1964-65

Content
Jan 01, 1964
CONTENTS
CHAPTER

PAGE

I.

India's Policy of Non-alignment

1-6

II.

United Nations and International Conferences

7-19

III.

Disarmament

20-23

IV.

India's Neighbours

24-42

V.

States in Special Treaty Relations with

VI.

South East Asia

47-51

VII.

East Asia

52-55

VIII.

West Asia and North Africa

66-57

IX.

Africa south of the Sahara

58-60

X.

Eastern and Western Europe

61-73

XI.

The Americas

74-78

XII.

External Publicity

79-83

XIII.

Technical and Economic Co-operation

84-87

XIV.

Consular and Passport Services

88-95

XV.

Organisation and Administration

96-104

India

43-46

(i)
(ii)
PAGE

Appendix I.

Declaration of Conference of Non-aligned
Countries

105-122

Appendix II.

International Organisations of which India
is a member

123-126

Appendix III.

Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Final Communique, July 1994

127-134

Appendix IV.

Indo-Ceylon Agreement

135-136

Appendix V.

Distinguished visitors from abroad

137-141

Appendix VI.

Visits of Indian Dignitaries to foreign
countries

142-143

Appendix VII.

Soviet-Indian Joint Communique

144-147

Appendix VIII.

Technical Co-operation

148-150

Appendix IX.

Economic Collaboration

151-152

Appendix X.

Foreign Diplomatic Missions in India

153-154

Appendix XI.

Foreign Consular Offices in India

155-157

Appendix XII.

Indian Missions Abroad

158-164

INDIA

Jan 01, 1964

INDIA'S POLICY OF NON-ALIGNMENT
CHAPTER I
INDIA'S POLICY OF NON-ALIGNMENT
India, ever since her independence, has consistently followed in
her foreign relations a policy of non-alignment with the opposing
power blocs. Such a policy flows naturally from India's past traditions and is fully in keeping with the interests of the people of India.
It is an assertion of the country's national sovereignty and independence. It is not an end in itself but a means to an end-the lessening
of tensions in the world and the preservation of world peace, so that
India and other under-developed countries which have regained their
freedom might be able to devote their energy and resources towards

their economic and social betterment. The essence of non-alignment
lies in the freedom and independence of each country to judge every
question on its merits and not on the basis of a predetermined attitude arising out of alignment with other countries. Non-alignment
implies an attitude of impartiality based on larger world interests
rather than on the narrow and limited interests of one power or
group of powers. Despite its detractors, the policy and practice of
non-alignment has steadily developed into a major factor in international affairs, with the emergence of a large number of countries
of Asia and Africa into independence. The gradual crystallisation
and evolution of nonalignment, as it later came to be called, was
perhaps the late Jawaharlal Nehru's greatest and most significant
contribution in the field of international affairs.
The first Conference of Non-Aligned Nations was held in Belgrade
in September 1961. It was attended by 28 countries, including 5
from Europe and Latin America. This Conference contributed substantially to the clarification of the principles of non-alignment and
the coordination of the policies of the nonaligned countries. This
meeting of countries outside the framework of the 'cold war', devoted
to the pursuit of peace by methods of conciliation, helped in the
relaxation of tensions at a time of great international peril.
Since that Conference, certain positive trends have developed in
the field of international relations, resulting in the softening of the
rigidity of attitudes between the main power blocs and within the
blocs themselves, a greater willingness to take disputes to the conference table, and, as a step towards disarmament, the conclusion of the
Partial Test Ban Treaty at Moscow in 1963. With this greater inclination to seek reconciliation between different political and
social systems on the basis of peaceful co-existence, and
<pg1>
<pg2>
with an increasing number of countries accepting either openly or
tacitly the policy of nonalignment, it was felt that a second conference of non-aligned nations should be held in order to further these
positive processes. The Second Conference of Non-Aligned Nations
was accordingly held at Cairo in October 1964 and was attended by
57 countries from Asia, Africa, Europe and Latin America.
Second Conference of Non-Aligned Nations at Cairo, October 5 to 10,
1964
At the end of 1963, when certain friendly countries suggested the
convening of a second conference of nonaligned countries, India
welcomed the initiative and expressed her willingness to participate
in it. The nonaligned countries could assist in furthering the processes of conciliation and negotiation on which President Kennedy

and Mr. Khruschev had embarked. The conference would also be
able to give a correct orientation to the policies of the non-aligned
countries in a changing world.
India participated in the Preparatory Meeting of Ambassadors at
Colombo in March 1964, which determined the time, venue, composition and other details of the conference. This Meeting was attended
by nearly all the States which had taken part in the Belgrade Conference of Non-Aligned Nations in 1961. The Preparatory Meeting
drew up a constructive draft agenda and decided to apply the criteria
for participation as liberally as possible, thereby permitting a substantial increase in the number of possible participants in the Second
Conference of Non-Aligned Nations. This gave the Second Conference a much broader geographical base and endowed it with a global
rather than a continental or regional character.
The Conference of Heads of State or Government of the NonAligned Countries, which the Prime Minister attended on behalf of
India, commenced at Cairo on October 5 and concluded on October 10.
This was preceded by a conference of Foreign Ministers which began
on October 1 and was attended by Sardar Swaran Singh, Minister of
External Affairs.
The deliberations and the outcome of the Conference fully justifled India's attitude towards the desirability and the urgency of holding it. In 1961, at the first such conference at Belgrade, there were
only 25 participating countries and 3 observers, while at Cairo there
were no less than 47 participating countries, together with 10 observers, representing four continents. The Cairo Declaration (printed
as Appendix I) affirms that the principles of non-alignment, thanks
<pg3>
to the confidence they inspire in the world, are becoming an increasingly dynamic and powerful force for the promotion of peace and
welfare of mankind.
The Cairo Conference helped to endow non-alignment with a new
sense of purpose as an important factor in promoting international
peace and understanding. In this connection, a significant development was the enunciation of the principles of peaceful co-existence
which the Conference has recommended to the General Assembly
of the United Nations for adoption on the occasion of its 20th anniversary. While recognising the right of all. nations to determine
their political status and freely to pursue their economic, social and
cultural development without intimidation or hindrance, it was agreed
that peaceful coexistence between States with different social and
political systems is both possible and necessary for the establishment
of lasting peace in the world. For regulating peaceful relations
between States, it was declared by the Cairo Conference that States
must abstain from all use of threat of force directed against the territorial integrity and political independence of other States. Any

situation brought about by the threat or use of force shall not be
recognised, and, in particular, the established borders of States shall
be inviolable. The participants at the Conference also pledged themselves to respect frontiers as they existed when the States gained
independence. Further, it was declared that every State must
abstain from interfering in the affairs of other States, whether openly
or insidiously or by means of subversion or various forms of political,
economic and military pressure, and that frontier disputes should be
settled by peaceful means. The Declaration went on to state that
disputes between neighbouring States must be settled peacefully in
a spirit of mutual understanding, without foreign intervention or
interference.
The Conference gave due importance to disarmament as one of
the basic problems of the contemporary world and stressed the necessity of reaching immediate and practical solutions to free mankind
from the danger of war and the fear of nuclear annihilation. Along
with many other countries, India expressed serious concern at the
fact that not all Powers had agreed to subscribe to the partial Test
Ban Treaty. It was, therefore, gratifying that the Conference called
upon those Powers who have not yet signed the Moscow Treaty to
do so.
The Prime Minister recalled to the Conference how strongly the
First Conference of Non-Aligned Countries at Belgrade had felt on
the subject of nuclear tests and, while referring to the disturbing
<pg4>
reports that China intended to explode a nuclear device, suggested
consideration of the despatch of a special mission to persuade China
to desist from such a course. The Conference recognised the validity,
of this suggestion to the extent that the Heads of State or Government present at Cairo declared their own readiness not to produce,
acquire or test any nuclear weapons, and called upon all countries,
including those which had not subscribed to the Moscow Treaty, to
enter into a similar undertaking. But within a few days of the signing of the Cairo Declaration, the Chinese Government-in utter disregard of the hopes and wishes of all the non-aligned countries and
in cynical defiance of world public opinion-carried out a nuclear
test.
The Indian delegation took a firm attitude on the question of the
need for the early eradication of all vestiges of colonialism, laying
particular stress on the question of Portuguese oppression in Angola,
Mozambique and so-called Portuguese Guinea. India announced her
refusal to accept any illegal, unilateral declaration of independence
by a 'white' minority government in Southern Rhodesia.
In accordance with India's traditional policy, our delegation condemned strongly the policies of apartheid and racial discrimination
of the Government of the Union of South Africa, and gave support
to all Practical measures for the restoration of human values in

South Africa and elsewhere.
In connection with the right of self-determination, a principle to
which India stands pledged, the Prime Minister uttered a note of
caution; while self-determination is the right of any country that is
dominated by another, this right is not relevant to a sovereign independent State and cannot be applied to a part or a region of a
sovereign State or to a section of a people or a nation. Otherwise
it would lead to fragmentation and disruption and no country's integrity would be safe.
In the economic field, the Conference endorsed the view that economic development is an obligation of the whole international community and it is the duty of all countries to contribute to the rapid
evolution of a new and just economic order under which all nations
can live without fear or want or despair and reach their full stature
in the family of nations. The Conference, therefore, pledged support
to the Joint Declaration of the Seventy-Seven made on the conclusion of the Geneva Conference on Trade and Development, and urged
all States to implement the recommendations contained in the Final
Act of the Geneva Conference.
<pg5>
The Conference stressed the paramount importance of lending
its combined strength to the United Nations to enable it to fulfil more
effectively the tasks entrusted to it for the preservation of international peace and security and for the promotion of cooperation
among States. The measures suggested to this end include universality of membership and equitable representation of different geographical regions in the various organs of the United Nations.
The success of the Conference was due, in no small measure, to
the broad common approach of the participants to the current problems of the world and to their general understanding to avoid any
discussion of national problems and bilateral disputes. The Indian
delegation played a purposeful and constructive role at the Conference and made a substantial contribution to its success.
Second Afro-Asian Conference
The idea of holding such a Conference had been supported for
some time by Indonesia, Pakistan and China. A meeting at Ministerial level was convened by Indonesia in Djakarta from the Apr 10, 1964
to 15th April, 1964 to prepare for the Second Afro-Asian Conference.
In his opening address, Shri Swaran Singh, a leader of the Indian
delegation, proposed that the Conference take place on the 10th
Anniversary of the Bandung Conference i.e. in 1965 and at a venue
in Africa, because the first Afro-Asian. Conference had been held
in Asia. In these two objectives our delegation was successful
and it was decided that the Second Afro-Asian Conference would
meet in a venue in Africa on the 10th March, 1965. The choice of

venue was felt to the African countries, and the Conference of the
Organization of African Unity, meeting in July in Cairo, selected
Algiers. The Standing Committee of Fifteen which is to assist the
host country in making preparations for the Conference has already
held a series of meetings in Algiers. The countries represented on
the Standing Committee are:
Algeria, Cambodia, China, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, India,
Indonesia, Iran, Morocco, Pakistan, Tanganyika, UAR,
Malawi and Zambia.
A list of countries to be invited to the Second Afro-Asian Conference was decided upon at Djakarta and is as follows :
(a) All the 29 countries in Africa and Asia which participated
in the Bandung Conference in 1955.
(b) Countries in Africa which are members of the OAU.
<pg6>
(c) Countries in Africa and Asia which will become independent by the time of the convening of the second AfroAsian Conference.
(d) Mongolia.
North Korea.
South Korea.
Cyprus.
Kuwait.
West Samoa; and
The Provisional Government of Angola.
Representatives of all national movements from non-self-governing territories recognised by the OAU in Africa and from Asia,
which have not yet attained independence, may come to the Conference with the right to be heard; and the host country has been
requested to provide facilities for their attendance. This provision
should also apply to South Africa, Southern Rhodesia, Oman, Aden
and Palestine.
The Indian delegation in Djakarta tried to secure the inclusion
of Malaysia and the U.S.S.R. Both matters have been left open
since the Meeting at Djakarta was unable to come to a decision.
The U.S.S.R. and Malaysia have expressed their desire to participate in the Conference.
INDIA
YUGOSLAVIA USA RUSSIA EGYPT SRI LANKA CHINA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC ANGOLA
GUINEA MOZAMBIQUE SOUTH AFRICA SWITZERLAND INDONESIA PAKISTAN ALGERIA
CAMBODIA ETHIOPIA GHANA IRAN MOROCCO MALAWI ZAMBIA MONGOLIA KOREA NORTH

KOREA CYPRUS KUWAIT OMAN MALAYSIA
Apr 10, 1964

UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES
CHAPTER II
UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES
The XIX Session of the United Nations General Assembly which
would normally have opened on Sep 15, 1964, was first postponed till November 10, because of the elections in Britain and the
United States, and again till December 1, 1964, at the request of a
majority of member States.
On the recommendation of the Security Council, the General
Assembly unanimously approved on 1 December 1964, the admission
of Malawi, Malta and Zambia to the United Nations.
The 1964 session of the Special Committee of 24 on the ending
of colonialism was opened in New Work on February 25, 1964 by
the Secretary-General, U Thai-it. The meeting marked the beginning of the Committee's third year of work. The Committee reelected Mr. Sori Coulibaly (Mali) as its Chairman and
Shri K. Natwar Singh (India) as Rapporteur.
The Special Committee deplored the persistent refusal of the
administering Power (Britain) to cooperate with the United Nations
in the implementation of the UN resolutions and drew the immediate attention of the Security Council to the report submitted by
the Sub-Committee, and particularly to the conclusions and recommendations contained therein. However, the recent declaration of
the British Government warning the Government of (Southern)
Rhodesia that any unilateral declaration of independence by it
would be an open act of defiance and rebellion and would therefore be unacceptable, has been widely welcomed as signifying a
healthy and realistic change in the attitude of the British Government.
The Special Committee reaffirmed Aden's right of selfdetermination, regretted the refusal of the United Kingdom to
implement the Assembly resolution of 1960 on ending colonialism,
and urged the United Kingdom to implement the Assembly resolution of 1963 on Aden and to take certain measures including repeal of laws restricting freedom, release of political prisoners,

and return of exiles and cessation of repressive measures, in particular,
military expeditions and bombing of villages. The Committee also
decided to establish a Sub-Committee to keep the situation under
review, to contact the administering Power with a view to imple<pg7>
<pg8>
menting the two resolutions of the Assembly and to arrange for
visits to the territory.
The Committee called on the Government of the United Kingdom to fix without delay the date for the independence of British
Guiana, appealed to all political leaders to take immediate steps to
restore harmony and peaceful conditions in the territory, requested
the administering Power to release all political prisoners and detainees and to end the state of emergency, and called on the United
Kigdom to refrain from taking any action which would aggravate
the present situation and to cooperate with the Special Committee
in the implementation of this and other resolutions of the Committee and the General Assembly. The Commitee decided to establish a Sub-Committee of good offices of three members to visit
British Guiana and to take any other necessary measures for the
implementation of the UN resolutions on British Guiana.
The Special Committee called on Portugal to implement the
measures laid down in the resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council, and in particular, those contained in the resolution of the Security Council of 31 July, 1963, namely:
(a) The immediate recognition of the right of the peoples of
the Territories under its administration to self-determination and independence;
(b) The immediate cessation of all acts of repression and the
withdrawal of all military and other forces at present
employed for that purpose;
(c) The promulgation of an unconditional political amnesty
and the establishment of conditions that will allow the
free functioning of political parties;
(d) Negotiations, on the basis of the recognition of the right
of self-determination, with the authorized representatives
of the political parties within and outside the Territories
with a view to the transfer of power to political institutions freely elected and representatives of the peoples;
and
(e) The granting of independence immediately thereafter to

all the Territories under its administration in accordance
with the aspirations of the peoples.
It drew the immediate attention of the Security Council to
the deteriorating situation in the Territories under Portuguese administration with the view to its taking appropriate measures to secure compliance by Portugal with
<pg9>
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council, and requested its Sub-Committee I, with
the assistance of the Secretary-General, to study the
activities of foreign, economic and other interests, which
were impeding the implementation of the Declaration on
the granting of independence to the Territories under
Portuguese administration.
(f) On April 2, Mr. Coulibaly, Chairman of the Special Committee of 24, announced the composition of three Sub-Committees, which the Committee had decided to establish at
its meeting on March 30. The Sub-Committees were set
up to consider a number of island territories which the
Special Committee had not considered so far.
The Special Committee called on the Republic of South Africa
to desist from implementing the recommendations of the Commission of Inquiry into South West Africa Affair of 1962-63. It considered that any attempt to annex a part or the whole of the Territory of South West Africa constituted an act contrary to international law and a clear violation of the mandate of the Charter of
the UN and would endanger international peace and security. It
condemned the Government of South Africa for its persistent refusal
to cooperate with the United Nations in upholding the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and implementing the resolutions
of the General Assembly. The Committee requested the SecretaryGeneral tic, continue to take steps to establish the office of a UN
Technical Assistance Resident Representative in South West Africa
and to report to the Special Committee on the measures taken by
States in compliance with paragraph 7 of resolution 1899 (XVIII).
It also drew the attention of the Security Council to the critical
situation in South West Africa, the continuation of which constituted
a serious threat to international peace and security and a clear violation of the Charter of the United Nations.
The Security Council, which met at the request of 58 delegations
to resume consideration of the situation in South Africa, held nine
meetings from June 8 to 18 and adopted two resolutions.
In the first resolution, the Council urged the South African Government to abandon the execution of the persons sentenced to
death for acts resulting from their opposition to the policy of apar-

theid, to end forthwith the trial instituted within the framework of
the arbitrary laws of apartheid, and to grant an amnesty to all persons already imprisoned, interned or subjected to other restrictions
for having opposed the policy of apartheid, and particularly to the
defendants in the Rivonia trial. It invited all states to exert their
<pg10>
influence in order to induce the South African Government to comply with the provisions of this resolution. It also requested the Secretary-General to follow closely the implementation of the resolution and to report on it to the Security Council at the earliest
possible date.
In the second resolution, the Council, inter alia,
(a) endorsed and subscribed in particular to the main conclusion of the Group of Experts that "all the people of South
Africa should be brought into consultation and should
thus be enabled to decide the future of their country at
the national level"; and
(b) decided to establish an Expert Committee, composed of
representatives of each present member of the Security
Council, to undertake a technical and practical study, and
report to the Security Council as to the feasibility, effectiveness, and implications of measures which could, as
appropriate, be taken by the Security Council under the
United Nations Charter.
The Security Council on March 4 unanimously adopted a resolution which recommended the creation, with the consent of the Government of Cyprus, of a United Nations peace-keeping force in Cyprus, the size and composition of which would be established by the
Secretary-General in consultation with the Governments of Cyprus,
Greece, Turkey and the United Kingdom. The Commander of the
force would be appointed by the Secretary-General and would report to him. The Secretary-General should report periodically to
the Security Council on the operation of the force. The stationing
of the force should be for three months. The resolution further recommended that the Secretary-General designate, in agreement with
the Governments of Cyprus, Greece, Turkey and the United Kingdom,
a mediator for the purposes of promoting "a peaceful solution and
an agreed settlement of the problem confronting Cyprus."
Mr. Sabari Tuomaioja and Lt. General P. S. Gyani were appointed Mediator and Commander of the UN Peace-Keeping Force in
Cyprus, respectively.
On June 20, the Secretary General appointed General K. S.
Thimmayya as the new Commander of UNFICYP in place of General Gyani who was to retire in the last week of June.

The Security Council, on August 9, called for an immediate
cease-fire in Cyprus. It called on all States to refrain from any
action which might exacerbate the situation, or contribute to the
<pg11>
broadening of hostilities. The President of the Council appealed to
Turkey to cease air attacks and the use of force against Cyprus. He
appealed to Cyprus to order its armed forces to cease-fire immediately. On August 10, both Cyprus and Turkey informed the President of the Security Council of their acceptance of the appeal for
a cease-fire in Cyprus.
On 16 September, the Secretary-General, U Thant, announced
the designation of Galo Plaza as United Nations Mediator in Cyprus
(Sabari Tuomaioja died on September 9, in Helsinki).
The following is a detailed table of the composition and nationality of the Force during the period June 8 to August 14, 1964:
(a) Military
8 June
Austria
55
Canada
1,122
Denmark
676
Finland
1,000
Ireland
639
Sweden
954
United Kingdom
1,792
---------------TOTAL
6,238
---------------(b) Police
Australia
Austria
Denmark
New Zealand
Sweden

8 June
40
33
40
20
40
---------------TOTAL
173
----------TOTAL UNFICYP
6,411

14 August
66
1,130
985
986
1,033
803
1,034
--------------6,037
--------------14 August
40
34
41
20
39
----------174
----------6,211

The Security Council held five meetings (September 9, 10, 14, 15
and 17) to consider a complaint by Malaysia that at about midnight
on September 1-2, an Indonesian aircraft had dropped a group of
about 30 heavily armed paratroopers in South Malaya. On
<pg12>

September 17 the Council voted on a draft resolution proposed byNorway by which the Council would have regretted all the incidents
that had occurred in the whole region, deplored the incident of
September 2 and called upon the parties to refrain from all threats
or use of force and to respect each other's territorial integrity and
political independence so as to create an atmosphere conducive to
the continuation of their talks. The Council would have also recommended that the Governments concerned should resume their talks,
on the basis of the joint communique issued by these Heads of
Government following the meeting at Tokyo on June 20, 1964.
The vote on the draft resolution was 9 in, favour and 2 against
(the USSR and Czechoslovakia). The draft resolution was not
adopted because of the negative vote of a permanent member.
International Cooperation Year
India has constituted an Indian National Committee for the International Cooperation Year to organise and prepare for suitable
activities for the ICY. India has also sent a report to the UN, outlining the various plans and projects to be undertaken in India in
observance of the ICY.
Congo
The Security Council met in December 1964, to consider a complaint by 22 member States, including 18 African States, against the
"military operations" of the United States and Belgium in the
Congo in November, 1964 as well as a complaint by Prime Minister
Moise Tshombe of the Democratic Republic of the Congo against
"foreign interference in the domestic affairs of the Congo". On
December 30, 1964, the Security Council adopted a compromise resolution hi which it deplored the recent events in the Congo, reaffirmed the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Congo and
expressed its conviction that the solution of the Congolese problem
depended on national reconciliation and the restoration of public
order, The resolution also called for a cease-fire in the Congo, the
termination of foreign intervention and the withdrawal of mercernaries. The Organisation of African Unity was encouraged to pursue its efforts to help the Congo Government in achieving national
reconciliation.
19th Session of the UN General Assembly
The Indian Delegation to the 19th Session of the UN General
Assembly was led by the Minister of External Affairs.
The immediate threat of confrontation over the issues of payment
of arrears on account of UN peace-keeping operations (in the Congo
<pg13>

and Gaza) and the applicability of Article 19 against defaulting
States was averted by the adoption of a formula proposed by the
UN Secretary-General and accepted by the U.S., the U.S.S.R. and
other member States. The formula was that the Assembly would
proceed with such of its business as could be transacted without
objection, that is, without resort to vote. On this basis, the General Assembly elected Mr. Alex Quaison-Sackey of Ghana as its President for the 19th Session and admitted three new member States,
Malawi, Malta and Zambia, raising the total membership of the UN
to 115. The Assembly also proceeded with the general debate.
The Minister for External Affairs spoke on December 14 in the
general debate. He reviewed the international situation and called
for an urgent settlement of the great problems of peace, disarmament, discontinuance of nuclear test explosions, non-dissemination
of nuclear weapons, apartheid, colonialism and narrowing of the
economic gap between the rich and the poor nations. He condemned the nuclear test conducted by the People's Republic of China in
defiance of world opinion as expressed in General Assembly resolution 1762 (XVII) and the Cairo and the Bandung Declarations, and
in utter disregard of the principles embodied in the Moscow Nuclear
Test Ban Treaty.
As regards financing UN peace-keeping operations, he said that,
while India subscribed to the principle of collective responsibility
in this respect and had made significant contributions in men and
money towards them, she felt, that no member State could be compelled to contribute either troops or funds to such operations. He
expressed the hope that the Assembly would act quickly to solve
the problem of past arrears and to settle the political and constitutional problems relating to UN peace-keeping operations. He suggested that the Assembly might entrust this problem to the Working
Group of 21, with a somewhat enlarged membership, if necessary,
and with wider terms of reference.
Security Council elections
In accordance with the decision of the General Assembly not to
resort to voting until agreement had been reached on the functioning of the Assembly under normal procedures, the General Assembly decided, without objection, to name Netherlands and Uruguay to
fill two of the three regular vacancies created by the expiry of the
terms of Norway and Brazil. By the same procedure, Malaysia replaced Czechoslovakia for a one year term in the Security Council.
This was in confirmity with the agreement reached at the Assembly's previous session on the sharing of the two-year term between
these two States. On December 30. the Assembly also approved, by
<pg14>

acclamation, an arrangement whereby Jordan and Mali would fill
the vacancy caused by the retirement of Morocco, Jordan occupying
the seat in 1965 and Mali in 1966.
Withdrawal of Indonesia from the UN
In protest against the occupation by Malaysia of a seat in the
Security Council, Indonesia announced its intention to withdraw
from the United Nations. Indonesia also lodged a written protest
with the UN saying that the election of Malaysia was not carried
out "without objection".
Economic and Social Council
India is a member of the U. N. Economic and Social Council for
the three year term 1962-64. The 37th Session of the Council was
held in Geneva in July-August, 1964 and India was represented by
a delegation led by Shri R. K. Nehru. In the elections held during
this Session India was elected to the following functional Commissions of the Council:
(1) Population Commission (elected for a term of 4 years from
the 1st January, 1965). Shri A. K. Mitra, Registrar
General of India has been designated to represent India
on this Commission.
(2) Commission on Human Rights (Re-elected for a term of 3
years from the 1st January, 1965). Shri B. N. Chakravarty,
Permanent Representative of India to the U.N. New York,
has been designated to represent India on this Commission.
UNICEF
India was also re-elected to the membership of the Executive
Board of the U.N.I.C.E.F. for a period of 3 years with effect from
February, 1965.
India was also a candidate for re-election to the Governing
Council of the Special Fund, but, in accordance with the decision
taken during this session of the Economic and Social Council, elections for the Governing Council were deferred until the 38th Session
of the Council and the term of the existing Governing Council was
prolonged till then.
Commission on human rights
India participated in the 20th Session of the Commission on
Human Right, field at New York during February-March, 1964.
<pg15>
U.N. Conference on Trade and Development

The U. N. Conference on Trade and Development was held at
Geneva from the 23rd March to the 16th June, 1964. It was convened by the U.N. Economic and Social Council primarily to suggest and adopt practical steps to meet the special needs of the
developing countries and generally to consider problems involved in
the expansion of international trade. The Conference adopted its
Final Act and elected 55 members to a proposed Trade and Development Board, planned as a permanent organ of the Conference and
part of the United Nations continuing machinery recommended by
the Conference. India is a member of the Board.
The Conference approved general and special principles governing trade relations and policies, and principles on the transit rights
of land locked countries and adopted recommendations relating to
international commodity arrangements and preferences.
A Special Committee on Conciliation Procedures was also constituted by the Secretary General. India was a member of this Committee. It held meetings in New York in September-October, 1964.
Sub-Commission on prevention of discrimination and protection of
minorities:
The Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities held its sixteenth Session at the Headquarters
of the United Nations, New York from the 13th to 31st January, 1964.
The Session was opened by Dr. Krishnaswami (India) Chairman
of the Sub-Commission at its fifteenth Session. This Session was
attended by two observers Shri I. A. Sajjad and Shri S. K. Singh of
India. The Sub-Commission devoted most of its time towards the
preparation of a Draft International Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and a Draft Declaration and
Conventions on the Elimination of All forms of Religious Intolerance.
U. N. Seminar on human rights in Developing Countries
A United Nations Seminar on Human Rights in developing countries was held in Kabul from 12th to 25th May, 1964. Delegates from
16 countries participated in the Seminar. India was represented by
Shrimati M. Chandrasekhar, then Deputy Home Minister and Shri J.
N. Dhamija, Indian Ambassador in Kabul, was the alternate
delegate.
The Seminar discussed the Promotion of human rights in developing countries and afforded an opportunity to the participants to
explore this question. The Seminar considered a proposal, which
<pg16>
was advanced by several speakers, to the effect that the Seminar-

should recommend that the United Nations should intensify its
studies of the special problems relating to human rights in developing countries, This proposal received unanimous support and the
Seminar recommended that the Secretary General should bring its
report to the attention of the next session of the Commission on
Human Rights, and of the Commission on the Status of Women and
that the Commission on Human Rights should undertake, as soon as
possible, a study of the special problems relating to human rights in
developing countries with a view to helping in the solution of any
special problems that may exist.
International Conferences
India took part in several conferences held under the aegis of the
U. N. and its Specialised Agencies. Brief accounts of India's participation in the more important of these conferences will be found in
the Reports of the appropriate operative Ministries.
A list of International Organisations of which India is a member
is contained in Appendix II.
The Conference of Commonwealth Prime Ministers, July 1964.
The Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference 1964 took place
between the 8th and the 15th July. Due to the Prime Minister's indisposition, Shri T. T. Krishnamachari and Shrimati Indira Gandhi
agreed, at his request, to attend the Conference on behalf of the
Government of India.
The provisional programme for the meetings of the Common
wealth Prime Ministers' Conference was discussed at a meeting of
officials on the afternoon of 6th July. One of the main points that
arose in this meeting was the upgrading of the item-progress of
British territories towards independence and membership of the
Commonwealth-to second place, immediately after the first item
dealing with world political situation. This matter was raised on
behalf of the African countries participating in the Conference and
was fully supported by India. As a result, this change was accepted
at the first meeting of the Commonwealth Prime Ministers which
dealt with the finalisation of the agenda and the priority of items on
the agenda.
At the opening of the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference
on the 8th, tributes were paid to the late Jawaharlal Nehru. It was
stated that, in a sense, the current meeting of Commonwealth Prime
Ministers was a memorial to Jawaharlal Nehru since it was his policy
which had done so much to transform the Commonwealth relation<pg17>
ship and make possible membership by countries with different
forms of Government. All continents, creeds, races and societies,

were now represented in the Commonwealth which transcended the
lines which divided mankind; and this gave special significance to
the deliberations of the Conference.
The results of the discussions are reflected in the communique
which is at Appendix III.
The Governments participating in this Conference numbered 18.
Of these, seven came from Africa, two from the Caribbean, four
from Asia, one, Canada, from North America, two, Australia and New
Zealand, from the Pacific region and one, Cyprus, from the Mediterranean in addition to the United Kingdom which, once an Imperial
colonial power, is now re-adapting itself, so far as the Commonwealth
is concerned, as one amongst other equal sovereign and independent members of the Commonwealth. The newly formed sovereign
and independent Governments of Uganda, Kenya and Malawi were
participating in the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference for
the first time.
As can be seen from the Communique, the deliberations of the
Conference covered a review of the world situation, the racial discriminatory policies of South Africa and the colonial policies of
Portugal, the pending problems of British colonial territories, suggestions for cooperation between Commonwealth countries in programmes of economic and social development and measures to in
crease cooperation between Commonwealth countries in matters of
Commonwealth aid and trade. Deliberations at a conference of
sovereign and independent countries in free and informal association in the Commonwealth, while free and frank, can hardly be
expected to result in firm and binding decisions. They can only be
declaratory as regards programmes and policies suggested for consideration of the sovereign and independent Governments.
It is, however, of interest that the communique-(i) emphasises the belief of all Commonwealth Prime Ministers that the objectives of policy for all Commonwealth
Governments should be to build in each country a structure of society which offers equal opportunity and nondiscrimination for all its people, irrespective (A race,
colour or creed;
(ii) includes the declaration that Commonwealth Government will maintain their efforts to reduce the areas of
international disagreement by all the means within their
power, while maintaining both the strength and the resolution to resist aggression from without or subversion
from within;
<pg18>
(iii) condemns the policies of apartheid followed by the Government of South Africa:

(iv) recommends the measures to be taken to enable Southern
Rhodesia to proceed to independence within the Commonwealth at the earliest opportune time on the basis of
majority rule;
(v) stresses, on the economic front, the need for promoting,
by preferences or otherwise, the access of manufactured
goods from developing countries into the markets of
developed countries; for following up the work of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
particularly with a view to expanding international
trade in primary products at stabilised prices and equitable levels and for increased financial aid to developing
countries on easier terms on a continuing basis; and
(vi) suggests several measures to increase Commonwealth cooperation in economic and social fields for further examination, including the examination of the project of a
Commonwealth Secretariat for closer understanding between Commonwealth Governments on matters of common
concern.
Our delegation at the Conference participated in the discussions
on various items and made its contribution in accordance with the
policies and programmes of the Government of India. In the
review of the world situation, for example, our delegation stressed
the significance of developments in the world situation in favour
of peace and the relaxation of tension between the U.S.A. and the
U.S.S.R. promoting the maintenance of world peace and general and
complete disarmament, as distinguished from. the bellicose and aggressive attitude and activities of China. As references had been
made by some Prime Ministers in the context of the latter to tensions in South and South-East Asia and the need for greater cooperation and understanding between the countries in South and
South-East Asia, including India and Pakistan, the Finance Minister
of India, while pointing out in the discussions on 9th July the importance of maintaining the convention that inter-Commonwealth
differences should not be discussed, stressed India's need for necessary defence preparedness to contain the Chinese threat along
India's borders. The Indian delegation fully supported measures to
end the apartheid policies of South Africa, early liquidation of
Portuguese colonial domination in African territories, and the
speedy evolution of British colonial territories to independence on
the basis of majority rule in Southern Rhodesia as well as in other
areas like British Guiana. It also welcomed the further exami<pg19>
nation of various suggestions made to increase co-operation between
Commonwealth countries on matters of trade and aid with a view
to bridging the gap between the 'haves' and the 'have-nots'.

The new members of the Commonwealth, particularly those
from the African and Caribbean areas, while they were more concerned with political and economic problems in their own areas,
displayed an active and dynamic interest in suggesting measures
for greater solidarity and cooperation and adoption of common
standards amongst the Commonwealth countries. This accounted
for suggestions like the establishment of a Commonwealth Conciliation Committee and a Central Clearing House for exchange of information. These ultimately led to an agreement in principle on
the establishment of a Commonwealth Secretariat. This also explains the references to Commonwealth countries playing a liaison
role and, when accepted by the parties concerned, using their good
offices towards settlement of disputes though it was categorically
stated that it was not a function of the Commonwealth to act as an
arbiter in disputes between member nations.
On the various projects for greater Commonwealth cooperation,
including the project of a Commonwealth Secretariat, there was
general agreement in principle. All these projects are to be further
examined by the appropriate official agencies before the various
Commonwealth Governments formulate their attitude to the projects and decide on the extent of cooperation they can offer.
There is a paragraph in the communique of the Conference which
reads:
"The Prime Ministers noted with satisfaction the friendly
public statements by the President of Pakistan and the
Prime Minister of India and expressed their hopes that
the problems between their countries will be solved in
the same friendly spirit".
This paragraph had no reference to any discussions in the Conference and was only a general expression of goodwill. Many Prime
Ministers of the Commonwealth countries had made it quite clear
during the discussions, and also publicly, that the convention that
differences between members of the Commonwealth should not be
discussed, should be fully maintained and that the differences between India and Pakistan are a matter for the two countries concerned to deal with between themselves. It was unfortunate that
this general expression of well-intentioned goodwill was exploited
and misrepresented in certain quarters abroad.

USA
MALAWI MALTA ZAMBIA MALI INDIA PORTUGAL SOUTH AFRICA CYPRUS GREECE TURKEY
FINLAND AUSTRIA CANADA DENMARK IRELAND SWEDEN AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND
MALAYSIA INDONESIA NORWAY JAPAN SLOVAKIA CONGO BELGIUM GHANA CHINA EGYPT
RUSSIA URUGUAY BRAZIL JORDAN MOROCCO CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC SWITZERLAND
AFGHANISTAN KENYA UGANDA PAKISTAN

Sep 15, 1964

DISARMAMENT
CHAPTER III
DISARMAMENT
The Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee held its deliberations in two sessions-from the Jan 21, 1964 to the 28th April and
from the 9th June, to the 17th September, 1964. In view of the
XIX session of the UN General Assembly, the Committee went into
recess on September 18 and will reconvene in Geneva as soon as
possible after the termination of the consideration of disarmament
matters by the General Assembly.
The Committee resumed its work in 1964 in an atmosphere of
optimism generated by the three agreements reached in 1963 viz.,
the establishment of a direct communications link (`hot line') between Washington and Moscow to limit the possibility of an accidental war, the partial nuclear test ban treaty prohibiting tests in
the atmosphere, in outer space and under water, and the banning
of nuclear weapons from outer space. Although these three agreements were limited in scope, they were the first to be reached in the
field of disarmament. The year 1964, however, did not prove very
fruitful and only one agreement could be reached. On April 20-21,
1964, the Soviet Union, the United States and the United Kingdom
made separate announcements of their intention to reduce the production of fissionable materials for use in nuclear weapons. This
agreement, like two of the previous agreements, was reached outside
the Disarmament Conference, although the ground for it had been
prepared by discussions in the Conference.
India continued its efforts to promote agreements by making
constructive suggestions. Thus, when the discussion on the drafting of a general disarmament treaty reached a stalemate because
of differences over the most suitable method of reducing and eventually eliminating nuclear weapon delivery vehicles as part of the
disarmament process, India suggested that the Gromyko proposal*
should be accepted in principle and that further discussions should
------------------------------------------------------------------------*The Gromyko proposal envisages the destruction of all nuclear delivery
vehicles in the first stage of the disarmament process, with the exception of
a strictly limited number of certain categories of missiles together with their

warheads, which are to be retained by the USA and the USSR in their own
territories until the third stage of disarmament. These retained missiles are
intended to provide an additional guarantee of security during disarmament.
The Gromyko proposal has been made as a concession to the Western proposal
for a reduction of all armaments, including nuclear delivery vehicles, on
a percentage basis-30 per cent. in the first stage and 35 per cent. each in
the second and the third stages.
<pg20>
<pg21>
proceed on that basis though other proposals could also be considered at a later stage if this approach did not prove satisfactory. The
Soviet Union welcomed this suggestion and even offered to join a
working group to consider the technical details, if the Indian suggestion were accepted. However, as this was not acceptable to the
United States, the Indian delegation suggested that the nuclear
delivery vehicles should be reduced to "lowest agreed levels" at an
early stage in the disarmament process. Discussions on this problem have, however, remained inconclusive. India has, like the
other seven non-aligned countries, submitted a separate memorandum
containing a brief resume of the suggestions and proposals made by
it on general and complete disarmament and on measures aimed at
reducing international tension.
On the question of the testing of nuclear weapons India continued to press for the immediate suspension of all nuclear and
thermo-nuclear tests. India stressed that the continuance of tests.
increased tension, aggravated the arms race and made the achievement of an agreement on general and complete disarmament more
difficult. While India recognized that there were differences
among the nuclear Powers regarding the question of identification and the need for verification of underground tests, she
urged that these tests should immediately be discontinued. The
possibility should then be explored of banning these tests by stages.
Thus another partial treaty could be concluded banning underground tests above a certain threshold. The threshold could be
lowered subsequently as a result of negotiations and the continuing
exchange of scientific and other data.
The explosion by the Chinese Government of a nuclear device
at Lop Nor on October 16, 1964, has posed a serious threat to world
peace and the welfare of humanity. This action is particularly deplorable in the wake of the partial nuclear test ban treaty and the
appeal made by the Non-aligned Conference at Cairo for the discontinuance of all nuclear weapons tests and has been undertaken
in defiance of the will of the international community, which has

condemned all nuclear weapons tests [UN General Assembly Resolution 1762 (XVII)]. India proposes to raise this question at the
19th session of the UN General Assembly.
In its report submitted to the 19th session of the UN General
Assembly on the entire period of its work during 1964, the Disarmament Committee has recorded that it could not reach "any
specific agreement either on the question of general and complete disarmament or on measures aimed at the lessening of international
tension". It has, however, expressed the hope that the discussions
<pg22>
held during the period would facilitate agreement on the issues to
be discussed by the Committee.
In consonance with India's consistent policy that urgent steps
should be taken to prevent any further spread of nuclear weapons
and the firm belief that an agreement on non-proliferation would
be the next logical step after the partial nuclear test ban treaty, the
Government of India have inscribed an item on "nonproliferation
of nuclear weapons" on the agenda of the 19th session of the UN
General Assembly.
India continued to render active co-operation to the International Atomic Energy Agency in its task of furthering the peaceful
uses of atomic energy. In recognition of the useful work done by
the Agency and as a gesture of sincere appreciation, the Government of India decided to enhance its voluntary contribution from
25,000 to $ 35,000 for the year. A significant development was
the appointment of Shri U. L. Goswami of India as a Deputy Direcfor-General of the Agency, in-charge of the newly created Department of Technical Assistance.
The Third International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of
Atomic Energy was held in Geneva from August 31 to September 9,
1964. (The First and Second Conferences were also held in
Geneva in 1955 and 1958 respectively). An Indian Delegation of 14
members, led by Dr. H. J. Bhabha, participated in the Conference,
which was attended by 1,780 representatives and advisers from 77
countries. India was also one of the seventeen countries which
provided exhibits for the governmental scientific exhibition
arranged along with the Conference.
The UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and its
two Sub-Committees-the Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee
and the Legal Sub-Committee--continued their deliberations with a
view to promoting international cooperation in the peaceful uses of
Outer space. India is a member of the 28-nation UN Outer Space
Committee and its two Sub-Committees of the whole. In regard to
the scientific and technical aspects of activities of States in outer
space, a number of agreed recommendations have been made by the

Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee. However, in regard to
legal problems pertaining to the peaceful use of outer space, work
on the drafting of international agreements on assistance to astronauts and liability for space vehicle accidents is still continuing.
Following an agreement reached in the Outer Space Committee in
1963 on a set of nine legal principles governing the activities of
States in the peaceful use of outer space, and its endorsement by
<pg23>
the General Assembly the same year, it was hoped that international
agreements would be drawn up soon on two of these principles viz.
assistance to astronauts and liability for space vehicle accidents, in
regard to which there was a large measure of agreement. India
continued its efforts to secure expeditious agreements on these two
problems and further urged the international community to accept
the principle that the use of outer space should be outlawed for
military purposes and should be made exclusively for peaceful purposes.
Disarmament figured prominently in the 12th and 13th Pugwash
Conferences on Science and World Affairs. These Conferences have
come to be recognized as one of the most important forums for the
discussion of the problems of disarmament and international cooperation. They owe their origin to a suggestion made by the late
Prime Minister in 1954 that a committee of scientists be set up to
explain to the world the effect that war would have on humanity.
The 12th Pugwash Conference was held in India at Udaipur from
January 27 to February 1, 1964. An Indian delegation consisting of
eminent Indian scientists participated in the Conference. The 13th
Pugwash Conference was held at Karlovy Vary in Czechoslovakia
from September 13 to 19, 1964. Dr. Vikram Sarabhai of India participated in this Conference. Shri V. C. Trivedi, then Joint Secretary
in the Ministry of External Affairs, attended both these conferences
as an observer.
SWITZERLAND
RUSSIA USA INDIA EGYPT NORWAY SLOVAKIA
Jan 21, 1964

INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS
CHAPTER IV

INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS
BURMA
India-Burma relations have been friendly and cordial. On most
important international issues such as peaceful coexistence, nonalignment with power blocs, support to the United Nations and
disarmament the two countries have similar views.
The presence of nearly half a million persons of Indian origin
in Burma has, on occasions, tended to be a disturbing factor in the
friendly relations between the two countries. As a result of the
nationalisation of shops in March-April 1964, and other restrictions
imposed on foreigners by the Government of Burma, Indian nationals
have been leaving that country in large numbers. The exodus
which started in June-July 1964 continues. This large scale movement of Indian nationals raised several problems e.g. provision of
adequate transport facilities, grant of compensation by the Government of Burma for nationalised property of Indian nationals, repatriation of their assets to India and rehabilitation of the repatriates
in India. The traditionally friendly relations between the two
countries have helped to solve some of these problems while some
others are under active negotiation. These negotiations started
with the Foreign Secretary's visit to Burma in May, 1964 and have
since continued at various levels.
Soon after taking over as Minister for External Affairs, Sardar
Swaran Singh, accompanied by the Commonwealth Secretary, paid
a goodwill visit to Burma in the first week of September, 1964. The
visit was very well received by the Press as well as the public in
Burma. It helped to bring about a better mutual appreciation of
the points of view of both Governments and to strengthen the friendly relations between the two countries. The Minister for External
Affairs took the opportunity to renew the President's invitation to
the Chairman of the Revolutionary Council of the Union of Burma
to pay a State visit to India. General Ne Win visited India from
the Feb 05, 1965 to the 12th February, 1965.
CEYLON
Soon after assumption of office as Minister for External Affairs,
Sardar Swaran Singh paid visits to neighbouring countries, with a
view to establishing personal contact with leaders of those countries
and as a gesture of goodwill. He visited Ceylon from 11 to 13
<pg24>
<pg25>
September, 1964 and discussed with the, leaders of Ceylon subjects

of mutual interest. The visit underlined the basic unanimity of
views between the two countries on international affairs and paved
the way for discussions between the Prime Ministers of India and
Ceylon in October, 1964.
The status of the persons of Indian origin resident in Ceylon had
defied solution for more than two decades. These persons, who
went to Ceylon in the nineteenth century and the early part of the
present century, are mostly employed on the tea and rubber estates.
After attainment of independence, Ceylon enacted legislation for
conferring Ceylonese citizenship on them. Only a small number
was, however, actually granted Ceylonese citizenship. A few of
them applied for, and were granted, Indian citizenship. The large
majority remained "Stateless" and without the citizenship of either
country and were consequently put to considerable hardship in
Ceylon.
Mrs. Sirimavo R. D. Bandaranaike, Prime Minister of Ceylon,
visited India from 22 to 30 October, 1964, accompanied by two of
her Cabinet colleagues, Mr. Felix Dias Bandaranaike and Mr. T. B.
Ilangaratne, Mr. N. Q. Dias, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs, and other Government officials. The Indian delegation at the talks consisted of Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri, Prime
Minister, Sardar Swaran Singh, Minister for External Affairs,
Shri V. Ramiah, Minister for Works, Government of Madras, and
senior officials. The meetings between the Prime Ministers and the
members of the delegations of both countries commenced on 24
October, 1964, and continued in a cordial atmosphere until 30 October,
1964, when an agreement was reached on this issue. The text of the
Agreement is at Appendix IV.
According to the agreement, the number of "Stateless" persons
has been estimated at 9,75,000. Of this, the Government of India
have agreed to the repatriation to India of 5,25,000 persons, together
with the natural increase in that number. The Government of
Ceylon have agreed to grant Ceylon citizenship to 3,00,000 persons,
together with the natural increase. It was agreed that this process
should be spread over a period of 15 years and that the two processes
should keep pace with each other. The status of the remaining
1,50,000 persons has been left for determination at a subsequent
meeting between the two Prime Ministers. It has also been agreed
that the Stateless persons, who were in employment in Ceylon on
30 October, 1964 will be allowed to continue in employment till
they reach the age of 55 years or till they are repatriated whichever
is earlier. The repatriates will also be allowed to transfer their
assets to India.
<pg26>
The Agreement provided for meetings at official level to establish joint machinery and to formulate a procedure for the implementation of the Agreement. An official delegation headed by the

Commonwealth Secretary met a Ceylonese delegation led by the
permanent Secretary of Ceylon at Colombo in December. An
Agreement has been reached regarding establishment of a joint
machinery and on the procedure to be followed for the implementation of the Agreement of 30 October, 1964.
CHINA
China continued to occupy 14,500 square miles of Indian territory
which she had seized by her earlier encroachment and the massive
invasion across the Indian borders in October-November, 1962Having thus occupied strategic territory in Ladakh, China turned
its back upon negotiations and rejected the Indian as well as thirdparty proposals calculated to bring the two countries to a negotiating table. The Colombo Proposals put forward by the Conference
of six Non-Aligned countries were fully accepted by the Government of India, while the Chinese Government, under the cover of
acceptance 'in principle', rejected the very basis as also the concrete
provisions of these proposals.
One of the important reservations to the Colombo Proposals made
by China was that in the demilitarized zone in the Western Sector
there should be no Indian posts, although the Chinese posts remained in position. In order to break the deadlock arising out of China's
non-acceptance of the Colombo Proposals, a suggestion was advanced by two emissaries of Earl Russell, in the summer of. 1963,
that the demilitarized zone in Ladakh should be kept vacant of
posts of either side as a basis for negotiations between the Governments of India and China. Early in the year under review, the
same idea was pursued in an exchange of correspondence between
the Prime Minister of Ceylon and the Prime Minister of India.
Referring to this in Parliament, the late Jawaharlal Nehru said in
the Lok Sabha on April 13, 1964 that if both parties, by agreement,
decided to have no posts at all in this demilitarized zone of
20 kilometres in Ladakh, it would be possible-to consider that this
satisfied the Colombo Proposals. In other words, if China agreed
to treat the demilitarized area as "no-man's land" and removed its
six "civil posts", India would consider it as a fulfilment of an important provision in the Colombo Proposals in regard to which the
Chinese had earlier made reservations. Thereafter negotiations
could take place between the two countries on the basis of and in
accordance with the Colombo Proposals. This conciliatory gesture
on the part of India was restated by the late Prime Minister,
<pg27>
Jawaharlal Nehru, on May 17, at a meeting of the All-India Congress Committee in Bombay. The suggestion was reiterated by the
present Prime Minister in Parliament on June 1, 1964. India thus
went to the farthest limit possible, within the ambit of the Colombo
Proposals, to break the deadlock and to make it possible for negotiations to take place between India and China.

Peking's response to this conciliatory gesture was negative and
uncompromising. The official news agency of China characterized
this gesture and concession on the part of India as "another precondition" to talks and said "it is China's internal affairs to set up
civilian posts and there is no reason for asking China to withdraw
in its own territory". On October 9, at the time of the Conference
of the Non-Aligned Nations at Cairo, the Chinese Government issued
an official statement in which, for the first time, it officially rejected
the suggestion made by Mrs. Bandaranaike the Prime Minister of
Ceylon, and welcomed by India, that negotiations should be held
between the two countries on the basis of there being no posts of
either side in the 20 kilometre demilitarized zone in Ladakh. The
statement further asserted "Chinese sovereignty" over the whole of
14,500 sq. miles of Indian territory illegally occupied in Ladakh,
including the 20 kilometre demilitarized zone. The Chinese statement said: "China will not withdraw from any of the seven civilian posts (in Ladakh). On the contrary, China has every right to
ask India to withdraw, from the more than 90,000 square kilometres
of China's territory south of the illegal McMahon Line". It was a
categorical rejection of the suggestion made by the Ceylon Prime
Minister, and it obviously meant that China intended holding on
to the territories that it had seized by military action in Ladakh and,
in addition, wanted to revive its vast and fantastic claims against
Indian territory elsewhere, south of the McMahon Line, in the
Eastern sector. The Chinese statement ruled out third party mediation, by peremptorily asking the Colombo Powers not to consult
amongst themselves on the Sino-Indian border question unless
China was also present at these consultations, and by asserting that
China would never agree to international pressure. The October 9
statement of the Chinese Government showed that China is interested neither in the Colombo Proposals nor in negotiations with India
on an honourable basis.
While thus doing everything to obstruct the possibilities of a
peaceful settlement of the border problem, China continued to build
up its military strength in Tibet and concentrate more and more
troops on the Indian border, where the build-up is heavier by the
end of 1964 than in the autumn of 1962. The Chinese have also
constructed a net-work of roads and barracks and several airfields
<pg28>
on the Tibetan side, thereby very substantially enlarging the logistic
and quartering facilities for their troops. There have been also a
number of cases of aerial and land intrusions into Indian and
Sikkimese territory by Chinese aircraft and armed personnel.
The Chinese aggression against India, it is now obvious, was
motivated as much by ideological considerations as by expansionist
motives. In the Chinese ideological spectrum, India is the key to
the vast "intermediate zone" of Asia, Africa and Latin America.

China would like to see India reduced to the status of a secondary
power in Asia and to destroy the policy of non-alignment which
has earned for India so much respect and prestige in the AsianAfrican world. In collusion with Pakistan, China has been conducting a virulent propaganda campaign denigrating Indian leadership
and India's foreign and domestic policies. Resentful of the effective role played by India in the Non-Aligned Conference at Cairo,
the Chinese press and radio, echoing Pakistan propaganda, said that
India was now "doubly aligned", to the USA as well as to the USSR,
and that instead of opposing imperialism India had "tried to turn
the discussion at the Conference in another direction". The Prime
Minister's suggestion at Cairo that the Conference might send a
mission to Peking, to dissuade China from exploding a nuclear
device, was attacked with particular vehemence in the Chinese
press. A new trend in Chinese propaganda was to characterize
India's defensive efforts as a threat, not so much to China as to the
geographically smaller countries of Asia. In this also Peking was
echoing a theme of typical Pakistani propaganda.
During the year under review, there was a series of exchanges of
diplomatic notes between India and China. In a note dated February
26, 1964 the Government of India protested against the setting up by
the Chinese Government of stone cairns along the so-called "Line
of actual control" in the Western Sector of the India-China border.
The note pointed out that under the guise of accepting the Colombo
Proposals, "in principle", the Chinese Government had, in open
and wilful contravention of the Colombo Proposals, established
seven civil posts in the Western Sector, six of which were located in
the Ladakh demilitarized zone. These posts, apart from violating
the letter and the spirit of the Colombo Proposals, were the creation of the massive Chinese aggression on India in OctoberNovember 1962. The, setting up of the stone cairns was a further
violation of the Colombo Proposals and an obvious attempt at
consolidating the area illegally occupied by China.
In another note dated 16th July, 1964, the Government of India
pointed out that the Chinese armed forces occupied over 14,500
<pg29>
square miles of Indian territory in Ladakh. This comprised not
merely the 20 kilometre demilitarized zone, in which the Chinese
Government had set up civil posts in violation of the Colombo
Proposals, but also the entire area of Ladakh under the illegal
occupation of Chinese forces. The Government of India pointed
out that ever since the Colombo Proposals were formulated by
friendly Asian and African countries, the major efforts of the
Chinese Government had been directed towards thwarting and circumventing these proposals. If there was one thing clear about the
Chinese Government's attitude to the Colombo Proposals, the note
said, it was that they had hitherto refused to accept them. The
so-called acceptance "in principle" by China was nothing but a

euphemism for non-acceptance in practice of the Proposals.
On September 5,1964, the Government of India protested against
the intrusion by a Chinese military patrol of three men-across the
Nathula Pass into Sikkim. This intrusion by Chinese personnel
was a calculated violation of the well-recognised boundary between
Sikkim and Tibet and a projection of the aggressive concentration
of troops and military installations by China in the Chumbi valley.
On April 25, 1964, the Government of India strongly refuted in
a note the allegations made in an earlier Chinese note that the
Indian government had connived at "anti-Chinese" statements
made in the name of the Dalai Lama. The Chinese note had said
that the Indian Government had supported the rebellious activities
of Tibetans. Replaying to these charges, the Government of India
pointed out that the popular rebellion in Tibet five years ago, was
not something which the Government of India had "engineered",
but was the spontaneous and inevitable reaction of the unfortunate
people of Tibet against the attempt by the Chinese Government to
extingiush, by brute force the autonomy of Tibet which China had
solemnly undertaken to respect. Regarding the Chinese Government's allegation that the Indian Government was still "dreaming
of expansion" into China's Tibet the Indian note pointed out the
absurdity of such suggestions and said that, while the Government
of India had, only too willingly, relinquished all privileges they had
inherited in Tibet form the British, China had not only destroyed
the historic autonomy of Tibet, but had even advanced fantastic
territorial clams against India and committed aggression against
India in furtherance of Chinese policies. It was, therefore, Chinese
expansionism that was haunting Asia today.
In a note dated 8th June, 1964, the Chinese Government characterised as "rudeness" the refusal of the Indian Government to send
a delegation of the scientific Workers of India to attend the 1964
Peking Symposium of Science. Replying to this note on
<pg30>
7th October, 1964, the Government of India pointed out that in the
context of the occupation of Indian territory by Chinese forces and the
violation of India's territorial integrity it would not be Possible for
any Indian delegate to participate in the Peking Symposium. It
was also pointed out that all talk of "promotion of international
scientific and cultural exchange" was meaningless in view of the
Chinese Government's policy of opposition to the Partial Test Ban
Treaty and China's intention to manufacture the atom bomb. The
Government of China, the note said, was trying to harness the
forces of science not for the peaceful purpose of improving the living
standards of the Chinese population, but for serving the expansionist big-Power dreams of the Chinese Government.

On October 16, 1964, China carried out her first nuclear explosion. This climaxed China's opposition to the Moscow Partial
Nuclear Test Ban Treaty to which more than 100 nations are signatories. Prime Minister Shastri called the Chinese test "an aggression against peace and security". It flouted world opinion and increased the danger of proliferation of nuclear weapons and the
hazards to the health and well-being of mankind. It was a violation of the Bandung Declaration. to which the Chinese Governwas a signatory and which enjoined on all countries not to carry out
nuclear tests. It was contrary to UN General Assembly Resolutions on the subject and totally disregarded the Declaration of the
Second Non-aligned Conference held at Cairo.
Almost immediately after exploding their first nuclear device,
the Chinese Government issued a call for the holding of a summit
conference for the destruction of all nuclear weapons. The
Chinese Premier, Mr. Chou En-lai, wrote to Heads of Government
on October 17, 1964, to canvass support for such a conference. The
Prime Minister of India replied to this, on November 27, pointing
out that, pending the conclusion of a comprehensive treaty covering
general and complete disarmament, including conventional weapons
and forces as well as nuclear weapons and their means of delivery,
the Government of India believed that all States should accept
practical measures of disarmament such as the stoppage of the testing
of nuclear weapons. The problems of disarmament were highly
technical, requiring detailed examination, and could not be debated
and settled at a large conference such as the Chinese Government had
proposed. By their very nature, these intricate issues required to be
negotiated in smaller committees or conferences, such as the Geneva
Disarmament Conference. A Summit Conference could be useful only
when substantial progress had been made in working out a draft
treaty on general and complete disarmament. The Prime Minister
also pointed out that the Chinese proposals suffered from the grave
<pg31>
lacuna of not including among matters that should be discussed
disarmament of conventional weapons and forces.
White Paper No. X containing Notes, Memoranda and Letters
exchanged between the Governments of India and China was placed on the Table of both Houses of Parliament on the 17th February,
1964.
Tibetan Refugees:
There are in all about 45,000 Tibetan refugees in India. It has
been decided to rehabilitate 12,000 refugees in five land settlements
comprising an area of about 10,000 acres of land. 3,000 Tibetan
refugees have been settled in the settlement at Bylakuppe in Mysore
district, which is now nearing completion. About 2,000 refugees have
been settled in the lower areas of Tirap and Lohit Frontier Divisions

of the North-East Frontier Agency. Another 2,500 are being settled
at Chandragiri in Orissa, and 2,000 at Mainpat in Madhya Pradesh.
Work on reclamation of land in these settlements is in progress.
The refugees in the five settlements have been given accommodation and land along with bullocks, agricultural implements, seeds and
fertilizers. Facilities have also been provided to these refugees to
enable them to supplement their income from agriculture by raising
poultry and pigs and opening dairies.
Since sufficient land is not available for settling the refugees and
since all of them do not possess an aptitude for agriculture, there is
a proposal to start an industrial project where a few thousand
Tibetans may be absorbed. The Government is trying to find industrial avenues for Tibetan refugees. Vocational training is also imparted to them in various trades, social welfare and nursing. Three
handicraft centres, mainly for carpet weaving, have been set up at
the three settlements at Bylakuppe, Chandragiri and Mainpat under
an agreement between the Government of India and the Swiss Aid
Abroad.
A separate body, named the Tibetan Schools Society, has been
set up under the Chairmanship of the Union Education Minister,
with Tibetan representatives, to make arrangements for the education of Tibetan children. Residential schools have been opened by
this society at Darjeeling, Simla, Mussoorie, Dalhousie, Pachmari,
Kalimpong and Mount Abu. In addition, non-residential schools
exist in various settlements and temporary camp schools at work
sites. 20 homes for orphan children have been set up at Mussoorie.
These homes are managed by the Tibetan Homes Foundation which
is a registered non-official body.
<pg32>
Hospitals and dispensaries have been opened at all settlements
and other camps. Arrangements have been made for the screening
of all Tibetans to detect chest and other diseases; those suffering
from tuberculosis are sent to sanatoria.
On the request of the Dalai Lama, the Government of India are
maintaining about 2,000 Lamas at Buxa, in West Bengal, and
Dalhousie.
The Government of India have accepted responsibility for the
maintenance of all the aged and infirm Tibetan refugees, numbering
about 1,500. They are being provided with free rations and free
medical treatment.
Various voluntary agencies have also been rendering limited
assistance to Tibetan refugees with food, medicines, stipends for
training, hospital facilities, etc.

NEPAL
The cordial and friendly relations existing between India and
Nepal were further strengthened during the year by visits at official
and ministerial levels.
At the invitation of the Government of Nepal, Shri Manubhai Shah,
then India's Minister for International Trade, paid a visit to Nepal
from February 19 to 22, 1964. The Minister had friendly and fruitful
talks with the Nepalese Minister for Commerce and Industry concerning trade between the two countries and the ways and means
of promoting collaboration between India and Nepal with a view to
stimulating economic co-operation. The Ministers agreed that
each country would try to buy more consumer and manufactured
goods from the other. Shri Manubhai Shah assured Nepal of India's
co-operation in diversifying Nepal's trade in accordance with the IndoNepal Treaty of Trade and Transit of 1960. The Indian Trade
Exhibition which was inaugurated in Nepal in November 1964 is
expected to stimulate trade between the two countries.
Early in May 1964, the meeting between the King of Nepal and
the late Prime Minister at Bhainsalotan on the occasion 'of the
foundation-laying of the Gandak Barrage, a project of great benefit
to Nepal and India, provided an opportunity for an exchange of views
between the two Governments.
At the invitation of Nepal's Foreign Minister, His Excellency
Shri Kirti Nidhi Bista, our Foreign Minister, Sardar Swaran Singh,
paid a two-day goodwill visit to Nepal from the 23rd August to the
25th August. He had friendly and informal exchange of views with
<pg33>
the King and the Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the Council of
Ministers, the Foreign Minister and the Minister of Commerce and
Industry of Nepal. The discussions covered a wide variety of matters
of interest and concern to our two countries and peoples. The talks
were most satisfactory and revealed a basic identity of approach
between the two Governments, based on the policy and principles of
non-alignment and peaceful co-existence.
Cultural contacts between the two countries continued to be maintained, especially on important occasions like the Republic Day,
Independence Day, etc. when Indian troupes visited Nepal.
A number of Nepalese students sought admission to various
institutions in India for higher studies in engineering, medicine and
other fields, both on scholarship and on self-financing basis. Admissions were arranged for most of them. Facilities for the training of
Nepalese military personnel in various defence establishments
continue to be provided.

Important consultations took place between the representatives of
the Government of India and the Government of Nepal in matters
of trade and commerce with particular reference to the Indo-Nepal
Treaty of Trade and Transit of 1960. A delegation led by Shri K. B.
Milla, Secretary for Commerce in His Majesty's Government of
Nepal came to Delhi in January-February 1964, for talks with Indian
officials. As a result of these talks the Indian delegation agreed to
facilitate border trade in reasonable quantities, of essential consumer
goods, not in short supply in India. The two delegations agreed upon
a procedure for the movement of goods of Nepalese origin from one
part of Nepal to another. The Nepalese delegation assured India
that any tariff levied by the Government of Nepal on Indian goods
would be so adjusted as to avoid any discrimination against India.
A Nepalese delegation led by the Chief Engineer (Telecommunications) of Nepal arrived in New Delhi on the 15th June 1964, for discussions with the Government of India on a telecommunication agreement between the two countries. The Conference was inaugurated
by the Minister of Communications on the 16th June 1964, and discussions were held in a cordial and friendly atmosphere. An Agreement
was signed on the 25th June, 1964, which has since been ratified by
the two Governments. This Agreement provides for the establishment of an independent wireless and telegraph service by the Government of Nepal and for the withdrawal of the facilities hitherto
provided in this respect by the Government of India in Kathmandu.
Three agreements relating to the exchanges of letters, insured and
parcel post between India and Nepal, were signed in New Delhi on
<pg34>
the 8th September, 1964. These agreements will come into force from
the 13th April, 1965, after ratification by the two Governments.
Nepal joined the Universal Postal Union in 1956 but did not
participate in the International Postal Service till 1959. Prior to
April 1959, when the provisions of the Universal Postal Convention
came into force in Nepal, the postal services between India and Nepal
were regulated under a bilateral Agreement concluded in 1936. This
Agreement provided for the exchange of only unregistered correspondence between the two countries. As regards other services like
registration, insurance and parcel, they were being provided by the
Indian Embassy Post Office at Kathmandu for the citizens of
Nepal, as these services were not available in the Nepalese postal
service.
The Indian Embassy Post Office, which has been functioning since
1816 and has rendered very useful service to the people of Nepal
besides catering to the needs of the Indian Embassy and other organisations of the Government of India, will cease to function in
Kathmandu from the 13th April, 1965, unless the Nepalese Government desire its continuance for a further period from that date.

An Air Agreement between India and Nepal was initialled in New
Delhi in August 1964. The Delegations of India and Nepal have
submitted the agreed text to their respective Governments. Formal
signing of the Agreement is expected to take place in New Delhi
shortly.
The Royal Nepalese Airlines Corporation and the Indian Airlines
Corporation are at present operating scheduled services between the
two countries and these operations will be placed on a formal footing.
The Nepalese indicated that at a suitable time in the future, the
Royal Nepalese Airlines Corporation may wish to operate a service
to a third country through India. The Government of India have
indicated their desire to extend their co-operation and assistance to
Nepal at the appropriate time in this regard.
A Nepalese Delegation led by Dr. Yadav Prasad Pant, Finance
Secretary in His Majesty's Government of Nepal, arrived in New
Delhi on the 26th September, 1964, to negotiate the details of the loan
of Rs. 1 crore that was offered to Nepal earlier this year for industrial development. An agreement to this effect was signed on the
29th September, 1964. The loan will carry interest at 3 per cent. on
outstanding balances and will be repayable in 15 equal annual
instalments.
<pg35>
During the year, India agreed to take up the following new
projects at an estimated cost of Rs. 979 lakhs.
(a) Sonauli-Pokhara Road
(b) Hanuman Nagar-Rajbiraj Road
(c) Fatehpur-Kanauli Bazar Road

Rs. 911 lakhs
Rs. 53 lakhs

(d) Setting up overhead Transmission
Lines in Kosi area
Rs. 15 lakhs
Total:

Rs. 979 lakhs

An agreement for the construction of the Chatra Canal, which is
estimated to cost Rs. 400 lakhs, was signed on the 2nd November,
1964.
During the visit of our Foreign Minister, Sardar Swaran Singh, to
Nepal in August, 1964, it was agreed that the two Governments should
undertake a periodic review of the progress made on Indian-aided
projects. The first such review took place in Kathmandu from the
29th October 1964 to 2nd November, 1964.
At the invitation of His Majesty's Government of Nepal, an Indian
delegation visited Kathmandu from the 22nd to the 27th November,
1964. During this period, the Indian delegation discussed with the

delegation of His Majesty's Government of Nepal, various questions
relating to the Treaty of Trade and Transit of 1960. The two delegations reached friendly understanding on a number of matters which
were discussed. The procedure and the charges to be levied by India
for the transport of goods in transit between Nepal and East Pakistan
via Radhikapur was one of the main subjects discussed. Although
no decision in the matter could then be taken, an agreement was
reached with His Majesty's Government as to the service charges to
be levied by the Government of India in connection with transit.
This agreement has given satisfaction to both Governments. Our
authorities have effected the necessary arrangements on a provisional basis, for the movement of Nepal's trade with Pakistan with
effect from February 1, 1965.
Early in March 1964, a fire destroyed a large part of Amlekhganj,
a town in Nepal Terai, adjoining Bihar, near the southern end of
Tribhuvan Rajpath. As a result, hundreds of people were rendered
homeless. As a gesture of goodwill, the Government of India made
a gift of 200 bundles of corrugated iron, costing about Rs. 30,000, for
the relief of the fire victims.
Shri Harishwar Dayal, Ambassador of India in Nepal, passed away
on the 19th May, 1964 at Gorakhehep, a remote mountainous region
<pg36>
of Nepal, while on tour. His body was brought to Kathmandu and
cremated with full honours.
The Government of India continued to grant aid to HMG of Nepal
for Nepal's economic development. The following Agreements were
signed during the year:
Development of Airports
Rs. 50 lakhs
Development of Irrigation, Water
Supply and Power
Rs. 50 lakhs
Maternity Home and Child Welfare
Centre
Rs. 3.5 lakhs
Trunk carrier telephone link
Rs. 50 lakhs
The Indian Aided schemes continued to make satisfactory
progress. Two permanent steel bridges constructed over the Tadi
and the Trisuli rivers were inaugurated by His Majesty the King of
Nepal in February, 1964.
110 nominees of the Nepal Government came to India for training
under the Technical Cooperative Scheme of the Colombo Plan.
Shri R. N. Warrier, Regional Director, National Productivity
Council, Bangalore visited Kathmandu in July, 1964 to conduct a
training course on marketing and sales.

The Drilling Engineer and the Assistant Drilling Engineer of the
Geological Survey of India visited Nepal for guiding drilling
operations.
Shri N. C. Chakraverty, Assistant Educational Adviser, Government of India visited Kathmandu to prepare a scheme for upgrading
the Indian-aided Engineering School in Kathmandu.
Shri Joglekar, Senior Architect, CPWD, Government of India
visited Kathmandu for the preparation of designs etc. of certain
important Indian aided projects.
Shri Prem Krishen, Secretary, Ministry of Works and Housing
visited Nepal in October 1964 and had discussions with the Nepalese
Minister for Transport and Communications in connection with the
implementation of Sonauli-Pokhra Road project.
Three Professors and twenty students of the Tribuvan University
visited Annamalai University in December, 1964 to attend the Indian
Political Science Conference. They also visited Delhi and were
received by the President.
<pg37>
The Indian Aid Mission participated in the Nepal Government's
Development Exhibition at Kathmandu in December 63-January 64.
About 75,000 persons visited the Exhibition.
PAKISTAN
Relations with Pakistan in 1964 fall into two parts. The first five
months of the year were a period of great tragedy and bitterness in
the relations between the two countries. Widespread communal disturbances broke out in the district of Khulna on the 5th of January
in the course of which members of the minority community were
subjected to arson and violence and deprivation of their elementary
human rights. The way these disturbances came about clearly showed that over several weeks prior, to these disturbances, communal
frenzy against the minority community had been whipped up. The
incident of the theft of the holy relic from Hazratbal mosque was
falsely represented in Pakistan as having been engineered by
Hindus to offend the religious susceptibilities of Muslims. In this
misrepresentation the press and other media of public information as
well as the leaders of the Pakistan Government participated. A procession of several thousand persons was allowed to form in spite of
prohibitory orders given by the police banning the processions, and
to subject the minorities to pillage, arson and violence. The disturbances soon spread to other parts of Khulna district and resulted in
hundreds of casualties and widespread arson.
The Khulna disturbances were soon followed by large-scale disturbances in Dacca city and Narayanganj in the district of Dacca and in

other districts of Fast Pakistan, namely, Noakhali, Comilla, Barisal,
Sylhet, Chittagong, Mymensingh and Rajshahi. In all these areas
the minorities were subjected to unprecedented harassment and
violence. There was no security of life, property or honour of the
minorities and casualties among minorities ran into several thousands.
The minorities, having lost all sense of security, began trekking
into India for refuge and asylum in large numbers since the beginning of the year. The daily average of influx varied from 1,141 in
January to the peak of 3,801 in May, 1964. There have been days
when the influx was as high as 5,000 per day. The daily influx of
refugees slowed down somewhat in the latter part of the year but
even at the close of the year, on the average, 1,500 persons belonging
to the minority community were coming into India as refugees. At
the end of the year, over 9,00,000 had already arrived in India. Of
these 8,20,000 were Hindus, 52,000 Christians and 29,000 Buddhists and
tribals.
<pg38>
As the attacks on non-Muslims in Pakistan spread and refugees
began to come into India, communal trouble started at various places
in India also. The Government of India mobilized all resources including the despatch of army units and took firm and effective steps
to control trouble in West Bengal. However, the Pakistan authorities,
having for weeks incited their public to attack the minorities, and
having unleashed anarchy, followed this up on the 13th of January
with a letter addressed by the President of Pakistan to our President
in which it was alleged that Muslims in India were being terrorised.
On the 16th January, the President of India replied to the President
of Pakistan pointing out that the latter's account of communal
disturbances in India was grossly exaggerated and sought to confuse
the issue of refugees with the eviction of Pakistanis who had illegally
entered the border States of India from Pakistan. It also deprecated
the anti-India campaign carried out in Pakistan. It was suggested
that the two Presidents should issue a Joint Appeal to the peoples
of the two countries for communal peace and harmony. This proposal was rejected by the President of Pakistan on the 17th of January
on the ground that he had already issued an appeal to his people.
Simultaneously with the handing over of the President's letter of
the 16th January, the Indian High Commissioner, as instructed by
the Government of India, proposed a meeting of the Home Ministers
of India and Pakistan in either Dacca or Calcutta. The Pakistan
Government's reply was not only ambiguous but hedged with so,
many conditions that it amounted to a rejection. The Government
of India, however, repeatedly appealed to the Pakistan Government
for a conference of Home Ministers. Eventually, in response to a
proposal by the late Jawaharlal Nehru to President Ayub, on the
23rd of March-more than two and a half months after the original
out-break of the Khulna riots-Pakistan accepted the proposal.

The conference of the Home Ministers on the 7th April was not
able to arrive at an agreement, though the Government of India made
several specific proposals for implementation by both countries. The
Joint Communique at the end of the meeting provided for a reconvening of the Conference of Home Ministers at an early date for
continuation of the discussion. After many efforts, a second conference of Home Ministers was scheduled for the 23rd of November,
1964.
In the second half of the year it appeared likely that Indo-Pakistan
relations might take a better turn. There were expressions of spontaneous sorrow in Pakistan on the death of Jawaharlal Nehru. The
President of Pakistan spoke of the need for fresh efforts to resolve
Indo-Pakistan differences and to place relations between the two
countries on a footing of good neighbourliness. These statements by
<pg39>
the President of Pakistan were welcomed in India, and the feeling
grew that in the improved atmosphere it might be possible to reopen
discussions with Pakistan on all our differences with that country.
It was hoped that a meeting between the Prime Minister and the
President of Pakistan at the Conference of Commonwealth Prime
Ministers in London would give new direction to our relations and
pave the way for further discussion of our differences with Pakistan.
The Prime Minister's inability to visit London prevented such a meeting. It was not until October 1964 that the two leaders could meet.
On his way back from Cairo after the Conference of Non-aligned
countries, the Prime Minister made a brief halt at Karachi and had
discussions with the President of Pakistan. As a result of this meeting, a joint communique was issued stating that the two leaders were
"firmly of the view, that these (Indo-Pakistan) relations needed to be
improved and conducted to their mutual benefit as good neighbours".
They stressed the need to "promote better understanding between
the two countries and to settle outstanding problems and disputes
on an honourable and equitable basis". It was agreed that "discussions between the two governments at appropriate levels should be
held at the earliest possible moment so as to give effect to their
common desire to develop friendly and co-operative relations between
the two countries."
Subsequent to the meeting between the Prime Minister and the
President of Pakistan, the Foreign Minister accepted, in principle,
the invitation from the Foreign Minister of Pakistan to pay a goodwill visit to Pakistan.
It was at this stage that certain factors connected with internal
political developments in Pakistan led to an outburst of anti-Indian
propaganda in that country which vitiated the atmosphere for a possible detente. From November onwards, Pakistan was in the throes
of election fever and India was unjustifiably dragged in. Anti-Indian

slogans and anti-Indian propaganda were indulged in by the ruling
party as well as the Opposition. This greatly surprised and troubled public opinion in India. Pakistani leaders launched a campaign
to misinterpret Indian policies and malign Indian leadership. The
ruling party in Pakistan inserted anti-Indian advertisements in their
newspapers. The Home Minister, the Foreign Minister, the Information Minister, the Governor of East Pakistan and other leaders of
the ruling party, by their statements, made their own contribution
to the anti-Indian campaign. The Government of India protested
strongly against such statements. The Pakistan Government also
took the unprecedented step of calling off the talks between the
<pg40>
Home Ministers of the two countries a week before the meeting and
after the Indian delegation to these talks had been announced. They
also withdrew from the commitment to discuss, at the official level,.
the deteriorating situation on the cease-fire line which had been.
causing India a great deal of anxiety.
In this unhelpful atmosphere, it was difficult to conceive of a
fresh start being made to initiate talks with Pakistan in terms of the
joint communique issued at Karachi after the meeting between the
Prime Minister and the President of Pakistan. When the elections
were over in Pakistan in early December, it was expected that signs
of moderation would appear and there would be a return to the hopeful atmosphere of the earlier months. Unfortunately, the end of
elections did not bring about any improvement and the 'hate India'
campaign continued unabated in both wings of Pakistan.
In order to provide justification for its request to the Security
Council for an urgent meeting to discuss the Kashmir issue, the Government of Pakistan seized every opportunity to create a crisis atmosphere. It exploited the theft of the holy relic from Hazaratbal
in Srinagar, engineered attacks on minorities in East Pakistan and
mounted violence across the cease-fire line. The Security Council
met between February 3 and February 17, between March 17 and,
March 20 and again between May 5 and May 18. In pursuit of its
anti-Indian and agitational policy, Pakistan put forward the pretext
that there was a revolt in Jammu and Kashmir and that the Council
should consider the "grave situation that has arisen in the State".
The Indian Delegation was led by Shri M. C. Chagla, the Minister for
Education.
In spite of Pakistan's arduous efforts, the Council adjourned without adopting a resolution or even reaching a consensus. All members of the Council agreed with the Representative of India that the
only solution lay in direct negotiations after a friendly atmosphere
had been created, and the general feeling in the Council was that this
was not an issue which could be resolved by third party intervention. Several countries urged that the realities as they existed today
could not be ignored. None of the suggestions made by the Foreign

Minister of Pakistan was accepted by the Council and the 'measure
of his failure was recorded by him in a statement in the Council on
May 18:
"We asked for prompt and tangible assistance from the Security Council in the effort towards an early settlement and
it was our expectation that the Security Council would be
a positive and material factor in the situation. We had
<pg41>
hoped that the Council would firmly lay down the framework within which contacts between India and Pakistan
should be carried on for a solution of the problem of Jammu
and Kashmir. We would also have liked a definite role
to be assigned to the Secretary-General to enable him to
facilitate the progress and to ensure a fruitful result of
these contacts".
After the failure of her efforts in the Security Council, Pakistan
stepped up her violent and unlawful activities across the cease-fire
line. During the first five months, Pakistani armed forces and their
agents committed 134 breaches of the Cease-Fire Agreement; and
this number had increased to 1522 by the end of the year. Earlier in
April 1964, the UN Chief Military Observer had decided that a violation had been committed by Pakistan armed forces by crossing the
cease-fire line and firing on an Indian police patrol, resulting in the
death of 14 members of the patrol and the capture of 9 others by the
Pakistan troops. The Pakistan Government have not returned the
captured constables or paid compensation for the relatives of those
killed in the ambush. The protest of the Government of India to the
Government of Pakistan was brought to the notice of the Security
Council.
On August 21, the Permanent Representative of India in the
United Nations addressed a letter to the President of the Security
Council, exposing the baseless allegations made by the Permanent
Representative of Pakistan in his letter dated July 27, against the
Indian armed forces in Kashmir. India's reply showed with documentation how the Government of Pakistan had been deliberately
violating the Cease-Fire Agreement, despite its repeated assurances
of good conduct given to the UN Chief Military Observer and the
Government of India. In a number of his awards, the UN Chief
Military Observer had been obliged to comment on the organised
methods employed by the Pakistan army personnel and the Pakistan
armed civilians.
As the violence unleashed by Pakistan across the cease-fire line
was contrary to the feeling generally expressed in the Security
Council that the two countries should assist each other in creating
a climate conducive to direct negotiations, India proposed to Pakistan early in July the consideration of a gentleman's agreement for

avoiding incidents across the cease-fire line. Pakistan concurred in
the proposal in September and suggested talks between official delegations of the two Governments at Karachi from the 2nd to the 4th
of November. However, on October 31, Pakistan suggested an indefinite postponement. Pakistan thus made it clear that it considered
<pg42>
the creation and maintenance of tension between the two countries
to be essential to its concept of negotiations.
Meanwhile, without having any common border with China and
with the locus standi of an aggressor in Kashmir, Pakistan continued with China the work of demarcation of Kashmir's border with
Sinkiang. In February, when Premier Chou En-lai and VicePremier Chen-yi were State guests in Pakistan, the latter said to a
Pakistani correspondent: "Pakistan and China will continue to be
friends even after you get Kashmir and we take Taiwan". Pakistan
was assured by Premier Chou En-lai that the "majestic Karakoram
have become bonds of friendship between the Chinese and Pakistan's
peoples".
Towards the end of the year Pakistan protested to the Security
Council against the application of Articles 356 and 357 of the Constitution to the State of Jammu and Kashmir. The Government of
India, in reply, rejected the protest and pointed out that Pakistan
had no locus standi to protest against the application of the laws and
Constitution of India to a part of India, for the administration and
good government of which the Government of India had total responsibility.
Indus waters treaty 1960
The Permanent Indus Commission, set up in accordance with the
provisions of Article VIII(1) of the Indus Waters Treaty 1960, submitted in May 1964 to the Governments of India and Pakistan its
Annual Report for the year 1963-64. One meeting of the Commission
was held during the period 1st April to 31st December, 1964. In this
period, four parts of the First General Tour of Inspection of Development Works and Sites on the Indus System of Rivers in India
and Pakistan, under Article VIII (4) (c) of the Treaty, and one special
Tour of Inspection of Hudiara Drainage System in India, under Article
VIII(4)(d) of the Treaty, were undertaken by the Commission.
As required under Article V of the Treaty, the fifth annual instalment of the fixed Indian contribution towards the cost of replacement works in Pakistan, equal to Pounds Sterling 6,206,000, payable
to the World Bank for the Indus Basin Development Fund on 1st
November, 1964, was paid.
INDIA

BURMA USA SRI LANKA CHINA TOTO EGYPT PAKISTAN RUSSIA CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC PERU INDONESIA SWITZERLAND NEPAL LATVIA BANGLADESH UNITED KINGDOM
MALI TAIWAN
Feb 05, 1965

STATES IN SPECIAL TREATY RELATIONS WITH INDIA
CHAPTER V
STATES IN SPECIAL TREATY RELATIONS WITH INDIA
SIKKIM
Progress in the implementation of the schemes under Sikkim's
Second Development Plan (1961-66) showed an improvement during
the year under review. The total outlay of the Plan is Rs. 813.30
lakhs and is being financed entirely by the Government of India.
The Budget provision for the Plan Schemes for 1964-65 amounted to
Rs. 180 lakhs as against Rs. 160 lakhs in 1963-64. The total expenditure on Plan Schemes from July, 1961, when the Plan period commences, to the end of September, 1964, has been of the order of
Rs. 370 lakhs. Of this, roads accounted for Rs. 155 lakhs and education and health Rs. 62 lakhs. The shares of agriculture and animal
husbandry and transport were Rs. 53 lakhs and Rs. 27 lakhs respectively. A team of the Planning Commission visited Sikkim in April,
1964, for a mid-term appraisal of the progress of Plan schemes and
made recommendations which are being considered by the Government. The proposal for upgrading the existing extra branch departmental post offices at Naya Bazar, Namchi and Geyzing to the status
of sub-post offices and of providing telegraphic facilities at Namchi
has been approved. Arrangements have been made for the supply
of modern X-Ray equipment, estimated to cost approximately
Rs. 70,000, for the Tuberculosis Unit at Gangtok. Besides, a scheme
for the training of the staff in the Unit is also under considerationA team for conducting a survey of venereal and intestinal diseases is
likely to visit Sikkim shortly. Field investigation for preparation of
a project report on power development from the River Raman, which
flows between Sikkim and India, is proposed to be undertaken next
year. It is expected to generate about a hundred million watts of
power from this river. Malaria eradication operations in Sikkim
continued during 1964 and it is proposed to intensify the coverage of
the scheme during the next year.
25 fresh scholarships were made available for the Sikkimese students for school studies and 22 scholarships for degree/diploma

courses for 1964. The total number of Sikkimese scholarship holders
now is 104 for school studies and 22 for degree/diploma courses. The
total expenditure on the scholarship scheme is estimated at Rs. 4.80
lakhs during 1964-65. Necessary assistance has also been extended,
through the Ministry of Education, in securing admission of Sikkimese students in colleges and technical and medical institutions in
India, in relaxation of the normal rules, to accelerate the availability
<pg43>
<pg44>
of suitable personnel for Plan schemes, etc. A separate scholarship
scheme for overseers/draftsmen and B.E. Courses for Sikkimese students is also financed by the Government of India.
The Ministry of Defence undertook responsibility from
Nov 14, 1963 for the work of construction of the aerial ropeway in
Sikkim and satisfactory progress has been made in this matter. An
expenditure of Rs. 10.5 lakhs is estimated on the ropeway project.
This excludes what has already been incurred by the Sikkim Durbar.
The Maharaja of Sikkim attended the Conference of the World
Fellowship of Buddhists held at Sarnath, from the 27th November,
1964.
BHUTAN
The Prime Minister of Bhutan, Shri Jigmie P. Dorji, was assassinated on the 5th April, 1964, at Phuntsholing. The assassin was
arrested by the Bhutanese authorities. Flags were flown at half
mast on all public buildings of Delhi and in West Bengal on the 6th
April and on the funeral day. The Minister of State in the Ministry
of External Affairs and the Foreign Secretary represented the Government of India at the cremation at Thimpu. The King of Bhutan
appointed Shri Lendup, Dorji, brother of the late Prime Minister of
Bhutan, as Acting Prime Minister of Bhutan, sometime after the
assassination of Shri Jigmie P. Dorji.
The Bhutan Government issued a statement in November, 1964,
that 4 civilian officers and 2 Army officers, including the Deputy
Commander-in-Chief, had fled the country. The statement said that
the officers had fled from Bhutan under an exaggerated sense of fear
of action that might be taken against them on the King's return
from Switzerland for dereliction of duty during the King's absence.
The King of Bhutan returned from Switzerland on the 27th November, 1964 and took steps to replace the officers who had deserted. The
King resumed responsibility for the administration of the country
and removed Shri Lhendup Dorji from the office of the Acting Prime
Minister of Bhutan. The King also placed his brother, Dashu
Wangchuck, in charge of the Army in addition to his civil duties.

Early in December, 1964, the four Bhutanese defectors who had
escaped into Nepal issued a press statement from Kathmandu, alleging Indian interference in Bhutan's internal affairs. These allegations
were immediately rebutted by the Government of India and India's
adherence to the Treaty of 1949 between India and Bhutan was reaffirmed, The King himself issued a statement denouncing the al<pg45>
legations of the defectors and dispelling any suspicion of any interference on the part of India in the internal affairs of Bhutan.
The King of Bhutan and the Prime Minister of India met in
Calcutta from 10th to 12th January, 1965, and held discussions on
matters of mutual interest.
The pace of implementation of development works in Bhutan
under the Bhutan Plan was disturbed by the dislocation caused by
the assassination of Shri Jigmie Dorji. However, development
activity regained momentum soon after, and it is expected that the
tempo will be kept up. Against the outlay of Rs. 1,747 lakhs envisaged in the Bhutan Plan during the period 1961-1966, the total
expenditure incurred upto the end of June 1964 amounted to
Rs. 515 lakhs. This compares well with the figure of Rs. 273 lakhs
till the end of June 1963. Budget provision for development works
in Bhutan during 1964-65 is of the order of Rs. 225 lakhs. Road works
in Bhutan accounted for about Rs. 36 lakhs till June 1964. A microhydel directorate, has been set up by the Government of Bhutan to
investigate and execute micro-hydel schemes. The Central Water
and Power Commission have been giving valuable advice to them on
technical problems. The Geological Survey of India, entrusted with
the work of investigating mineral deposits in Bhutan, completed its
survey report on Bungthing copper deposits and its preliminary
report on Chilai La graphite occurrences, as well as certain other
projects. A malaria eradication team from Bihar and B.C.G. Teams
from West Bengal and Assam visited Bhutan during the year in
connection with disease prevention operations. Technical experts
were deputed from India to advise Bhutan authorities on small scale
industry and handicraft schemes as well as weaving and textile designing.
Under the programme for road construction in Bhutan by the
Border Roads Development Board, construction work continued in the
Samdrup-Jhangkher (Dharanga-Tashigong road). The major work
has been completed covering 106 miles. The work on the SarbhangHatisar-Tongsa road (190 miles long) has also been progressing satisfactorily. Widening of the Paro-Phuntsholing-Thimpu road (120
miles) has also gone on expeditiously. The line communication road
from Dharanga to Tashigong has been completed and that from
Phuntsholing to Paro/Thimpu is nearing completion.
35 more scholarships, 30 for school studies and 5 for degree/

diploma courses for Bhutanese students, were provided for in 1964.
<pg46>
The total number of Bhutanese students studying in India under the
scholarship scheme is 117. Expenditure to be incurred under the
scheme during 1964-65 is estimated at Rs. 5.08 lakhs. It is proposed
to grant 60 more scholarships to Bhutanese students in 1965 forstudies in India.
INDIA
USA BHUTAN SWITZERLAND NEPAL
Nov 14, 1963

SOUTH EAST ASIA
CHAPTER VI
SOUTH EAST ASIA
MALAYSIA, INDONESIA AND THE PHILIPPINES
The dispute between Malaysia and Indonesia and Indonesia's
"confrontation" policy against Malaysia continued unabated during
the year. Malaysia and the Philippines have re-established consular
relations, but have not exchanged full diplomatic representatives.
The Philippines have laid claim to Sabha, which is one of the constituent parts of the Federation of Malaysia.
Several unsuccessful efforts were made during the year to resolve the differences between Indonesia and Malaysia. The Foreign
Ministers of Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines met twice in
Bangkok in an attempt to iron out their differences, but these meetings proved infructuous and failed to reach agreement on the question of the withdrawal of Indonesian guerillas from Malaysian territory. On Jun 20, 1964, there was a "summit" meeting of the Heads
of State of the three countries in Tokyo, but this also ended indecisively. A communique issued at the end of the meeting recorded agreement "in principle" between Indonesia and Malaysia on
a peace formula proposed by the Philippines, calling for the creation
of a Afro-Asian Conciliation Commission of four nations to study the
dispute on the basis of the material supplied to, it by the disputing
parties and to make its recommendations. Malaysia, however, firmly stipulated that before such a Commission could be set up, "all acts

of hostility against Malaysia must cease forthwith".
Indonesian paratroops were dropped for the first time on the
Malaysian mainland, at Labis in South Central Malaya, on September
2, 1964. The Malaysian Government declared a State of Emergency
throughout Malaysia and asked for an urgent meeting of the Security
Council under Article 39 of the United Nations Charter. The Council
met on September 9, 1964. After unsuccessful attempts by Morocco
and Ivory Coast to achieve a consensus, Norway submitted a draft
resolution. The Security Council ended its debate on September 17,
1964 by voting on the Norwegian draft, which was vetoed by the
U.S.S.R. Czechoslovakia also voted against, while the other 9 members of the Security Council voted in the affirmative.
India's Attitude
As far as the formation of Malaysia is concerned, in view of the
clear and unequivocal findings of the United Nations Secretary<pg47>
<pg48>
General in favour of Malaysia in Sarawak and North Borneo, India
has maintained its support to the inauguration of Malaysia. As regards the conflict between Indonesia and Malaysia, the Government
of India have refrained from taking sides in the specific dispute between the two countries, and are not involved in a mediatory capacity.
They have welcomed and supported the formation of Malaysia, because it was in accordance with the wishes of the people of the constituent territories, and this was ascertained by the United Nations
Secretary-General. India was a signatory to the Commonwealth
Prime Ministers' Communique in July 1964, which expressed sympathy and support to Malaysia in her efforts to maintain her sovereignty and territorial integrity. The Government of India are, however, anxious that there should be a peaceful solution of the dispute
without resort to force or threats to use force.
THAILAND
India purchased 25,000 tons of rice from Thailand in 1964. The
Government of Thailand sponsored the visit of a group of Thai
officials in March-April, 1964, to study the development of small scale
industries in India. Mr. Bunchana Athakor, the Deputy Minister for
National Development of Thailand, also paid an official visit to India
in March 1964.
AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND
Both Australia and New Zealand revealed an increasingly active
awareness and interest in the affairs of the Asian continent. Re-

lations between India and these two fellow-member countries of the
Commonwealth have continued to be close and friendly. An
Australian trade delegation visited India, and an Indian trade delegation later visited Australia for talks on trade between the two
countries. A Parliamentary Delegation from Australia also visited
India in June-July 1964.
In July 1964, a Silver Shield was presented in memory of the
late Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, to the Adelaide University Debating Club, Adelaide, South Australia. The shield, which
is called the "Nehru Challenge Shield", will be competed for at an
annual debate organised by the Club.
LAOS
India continued to be Chairman of the international Commission
for Supervision and Control in Laos. Although the principal aim of
<pg49>
the 1962 Geneva Agreement on Laos was political and military integration of the three factions in Laos, unfortunately the task of the
Government of National Union of Laos, headed by His Highness
Prince Souvanna Phouma, was rendered difficult on account of internal developments in that country. A military coup d'etat took place
in Vientiane on 19 April, 1964, which was led by a General belonging
to the Rightist group. The Revolutionary Council placed restrictions
on the movement of His Highness Prince Souvanna Phouma and
other Neutralist Ministers and Generals. The Prime Minister of
India sent a message to the Prime Minister of Laos, expressing deep
regret at the happenings in Laos and the hope that he would continue
to lead the Laos Government and people to a full realisation of the
objectives embodied in the Geneva Agreement. India's full support
to His Highness Prince Souvanna Phouma's efforts to maintain the
unity and neutrality of Laos was also conveyed. Later the restrictions placed on the movement of the Prime Minister of Laos and
other Neutralists were removed and the former continued to function
as Prime Minister.
In May 1964 the Prime Minister of Laos announced that the Pathet
Lao had launched a general offensive with the help of North Vietnamese soldiers and thus caused a further deterioration of the situation in Laos. The Plain of Jars where the Neutralist Commander,
General Kong Le, had his headquarters, was captured by the Pathet
Lao and the Indian and Canadian members of the 'Learn stationed
there by the International Commission had to be withdrawn to Vientiane. In June 1964 the International Commission sent a report to
the Co-Chairmen of the Geneva Conference, viz., Britain and the
U.S.S.R., on the worsening military situation in Laos. This report
was signed by the Canadian and Indian Commissioners. After narrating the internal political dissensions in Laos, the report regretted
that there was a widening of the gap within the Government of

National Union with few signs of the rift being quickly healed. The
report added that in regard to the allegations regarding the presence
of Vietminh elements fighting alongside the Pathet Lao, the Commission was hampered by the refusal by the Pathet Lao to permit
entrance into its territory except under very strictly controlled
conditions.
The Government of India have strongly supported, and continue
to support, the convening of a 14-Nation International Conference on
Laos. For any settlement of Laos to be achieved, the three parties or
factions have to meet again; and in these efforts the Commission,
under the Chairmanship of the Indian Commissioner, as also the
diplomatic representatives of the Governments of Britain and
<pg50>
U.S.S.R. as Co-Chairmen of the Geneva Conference, continued to
render constant assistance. Within the framework of the Geneva
Agreement, the Indian representative on the Control Commission
took all possible measures at every stage to bring about peace and
understanding among the parties.
Talks between the leaders of the three Laotian parties commenced
in Paris in August 1964 and, according to a joint communique issued
in September 1964, they agreed on a three-point agenda for tripartitetalks to settle their differences and protect Laotian neutrality. The,
three points were: (a) a cease-fire, (b) the reconvening of a 14-Nation
Conference on Laos and (c) a Laotian Government of National Union.
Renewed hostilities in Laos caused suffering to the civilian population. His Highness Prince Souvanna Phouma, Prime Minister and
Defence Minister of Laos, sent an urgent message in May 1964 to
the Prime Minister of India requesting medical assistance for the
civilian population affected by the renewed hostilities. An Indian
Medical Team, consisting of 6 Medical Officers and 37 Other Ranks,
was sent to Laos on humanitarian grounds. The Medical Team has
done useful work in relieving the suffering of the civilian population
in Laos.
CAMBODIA
The International Commission for Supervision and Control
in Cambodia, with India as Chairman, continued to function effectively in Cambodia.
There were several allegations of incidents on the CambodiaSouth Vietnam border. In June 1964 the Control Commission sent
a report to the Co-Chairman of 'the Geneva Conference on Indo-China
viz. Britain and the U.S.S.R, about three incidents involving violations
of the Cambodian territory which had taken place in the first half
of 1964. The Commission reported that "in all these three incidents,
the Commission found conclusive evidence that the Armed Forces of

South Vietnam were responsible for the violations. The Commission
is also convinced that none of these incidents was the result of any
provocation from the Cambodian side". This report was sent to the
Co-Chairmen by India and Poland, while the Canadian Commissioner
forwarded a minority report.
The Government of India have supported fully the proposal of
the Government of Cambodia that an International Conference of
the Geneva Powers should be convened to study the steps to be taken
to ensure the neutrality and territorial integrity of Cambodia.
<pg51>
A consignment of surgical instruments made in India, appliances
and medical drugs worth Rs. 25,000 was presented as a gift to the
Royal Government of Cambodia for use in Cambodian hospitals.
VIETNAM
The Government of India firmly support the Geneva Agreement
of 1954 on Vietnam which envisages the peaceful reunification of
Vietnam. The situation in Vietnam today is tense. The 1954
Geneva Agreement on Vietnam contemplated the insulation of the
country from military intervention from outside. The Agreement
had specific clauses forbidding entry into Vietnam of foreign military
personnel or material of any type, except in replacement of permissible quantities already in the country. It is, therefore, a matter of
regret that outside interference in the affairs of Vietnam has continued in spite of the Geneva Agreement and the reunification of
Vietnam remains unachieved. The Government of India have
always worked for the implementation of the Geneva Agreement.
The situation in Vietnam became critical in the month of
August, 1964, when incidents involving navalcraft of the U.S.
Seventh Fleet and torpedo boats belonging to the Democratic Republic of Vietnam took place in the Gulf of Tonkin. The Government
of India issued a statement expressing their distress over these
incidents and the hope that the explosive situation created by these
incidents would not be further aggravated. The statement stressed
that it was imperative that at least the uneasy peace which prevailed
in this area before these incidents would immediately be restored.
Contrary to the expectations of the Government of India the
situation in Vietnam has not shown any signs of settling down. The
Government of India believe that political rather than military
solutions should be sought for Vietnam. In Indo-China the solution
lies in eliminating outside influences and in insulating this area from
foreign interference. The Government of India would like to see
the people of Vietnam enjoy their freedom and independence without any interference from outside. The Government of India believe
that a Geneva type Conference will help in finding a political solution to the problems of Vietnam.

In November, 1964, there were serious floods in Central Vietnam
and the Government of India sent Indian textiles worth Rs. 10,000/to the Republic of Vietnam as their contribution for the relief of
flood victims.
INDONESIA
MALAYSIA PHILIPPINES USA JAPAN MOROCCO NORWAY SLOVAKIA INDIA THAILAND
AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND LAOS SWITZERLAND FRANCE CAMBODIA VIETNAM CHINA
POLAND
Jun 20, 1964

EAST ASIA
CHAPTER VII
EAST ASIA
JAPAN
During the year relations between Japan and India were cordial
and friendly and economic, cultural, educational and social ties
between the two countries were strengthened in many ways.
A scholarship, to a Japanese student for studies and research in
an Indian university was granted by the Government of India and
under the scholarship programme, four scholarships to Indian students for research and study in Japan were granted by the Japanese
Government.
The Nichigeki dancing team of Japan toured India in January
1964 under the sponsorship of the Japanese Embassy in New Delhi.
The team's performances entitled "spring time splendour of Japan",
and consisting of classical, folk and modern dances in four shows
spread over two days, delighted packed houses in Bombay. The
dance troupe was given a reception at the India International Centre
in New Delhi.
A Japanese women's hockey team consisting of 16 players and 5
officials, toured India for two weeks and played five exhibition games
and seven test matches. This was the first tour of a Japanese
women's hockey team abroad.
A students' goodwill mission consisting of three Japanese stu-

dents visited India in August, 1964 under the sponsorship of the
Asia Fellowship Society of Japan. They visited different places and
met several students and youth organizations.
The same month, two Buddhist groups consisting of 13 and 15
members respectively toured India, visiting places of Buddhist interest. Both the teams stayed in India for more than a fortnight.
An Indian delegation of ten members under the leadership of the
Secretary of the Department of Iran and Steel, Shri N. N. Wanchoo,
visited Japan in February, 1964, to study the working of the Japanese steel industry. During its stay in Japan the delegation had discussions with leaders of the steel industry and visited various steel
plants, shipyards and other heavy industrial plants.
Shrimati Indira Gandhi, the Regional President of the International Co-operative Alliance, visited Japan on her way to the United
<pg52>
<pg53>
States in April 1964, to attend the conference of the International,
Co-operative Alliance. This conference had been organized with
particular reference to the "role of co-operation in social and economic development" in collaboration with the Central Union of Cultural Co-operation, Japan. As it was a meeting of senior representatives from various South-East Asian countries, India was represented by Shri S. D. Misra, Deputy Minister (Co-operation) and a senior
officer of the Ministry of Community Development and Co-operation. This delegation also represented India at the Second Asian
Cultural Co-operative Conference held in Tokyo in the same month
to discuss measures to be taken in future for the development of
cultural co-operatives in the region and for strengthening mutual cooperation. Shri Shriman Narayan, then Member of the Planning
Commission, paid a visit to Japan from Apr 21, 1964 to 29 April, 1964, at
the invitation of the Chairman of the Japanese Committee for Studies
on Economic Development in India and Japan.
Mr. Masayoshi Ohira, Foreign Minister of Japan, attended the
funeral of the late Prime Minister and joined the public meeting of
condolence' at the Ramlila grounds in New Delhi along with Indian
leaders and leaders of other countries.
In May 1964, Shri Raj Bahadur, Minister of Transport, visited
Japan to conduct negotiations for the establishment of the second
shipyard in Cochin and to hold discussions in regard to tourism and
foreign collaboration in hotel industry and shipping. The Minister
had useful discussions with the Prime Minister, the Foreign Minister, the Vice-Minister of Transport and the Minister of International
Trade and Industry of the Government of Japan.

In August, 1964, the Indian Olympic Association gave a befitting
welcome to the Japanese members carrying the Olympic flame on
its way from Athens to Tokyo. The flame was kept in the New
Delhi Town Hall for a day.
The 18th World Olympic Games were held in Tokyo from the
10th to the 24th October, 1964. A contingent of 58 Indian athletes
and officials of the Indian Olympic Association visited Japan for
participation in the games. The Indian Hockey team won the gold
medal for hockey.
The meeting of the Asian Women's Hockey Federation was held
at Osaka in October 1964 and the All India Women's Hockey Federation was represented at the meeting by five delegates. The acting
honorary treasurer of the All India Women's Hockey Federation
was also given a coaching assignment for about a month to coach the
team of the Hagoromo Institution in Japan.
<pg54>
In October 1964, two child ambassadors with an adult escort
visited Japan for one month at the invitation of the International
Children's Goodwill Association, Tokyo. They carried with them
colourful Indian toys and friendly letters for the Japanese children.
The child ambassadors visited Nikko, Osaka, Kyoto, Nara and other
places. They also witnessed the Olympic Games on the special invitation of the Mayor of Tokyo.
THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA
Discussions were held in New Delhi from the 20th to the 22nd
January 1964, between a trade delegation of the Government of the
Republic of Korea, led by Mr. Chul Seung Lee, Assistant Minister,
Ministry of Commerce and Industry, and a delegation of the Ministry of International Trade, Government of India. led by Shri D. K.
Srinivasachar, Joint Secretary. Both delegations expressed their
desire to expand trade and economic co-operation between the two
countries and a trade arrangement was concluded. Letters exchanged between the two countries were signed on the 29th April
1964 in New Delhi. The arrangement came into force from the date
of signature of the letters and will remain valid for two years. It
will be renewable on a year-to-year basis.
The Government of India gave training facilities in statistics to
four South Korean nominees at the International Statistical Education Centre, Calcutta, during the year 1964-65 under the Colombo
Plan. The Government of India also granted training facilities for
five candidates from the Republic of Korea in forestry (diploma
course) at the Forest Rangers College, Dehra Dun, during 1964-65,
under the Colombo, Plan.
Five members of the Indian table tennis team visited South Korea

to compete in the 7th Asian Table Tennis Championship held in
Seoul from 25th September to 10th October, 1964.
THE DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
During August 1964, our Charge d'Affaires in Peking visited
North Korea. During his brief stay the Charge d'Affaires visited
many industrial establishments and other institutions. He also had
discussions with the authorities in North Korea on matters of mutual
interest.
THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF MONGOLIA
Our Ambassador in Moscow, who is concurrently accredited as
Ambassador to Mongolia, visited Ulan Bator in July, 1964, During
<pg55>
his visit he had useful discussons with the Chairman of the Council
of Ministers and other leaders of the Mongolian People's Republic.
He also organised an Indian photographic exhibition depicting India's
art, architecture, modem industries, agriculture and health services.
On the opening day of the exhibition on 2nd July, a large number
of Mongolian dignitaries were present. The exhibition was opened
by Mr. Chultem, President of the Indo-Mongolian Friendship Society.
In his speech Mr. Chultem stressed Indo-Mongolian ties and paid
warm tributes to the late Jawaharlal Nehru's policies which had
laid the foundation of modern India.
The Ambassador, during his visit, also participated in the celebrations of the 43rd anniversary of the Mongolian People's Republic.
The new Mongolian Ambassador, Mr. Oyuny Khosbayar, presented his credentials to the President on the 1st October, 1964.
In order to strengthen further the relations between India and
Mongolia, discussions are being held between our Embassy in
Moscow and the Ministry of Foreign Trade of the Mongolian People's
Republic and its trade organizations for developing trade.

JAPAN
INDIA USA IRAN CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC GREECE KOREA SRI LANKA NORTH KOREA
MONGOLIA RUSSIA
Apr 21, 1964

WEST ASIA AND NORTH AFRICA
Jan 01, 1964
CHAPTER VIII
WEST ASIA AND NORTH AFRICA
In her relations with the countries of West Asia and North Africa,
the aim and endeavour of India's foreign policy is, and has been, to
develop, in a modern context, the historical and cultural ties which
have linked these two regions of the world since the dawn of history.
India shares with the countries of the region the same challenges in
the fields of economic and social reconstruction and follows broadly
similar principles and policies in her external relations.
India has embarked on an extensive programme of economic and
scientific collaboration with the countries of West Asia and North
Africa by providing training facilities of all kinds, lending experts
and initiating plans for joint industrial ventures. During 1964, one
of the important schemes in this sphere was a technical and economic
aid programme for the Yemen.
In international affairs, India shares with the Arab world and
Afghanistan, common principles of non-alignment, peaceful coexistence, disarmament, anti-colonialism, anti-racialism, and secularism. Adherence to these principles was reflected in the resolutions
adopted at the Non-aligned Nations' Conference in Cairo in October
1964. India has consistently supported the Arab countries on their
stand on the Jordan waters issue and on the rights of the Palestine
refugees wishing to return to their homes. With the Arab countries,
India firmly believes that States should not be artificially created on
the basis of religion and no people should be forcibly evicted from
their ancestral homes because of religious differences. It was in
accordance with these principles that India, along with the Arab
countries and other non-aligned nations, voted for the resolution at
the Non-aligned Conference supporting the unity and territorial
integrity of Cyprus.
Indo-Arab understanding on the question of the Jordan waters
issue and the problem of Palestinian refugees was reiterated in the
Joint Communiques issued after the State visits to India of President
Aref of Iraq, President Abboud of the Sudan and the Crown Prince
of Kuwait and the visit to the U.A.R. by the Prime Minister of India.
Details of visits exchanged between India and countries in West Asia
and North Africa during the year are given at Appendix V and VI.
Mention must also be made of the grief expressed by the friendly
countries of West Asia and North Africa on the death of Jawaharlal

<pg56>
<pg57>
Nehru. Official mourning was declared in the U.A.R., Iraq and some
other countries. Official delegations present at the funeral included
H. E. Mr Shafei, Vice-President of U.A.R., Dr. Ahmed Belafrej,
personal representative of H. M. the King of Morocco, Mr. Brahimi
Ladkher. representative of President Ben Bella, and Mr. Mongi Slim,
representative of President Bourguiba.
INDIA
USA YEMEN AFGHANISTAN EGYPT JORDAN CYPRUS IRAQ SUDAN KUWAIT MOROCCO
Jan 01, 1964

AFRICA SOUTH OF THE SAHARA
CHAPTER IX
AFRICA SOUTH OF THE SAHARA
India's close and friendly relations with the African countries
were further strengthened during 1964 by exchanges of visits, the
opening of new diplomatic missions in Malawi and Somalia and the
decision to appoint Indian envoys to Zambia and Guinea. India
welcomed the emergence of Malawi and Zambia as independent
States within the Commonwealth. A Ministerial Delegation, headed
by Shri A. K. Sen, Minister of Law, and Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy
Minister of External Affairs, represented India at the independence
celebrations of Malawi in July and the late H. C. Dasappa,
Minister of Industry and Supply, led the Indian Delegation to the
independence celebrations of the Republic of Zambia in October.
A number of distinguished visitors from African countries visited
India during 1964. (For details see Appendix V). A party delegation
from the Kenya African National Union toured India on a goodwill
visit and a Press delegation representing the various newspapers of
Nigeria paid a visit.
The death of Jawaharlal Nehru evoked spontaneous grief
and feelings of sympathy for India among the African people who
had regarded him as the foremost champion of freedom and equality.

State mourning was declared in Ethiopia and Uganda. Official delegations from Africa present at the funeral included Mr. Kalule Settala,
Minister of Works and Communications, Uganda, Mr. Jaja Wachuku,
Minister of External Affairs. Nigeria, and Mr. Ofori Atta, Minister
of Justice, Ghana.
Significant steps were taken by the independent African States
to strengthen the Organization of African Unity founded in 1963.
As a manifestation of the desire of the African peoples for unity, a
second "summit" conference of African Heads of State and Government was held in Cairo in July 1964. The OAU achieved success in
reconciling boundary differences between Algeria and Morocco and
Ethiopia and Somalia. On the economic front, an important step
was taken by the formation of an Africa Development Bank.
The internal situation in Congo was the cause of much concern
to African and other States. The United Nations troops which had
<pg58>
<pg59>
contributed so much towards maintaining the unity and integrity of
the Congo since its independence and in which operation Indian
troops had played the most significant role, were finally withdrawn
on Jun 30, 1964. Thereafter only the civilian presence of the
United Nations remained in some fields. The problem of bringing
about national reconciliation in the country, however, defied solution.
The OAU became seized of the matter and appointed an ad hoc
Conciliation Commission of 9 members under the Chairmanship of
Mr. Jomo Kenyatta. The efforts of this Commission in bringing
together the two main factions in the Congo were in progress in
Nairobi when Belgian paratroopers landed in Stanleyville on November 24. The Europeans in Stanleyville and the neighbouring areas
were flown out by the paratroopers along with some other people of
various nationalities. The foreign military intervention in the Congo,
especially when the OAU was engaged in finding an African solution
to this problem, created a sharp reaction among the African people.
There was, however, no consensus on the manner of dealing with
the situation and the African States were divided on the question of
recognition of Mr. Tshombe as the legitimate Prime Minister of the
Congo (Leopoldville). The Government of India have given full
support to the efforts of the OAU and the U.N. Security Council to
bring about lasting peace in that troubled country.
The other problems agitating the minds of the African people,
with which India has always expressed her full sympathy and
support, were the question of ending the racialist policies of the
Government of South Africa, eradicating Portuguese colonialism
from the continent and the ending of repression of African nationalism by the 'White' minority Government in Southern Rhodesia.

Indian support was fully extended to the demand for the political
and economic emancipation of the African people of South Africa.
As a practical manifestation of its earnestness, the Government of
India have taken all steps necessary towards imposition of a political
and economic boycott of South Africa, as adopted in the United
Nations resolution (1761 XVII) of 7th November 1962. In this field,
India's record has been that of a pioneer. In regard to the elimination of Portuguese colonialism, India has extended her friendship and
support to the efforts being made by the OAU to liberate these areas.
The problem of Southern Rhodesia remained a source of concern.
The Government of India welcomed the positive stand taken by the
Labour Government in Britain against a unilateral declaration of
independence by the 'White' minority Government in Salisbury,
which was in conformity with the consensus expressed by the Commonwealth Prime Ministers at their Conference in London in July
1964.
<pg60>
The future of the people of Indian origin settled in various countries of Africa continued to attract attention in India. Since the
political and economic conditions have considerably changed following the emergence of the African countries to independence, the
problem of adjustment remained a major pre-occupation with the
people of Indian origin. During the transitional phase, stresses and
strains of varying degree are being experienced by them in different
countries. While in some countries the position was satisfactory, in
others there was a considerable degree of instability and fear as to
the future. It is the hope and endeavour of the Government of India
that the process of adjustment, which has already begun, will be
smoothly completed, so that the Indian settlers, as equal, useful
citizens, may contribute their best to the progress and welfare of their
adopted countries.
The violent revolution in Zanzibar in January 1964, followed by
its repercussions as manifested in the army mutinies in Tanganyika,
Kenya and Uganda, had an unsettling effect on the Asians in these
countries. The forced pace of Africanisation of services also affected
the fortunes of a number of Asian civil servants.
In implementation of the decision taken at the Conference of
Indian Heads of Mission in Africa in November 1963, concrete steps
were taken to enlarge economic and technical co-operation with the
African countries. The services of Indian technical personnel,
doctors, teachers, etc., were made available in increasing numbers to
Nigeria, Ethiopia, Sudan, Uganda and other countries. The most
significant step towards Indo-African collaboration was taken by the
conclusion of an agreement in Kampala, Uganda, for the setting up
of four new sugar mills with Indian technical assistance and equity
capital participation. A delegation sponsored by the Federation of
Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industries visited a number of
independent African countries to explore the possibilities of joint
collaboration in the industrial field. Their findings will provide the

basis for setting up Indo-African joint ventures in different fields.
INDIA
MALAWI MALI SOMALIA GUINEA ZAMBIA USA KENYA NIGER NIGERIA ETHIOPIA UGANDA
UNITED KINGDOM GHANA EGYPT ALGERIA MOROCCO CONGO FALKLAND ISLANDS SOUTH
AFRICA SUDAN
Jun 30, 1964

EASTERN AND WESTERN EUROPE
CHAPTER X
EASTERN AND WESTERN EUROPE
Eastern Europe: USSR
The USSR successfully maintained her leadership of the Communist movement, in the face of increasingly belligerent attacks from
the Chinese Communist Party. The constructive policies of peaceful
co-existence and rejection of the theses of the inevitability of war and
of violent revolutions, followed by the USSR contributed to the
maintenance of peace and amity between the major nuclear powers.
The relations between India and the Soviet Union, based upon the
policies of respect for each other's national integrity, peaceful coexistence and cooperation in economic and cultural fields, continued
to remain firm and friendly. In the Plenary Meeting of the Central
Committee of the CPSU in February 1964, Mr. Suslov, member of the
Central Committee, had blamed the Chinese for starting a violent
conflict with India on the border issue and commended India's
acceptance of the Colombo proposals for a peaceful settlement of the
problem. On Kashmir, the Soviet Union once again gave its full
support to India's stand in the Security Council debate in May 1964.
The economic and cultural relations between the two countries
continued to expand. The Cultural Exchange Programme, signed in
February-March 1964, in New Delhi by the Soviet delegation led by
Mr. Romanovsky, Chairman of the State Committee for Cultural
Relations with Foreign Countries, provided for the exchange of
scholars, scientists, technicians and artists between the two countries.
In the field of economic collaboration, the Soviet Government afford
assistance for the construction of another major steel plant at Bokaro.
Considerable progress has already been made in working out details
of this project. The Soviet Government also assured the Govern-

ment of India of their willingness to advance credit to India for establishing various projects under the Fourth Five Year Plan. A Trade
Delegation from the Soviet Union under the leadership of Mr. B. A.
Borisov, Deputy Minister of Foreign Trade, visited India in OctoberNovember, 1964 and an agreement to increase the trade between the
two countries by one and a half times during 1965-66 was signed. The
Soviet Minister for Power and Electrification, Mr. P. S. Neporozhny,
visited India in July 1964 to attend the inauguration of the Neyveli
Thermal Plant in Madras, which has been constructed with Soviet
collaboration. Prof. V. P. Elutin, Soviet Minister for Secondary and
<pg61>
<pg62>
High Education paid a visit to India and attended the 2nd Convocation of the Indian Institute of Technology in Bombay in March 1964.
Mr. A. N. Kosygin, then the First Deputy Prime Minister and
now the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR, led the
Soviet delegation to, attend the funeral of the late Prime Minister.
The Soviet leaders and people expressed their deep sense of sorrow
and sympathy for India at the time of her national bereavement and
paid high tribute to the late Jawaharlal Nehru and to his life long
dedication to the cause of world peace.
The Soviet Government welcomed the election of Shri Lal
Bahadur Shastri as India's Prime Minister and assured full support,
to India in pursuing her policies of peaceful co-existence and nonalignment. Mr. A. I. Mikoyan, formerly the First Deputy Prime
Minister and now the President of the Presidium of the Supreme
Soviet of the USSR paid a short visit to India in June 1964 on his
way to Indonesia and assured India of the continuance of the Soviet
Union's policy of friendly relations and cooperation with India.
A ten-member Soviet Parliamentary Delegation led by Mr. Ivan
Spiridinov, Chairman of the Council of the Supreme Soviet of the
USSR, visited India in March 1964 at the invitation of the Speaker
of the Lok Sabha and the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha.
The President of India paid a State visit to the Soviet Union from
Sep 11, 1964 to 19th September, 1964. During this visit, the President had
an opportunity of meeting the leaders of the Soviet Union and exchanging views on relations between the two countries as well as on,
important international problems. During these discussions both
sides re-affirmed their support for peaceful co-existence, resolving
the border problems between States without resort to force, need for
general and complete disarmament and end of colonialism. Both
sides expressed their desire to continue and expand their friendly
relations and cooperation in various fields of mutual interest. The
Joint Communique issued at the end of this visit is at Appendix VII.

Mr. N. S. Khrushchev resigned his posts of Chairman of the
Council of Ministers and First Secretary of the Soviet Communist
Party on the 14th October, 1964, after a long and distinguished career.
During his tenure there was marked relaxation of tension between
the USSR and the countries of East Europe on the one hand and the
USA and her Western allies on the other. The signing of the Nuclear
Test Ban Treaty marked a step forward towards international nuclear
control. The relations between India and the Soviet Union were
also placed on a firm footing. The new Soviet leadership, represent<pg63>
ed by Mr. A. N. Kosygin, Mr. L. I. Brezhnev, and Mr. A. I. Mikoyan,
has assured India that the Soviet policies of friendliness and cooperation with India in various fields would continue unchanged and even
expand further. India has also been assured that Soviet economic
and military aid would continue as before.
In September, 1964 an Indian Youth Delegation consisting of
members of various Youth Organisations of India went to Moscow
to participate in the World Youth Conference. The Indian delegation explained India's point of view on various world problems to
youth delegations of different countries and won support for India's
stand on the Sino-Indian border issue. The Chinese delegation was
isolated at the Conference.
Yugoslavia
Relations between India and Yugoslavia, based upon the policies
of non-alignment, peaceful co-existence mutual understanding and
common belief in the relaxation of international tensions, remained
friendly and cooperative. Yugoslavia maintained her support for
India on the Sino-Indian border issue. There was close identity of
views between the two countries at the Conference of Non-Aligned
Nations held in Cairo in October, 1964. Both countries emphasised
the need for policies of peaceful co-existence and non-alignment for
the newly independent nations of Africa and Asia and pointed out
that the only alternative to peaceful co-existence was nuclear
annihilation.
President Tito along with the leaders of the Federal Socialist
States of Yugoslavia expressed deep sorrow and sympathy at the
sad demise of the late Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru. A delegation headed by Mr. Peter Stambolic, the Federal Prime Minister,
attended the funeral.
A Yugoslav Economic Delegation, led by Mr. Jose Brilej, Member of the Federal Executive Council and President of the Board
for Economic Relations with Foreign Countries, visited India during
February 1964 and signed a trade protocol between the two countries for 1964-65.

Other East European Countries
India's relations with Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland
and Rumania were further strengthened with increasing trade, cultural exchanges and, exchange of visits. There was a better appreciation of India's case on Chinese aggression in these countries.
The leaders of Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Poland and Hungary
criticised China for starting hostilities on Indian borders in October,
<pg64>
1962. Czechoslovakia gave her firm support to India on the Kashmir
issue in the Security Council in May 1964.
New trade agreements were signed with Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia. A trade delegation from Bulgaria led by Mr. Ivan Golomeev, Deputy Minister of Foreign Trade, visited India in February
1964 and signed a four year trade and payments agreements with
the Government of India. A trade delegation from East Germany led
by the Deputy Minister of Foreign Trade came to India in September
1964 and finalised a long term trade and payments agreement for 3
years with India. A trade delegation headed by Shri S. V.
Ramaswami, Deputy Minister of Commerce visited Czechoslovakia
in October 1964 and signed a new trade agreement with that country.
All these agreements envisage increased trade with India with
provision for payment in Indian rupees.
Czechoslovakia offered a credit of Rs. 40 crores to India to promote economic collaboration between the two countries and the
credit agreement was signed in Prague in May 1964.
In the cultural field there was the usual exchange of scholars,
scientists, artists etc., with all of these countries. Dr. Jozef Bognar,
Chairman of the Hungarian Institute of Cultural Relations, visited
India in February 1964 and signed the Annual Cultural Exchange
Programme between the two countries for 1964-65. Another
cultural exchange programme was finalised with the German Democratic Republic in February 1964.
An Indian Parliamentary Delegation, led by the Speaker of the
Lok Sabha, paid a goodwill visit to Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia,
Hungary and Poland in October-November, 1964. Professor
Humayun Kabir, Minister of Petroleum and Chemicals, visited
Rumania in August 1964 for talks on Rumanian collaboration in
India's oil industry. Shri M. C. Chagla, Minister of Education, paid
a goodwill visit to Bulgaria in July 1964 on an invitation from the
Bulgarian Government.
On the occasion of the death of Jawaharlal Nehru, all the
countries of Eastern Europe expressed their deep sorrow and sympathy. A delegation led by H. E. Georghe Apostol, First Vice Pre-

sident of the Rumanian People's Republic, came to India to attend
the funeral.
Western Europe
Western Europe continued to achieve further progress and prosperity during the year under review. Recently efforts are being
<pg65>
made to break the impasse created by the non-inclusion of Britain
in the ECM, The Belgian Foreign Minister, M. Henri Spaak, suggested that a political Commission of three persons should be nominated by the E.C.M. Governments for about three years during which
the Commission would propose policies to the Community's Council
of Ministers. The Federal Republic of Germany has also announced
a plan which envisages a Union of the Six in such a manner as to
allow Britain and other countries to join it at a later date. The
Federal Republic of Germany has proposed a governmental conference of the Common Market countries to discuss its proposals for
cooperation in foreign, defence and cultural policies. However,
differences continue over agricultural policies, attitude towards NATO
and the proposed Multilateral Force.
India's trade balance continues to be very unfavourable with the
ECM countries. India has recently sent a Note to the Common
Market Executive Commission suggesting exploratory talks to discuss bilaterally certain guide-lines proposed by the World Trade
Conference in March for the relations between the industrial and
developing countries. It has also been requested that trade facilities should be provided for import of several Indian products like
furniture, jute, handloom and tanned leather products.
During the year the Federal Republic of Germany continued its
progress in the economic and industrial fields under the leadership of Chancellor Erhard. At the invitation of the Prime Minister,
Chancellor Erhard is expected to pay a visit to India this year.
During 1963, the Treaty of Friendship between France and the
Federal Republic of Germany underwent several strains and stresses.
A new Pass Agreement has been concluded to allow West Berliners to visit their relatives in East Berlin. Similarly, the East
German Government decided to allow pensioners to visit their relatives in West Berlin and West Germany, thereby permitting a
limited two-way traffic. Another welcome development is the opening of some new Trade Missions by the Federal Republic of Germany
in some East European capitals. Much hope had been aroused by
the announcement that the then Soviet Premier, Mr. Khrushchev,
would visit West Germany to discuss the German question. The
Government of India believe that the reunification of Germany
should be sought by peaceful negotiations.

India draws heavily on imports, especially of machinery and basic
metals, from West Germany. Our imports from West Germany
which were valued at Rs. 89 crores in 1963-64 accounted for 9%
of India's total import trade during that year. Our exports, on the
other hand, are only Rs. 20 crores and it is largely because of this
<pg66>
one-sided flow of trade that India suffers from. a heavy deficit in hertrade with West Germany. The deficit during the years 1960 to
1962 was as much as Rs. 102 crores per year. It has now been reduced
to Rs. 69 crores by reduction in our imports.
During the four years 1961-62 to 1964-65, West German credits
amount to $ 558-5 millions. For 1964-65, West Germany has agreed
to credits of $ 95 millions or DM 380 millions. It may be pointed out
that West German aid has declined during the last three years. An
agreement has been reached between India and the Federal Republic
of Germany for providing Government guarantees to German investments in India. With this Agreement, it can be hoped that the flow
of private capital from Germany to India will increase steadily.
There was an increased exchange of visits between Germany and
India which covered persons from many and varied walks of life.
German scholars are well known for the keen interest they have
been taking in India's classical literature and philosophy.
A proposal to have a cultural agreement to ensure closer contacts between the two countries and to, regulate cultural exchanges
is being examined.
A large number of scholarships (post-graduate, research and technical) were granted to Indians through the German Academic Exchange Service. A. comprehensive scheme of scholarships is being
implemented by this agency.
After a series of deficits, France was able to present a balanced
budget for the fiscal year 1964-65. The balance of payment position
for France is favourable.
An important development was the French recognition of the
People's Republic of China and the establishment of diplomatic relations between the two countries. The reaction in France to the
Chinese atomic explosion has been that it justifies and strengthens
the French policy for achieving an independent nuclear deterrent.
The friendly relations between India and France were further
strengthened by the visit of the French Prime Minister M. Pampidou
in February 1965.
Franco-Indian economic relations have lately expanded, covering
many fields apart from the normal commercial transactions. Franco-

Indian Exchange of Letters of October 1959 for developing trade has
been renewed for one year with effect from 15th March 1964. An
agreement for avoidance of double taxation between the two countries is under negotiation. There are over 24 projects in public and
private sectors in which French collaboration has been obtained.
<pg67>
The balance of trade between India and France is unfavourable
to India (approximately 70 million francs per year) largely
because of the fact that expensive capital goods are imported by
India against the export of Indian primary products. French economic aid to India, as a member of the Aid India Consortium,
between 1961 and May 1964 was 90 million dollars. In addition, the
French Bank for International Commerce has made available directly
to the Industrial Finance Corporation of India credits totalling $ 10
million.
To further strengthen the cultural ties between India and
France, it is proposed to have a cultural agreement between the two
countries in the near future.
The Government of France offered nine scholarships for higher
studies of research at post-graduate level for Indian nationals during 1964-65. The Government of India under its French Fellowship
Scheme, 1964-65, offered six fellowships to French nationals for
post-graduate study/research in India. The Government of France
also offered two scholarships for Specialised Training in Theatre
Art, Music, Painting and Sculpture for Indian nationals during
1964-65.
At the last Consortium meeting, the Dutch Government agreed
to extend their credits for 1964-65 to India by a further sum of 20
million Guilders (Rs. 263 lakhs). One third of this amount will be
under the Dutch Financial (Export) Credit and the remaining 2/3rd
under the General Purpose Lona.
Exports from India to Holland increased to 40.3 million Guilders
for the first six months of 1964 from 37.7 million Guilders for the
same period in 1963.
The Institute of Social Studies, The Hague, offered 8 fellowships
to Indian nationals for studies in Holland. Three fellowships were
also offered to Indian nationals by the International Union of Local
authorities at The Hague for its course from September 7 to November 6, 1964. India has offered two scholarships to Holland.
In view of the increasing collaboration in various fields between
India and the Netherlands, it is proposed to have closer cultural contacts between the two countries, e.g. visits of professors and journalists and exchanges of students and women delegations.

A new V. M. Ambulance Car, purchased out of the subscriptions
contributed by the Dutch public, was presented to the hospital at
Jalna (Maharashtra).
<pg68>
As a result of a reduction in imports and some improvement in
exports. India's deficit balance of trade with Belgium has narrowed down from Rs. 3.4 crores in 1962-63 to Rs. 24 lakhs in 1963-64.
The Government of Belgium offered four fellowships of one
year's duration to the Indian nationals during the academic year
1964-65. The Government of Belgium also offered five scholarships
for post-graduate and research work for the academic year 1964-65.
India has offered two scholarships.
An agreement has been concluded for cooperation between India
and Spain for developing atomic energy for peaceful purposes.
In 1962-63 the value of total trade between the two countries
reached the peak of Rs. 4.74 crores. During April to December, 1963,
our exports at Rs. 3.77 crores were quite impressive.
A Delegation of Spanish businessmen is expected to visit India
to further strengthen the trade relations between the two countries.
The out-dated colonial policy of Portugal remained unchanged
during the year. The recent Cairo Conference of Non-aligned countries urged all countries to help in the struggle against colonial repression in Angola, Mozambique and the so-called Portuguese
Guinea and other Portuguese colonies in Africa and Asia.
Finland is the only Scandinavian country which sent an observer to the Conference of Non-aligned countries held in Cairo this,
year.
As Dr. Karjalainen's parliamentary government was unable to,
function, it had to resign and a caretaker government of civil servants under Mr. Lehto was formed. Mr. Lehto's government continued to function till the 12th September, when a new coalition
parliamentary Government under Dr. Johannes Virolainen was
formed. Changes in government have not affected President
Kekkonnen's foreign policy.
President Kekkonnen paid a State visit to India in February,
1965.
Finland is emerging as a country which is looked upon as pursuing policies which could enable her to perform the role of mediator in international disputes. This became evident when
Mr. Sakari Tuomioja, a distinguished Finn, acted as mediator under
the United Nations, in the Cyprus dispute, till his death on 9th

<pg69>
September. Finland also contributed a strong contingent of a
thousand men to the United Nations Peace Keeping Force in Cyprus.
President Kekkonnen's plan for a 'Scandinavian Nuclear FreeZone' has not yet found ready acceptance.
India participated in the Helsinki International Trade Festival,
held in the second half of September. India's pavilion was considered to be the best and made a great cultural and trade impact.
At the opening ceremony of the Swedish Parliament, His
Majesty the King of Sweden declared that Sweden would actively
work for international disarmament, and provide for a permanent,
Emergency Force to the United Nations. Sweden continued to
pursue a policy of neutrality and did not commit itself on controversial issues e.g. Indo-Pakistan dispute and Sino-Indian border
conflict.
Sweden continued to look with disfavour on the idea of unilaterally giving up the right to manufacture atomic weapons, though
she is keen on world disarmament.
Sweden contributed about a 1,000 soldiers to the U.N. Peace Keeping Force in Cyprus. The Swedish Parliament has also approved
the setting aside of a permanent stand-by force of 1600 men for use
in conjunction with United Nations Peace Keeping operations. The
control and maintenance of this will be entirely in Swedish hands.
The then Prime Minister of the Soviet Union, Mr. Khrushchev
and Foreign Minister, Mr. Gromyko, paid a state visit to Scandinavia from June 22 to June 27. Throughout his tour, Mr. Khrushchev
emphasised the importance of peaceful co-existence and further
trade between the Scandinavian countries and the Soviet Union.
Sweden does not believe in a purely Northern Nuclear-free zone
of Europe. It wants a more comprehensive area to include Central
Europe also. At the same time it attached a pre-condition that all
big powers must stop testing nuclear weapons entirely.
Sweden has expressed its willingness to negotiate with less developed countries for the reduction of tariffs on most tropical products,
fuels and industrial raw materials.
An Indo-Swedish financial development cooperation agreement
was signed in Stockholm. The agreement allocates Sw. Kr. 36
million to India. Sw. Kr. 12 million will be in the form of grants
in kind, mainly paper for textbooks, forestry equipment and the
<pg70>

study of grain storage system in India. The development credit
on easy payment over 20 years and low interest provides for an
expenditure of Sw. Kr. 20 million on 15 dairy projects, 7 electric
power schemes and other projects.
The Danish Foreign Minister, Mr. Haekerrup, visited Japan,
Hong Kong, Malaysia and Burma in January. In Japan, he mainly
discussed trade and shipping matters. In Burma, he mainly discussed questions of compensation of Danish properties which were
nationalised.
In February the Danish Foreign Minister reiterated the continuation of Denmark's foreign policy. Membership of the NATO was as
essential as it was before. When the Danish Prime Minister Mr. Oto
Krag visited the Soviet Union in February appreciation was expressed by the Soviet Union of the fact that Denmark had not placed
nuclear weapons on its soil.
A permanent Danish force of 950 men was created for service with
the United Nations. It would cost 20 million Danish Kroners
to set it up and another 10 million Kroners to operate it
annually. There are three conditions for its use; the Security
Council must approve of its use; the country where the forces are
to be stationed must accept it; and the Danish Government would
be free to decide on each occasion whether Denmark's defence requirements can spare the force.
Elections were held in September and the government of Prime
Minister Krag has been returned to power.
The Indo-Norwegian fisheries project in Kerala has made further progress. The Norwegians have so far spent more than five
crores of rupees. A project to supply marine engines to fishermen
is already working. An 'Industrial Estate' to manufacture equipment for fishermen is under way.
Mr. Khrushchev paid a state visit to Norway from June 29 to
July 4. His visit throughout reflected the relaxation of tensions
in the international situation.
Norway is to create a permanent force of 1250 troops and a
naval frigate and a air unit of transport planes and helicopters to be
at the disposal of the United Nations. This is similar to the action
taken by other Scandinavian countries.
At the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
Mr. Schaffner, a Swiss delegate, in his speech requested developing
<pg71>

countries not to under-rate the results of the Conference which had
succeeded in bringing home to, developed countries the need to
make departures: from their belief in status quo in world trade.
Switzerland was elected by group 'B' (Development Market Economic Countries) as one of the 18 countries from this group who would
be members of the Board of Trade and Development.
Dr. Wenger, a National Councillor and President of the Swiss
Indian Society in Berne, gave a talk on India's northern frontier.
He brought out clearly the facts about China's aggression against
India and Pakistan's exploitation of this situation.
Five scholarships for post-graduate studies in science and
English were offered by the Swiss Government and availed of by
Indian students under the Cultural Exchange Agreement.
Senor Aldo Moro's coalition Government in Italy resigned on
the 26th of June, 1964, but all the political parties reaffirmed their
faith in the continuance of the coalition and Senor Moro continued
as Prime Minister. The new Government was formed again as the
coalition of four parties, i.e., Christian Democrat, Socialist, Social
Democrat and Republican, and the members were sworn in on the
23rd July, 1964, with Senor Moro as Prime Minister. On seeking
the vote of confidence Prime Minister Moro's government was given
a parliamentary endorsement.
The International Eucharistic Congress which is held every
fourth year was held in Bombay from 28th November, 1964 to 6th
December, 1964. His Holiness Pope Paul VI visited India to participate in this Congress. This was a fitting recognition of India's
age-old tradition of religious tolerance and the official policy of
secularism.
On the demise of King Paul I of Greece the Indian Ambassador
in Belgrade represented the Government of India at the funeral
ceremony in Athens on. 6th March, 1964. King, Constantine II succeeded his father to the throne of Greece.
An Indian Folk Dance troupe, the Revival Group, held successful shows at the Izmir International Trade Fair, in Turkey.
His Excellency, Mr. Lebit Yurdoglu, Minister of Rural Areas
and Community Development in Turkey visited India from 1st to
12th May, 1964.
Dr. Dogra Maci, Member of the Turkish Senate, was invited as on
official guest in January, 1964, and taken round the Medical
Institute, Maulana Azad Medical College and the Medical College at
Agra.
193 M of EA--6
<pg72>

Two Turkish officials visited India for training in Community
Development and a three months programme was carried out from
27th December, 1963 to 4th April, 1964.
Another batch of Turkish officials came to India on a six week
programme to study economic planning during March and April,
1964, at the instance of the Planning Commission.
In the first week of March, 1964, the Cyprus situation was
debated in the Security Council and a Peace Keeping Force was
established for three months ending 27th June, 1964. It was
subsequently extended for another three months. Gen. P. S. Gyani,
formerly Commander of the U.N. Emergency Forces in Gaza was
appointed as Commander of the U.N. Peace Keeping Force. Later
he was succeeded by Gen. K. S. Thimayya.
In the second week of August 1964, President Makarios sent
messages to the President of India that the Turkish Air Force had
launched attacks against Cypriot towns and villages, killing and
wounding hundreds of Cypriot civilians. The Government of India
issued a statement deploring the action by Turkish aircraft against
Cyprus towns and villages. The statement added that the internal
situation in Cyprus had been undoubtedly difficult for some time
but the U.N. Peace Keeping Force was already functioning to help
the Government to resolve this situation. In these circumstances,
bombings and armed attacks against the civilian population of
Cyprus, whatever the reasons therefor, was a matter of serious
concern as these would intensify the atmosphere of conflict and
tension and make the tasks of the U.N. Peace Keeping Force more
difficult. The Government of India fully supported the appeal made
by the President of the Security Council and in the resolution
passed by the Council, appealing to all concerned to desist from
any further actions which might aggravate the situation and further retard the possibility of restoration of amicable and peaceful
conditions in Cyprus.
The Government of India and the Indian Red Cross Society sent
relief supplies in the form of medicines and clothing valued at
approximately Rs. 15 lakhs for use amongst Cypriot vicitims.
At the Non-Aligned Conference at Cairo, in October 1964, India
supported a resolution on Cyprus calling upon all the states to respect the sovereignty, unity, independence and territorial integrity
of Cyprus and to refrain from any threat or use of force or intervention directed against Cyprus.
<pg73>
United Kingdom
Relations between India and the United Kingdom continued to be

cordial, while the Labour Government has given indications of still
closer contacts. This was stressed during the Prime Minister's visit
to London in the first week of December 1964. Discussions on world
problems took place in an atmosphere of complete cordiality.
The Minister for Information and Broadcasting, Shrimati Indira
Gandhi, visited London in October 1964. She met the Prime Minister and some of his Cabinet colleagues. The Defence Minister, Shri
Y. B. Chavan, visited Britain in connection with India's defence requirement. These negotiations were satisfactory from India's point
of view.
Sir Alec Douglas Home, the then Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom, Mr. George Brown and Lord Mountbatten attended the
funeral of the late 'Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru.
Ireland
India and Ireland strengthened their existing friendly ties during
the year under review. An Irish Embassy was opened in New Delhi
in April, 1964, and the first Irish Ambassador, Mr. William Warnock,
presented his credentials on 14th April, 1964.
The state visit of the President, Dr. Radhakrishnan to Ireland
between 21st and 25th September, 1964, was the most significant
event in the history of Indo-Irish relations. The President was
accorded a rousing reception, and in the joint communique issued at
the end of the visit, the Presidents of Ireland and India agreed that
the closest' possible relations should be maintained and developed
between the two countries. On Indo-Pakistan relations, the two
sides "welcomed the prospect of direct talks and negotiations at
various levels between the representatives of India and Pakistan
which are aimed at seeking solution of their problems and promoting
friendly and neighbourly relations. The Prime Minister of Ireland
expressed the hope that Indo-Pakistan differences including those on
Kashmir would be solved through direct negotiations between India
and Pakistan". In particular, it was agreed that trade and cultural
relations should be pursued with all vigour.
USA
INDIA SRI LANKA OMAN INDONESIA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC RUSSIA YUGOSLAVIA
EGYPT BULGARIA HUNGARY NORWAY POLAND SLOVAKIA CHINA GERMANY CZECH
REPUBLIC FRANCE THE NETHERLANDS BELGIUM SPAIN PORTUGAL ANGOLA MOZAMBIQUE
GUINEA FINLAND CYPRUS SWEDEN PAKISTAN JAPAN BURMA HONG KONG MALAYSIA
DENMARK LATVIA SWITZERLAND ITALY GREECE TURKEY UNITED KINGDOM IRELAND
Sep 11, 1964

THE AMERICAS
CHAPTER XI
THE AMERICAS
CANADA
India and Canada have the closest cooperation and understanding.
The two countries have been working together in different international commissions in South East Asia. Both these countries have
also been successfully participating in the U.N. Peace Keeping
operations. Canada has taken the initiative of calling a conference
at Ottawa for discussing the technical aspects of U.N. Peace Keeping
operations and India is participating effectively in the conference.
Canada's aid to India under the Colombo Plan alone has exceeded
238 million dollars. The Canadian Committee of Freedom from
Hunger launched the Canada-Mysore Project for setting up a
regional institute of food and technology at Mysore. The Export
Credit Insurance Corporation of Canada had advanced 37 million
dollars as a loan towards the construction of the Rana Partap Sagar
Atomic Power Plant in Rajasthan.
The Education Minister, Shri M. C. Chagla, attended the Commonwealth Education Ministers Conference at Ottawa in August,
1964. As a result of this Conference it is expected that Canada will
offer increased collaboration to the Commonwealth countries in the
educational field.
U.S.A.
President Johnson delivered his first State of the Union Message
to the Congress on Jan 08, 1964. In his speech, President Johnson
proposed far-reaching tax reductions and declared war on poverty
and unemployment in the United States. He also outlined an effective and efficient foreign aid programme. He pledged himself to
carry out the plans and programmes of President Kennedy. President Johnson promised to make increased use Of food as an instrument of peace. He advocated the control and eventual abolition of
nuclear arms. He also pledged himself to reduce the gap between the
East and the West and offered U.S. assistance to strengthen the ability
of free nations everywhere to develop their independence and to help
in raising their standards of living.
Mr. Dean Rusk, Secretary of State, flew to India to attend the late
Prime Minister's funeral.
<pg74>

<pg75>
The Government of India contributed $100,000 to the Kennedy
Memorial Library to be set up in Boston. While handing over the
cheque to Mr. Eugene Black. Board Chairman of the Library Fund,
the Indian Ambassador, Shri B. K. Nehru, said in New York on
July 8, 1964, that the people of India held the late President "in
highest regard, esteem and affection". The Attorney General, Mr.
Robert F. Kennedy thanked the Government and people of India
on behalf of Mrs. Kennedy, the members of the family and the
trustees of the Kennedy Library and Institute for this generous
contribution.
In July 1964. when the Civil Rights Bill was enacted as law, the
President of India sent a message to President Johnson expressing
sincere congratulations on this historic measure and great achievement which would ensure the enjoyment of equal rights by all
citizens of the U.S.A. irrespective of race, colour, or creed.
The Defence Minister, Shri Y. B. Chavan, visited the USA in May
1964, for negotiating aid to India to build up her defensive potential
against external aggression.
Pakistan's overtures to China in the context of the Sino-Indian
border conflict were taken note of by the U.S. Government. In April
1964, Mr. Phillips Talbot, Assistant Secretary for State for Near
Eastern and South Asian Affairs, gave the following testimony
before the House of Representatives Committee on Foreign Affairs:
"India over the past decade has been effectively using the
large input of U.S. aid in achieving social and economic
accomplishments that have been remarkable, in view of
the great difficulties which she has had to overcome. The
Chinese threat has now forced India to assume an added
burden of building its defenses at the same time it continues its development efforts.
"The Government of Pakistan has reacted strongly against
the provision by its allies of military assistance to India
to meet the Chinese Communist threat, without such
assistance being contingent on a Kashmir settlement. At
the same time, Pakistan has moved to take advantage
of Communist overtures, designed to isolate India, by
concluding trade, boundary and civil air agreements with
Red China and by expanding cultural exchanges."
The U.S. Government had anticipated the Chinese atomic explosion of October 1964. The U.S. Secretary of State, Mr. Dean Rusk,
said in a statement to the Press that while India had the capacity to
move Promptly towards nuclear explosion, the decision of the Indian

<pg76>
Government to exploit nuclear energy for peaceful purposes only
was a great contribution to world peace and to the welfare of
humanity.
India participated in the New York World Fair and the Indian
Pavilion attracted a large number of visitors. It was inaugurated by
Shrimati Indira Gandhi in April. A meeting was held in the Indian
pavilion on June 24, with the Minister of Commerce, Shri Manubhai
Shah in the Chair, of our Commercial Representatives from the
U.S.A., Canada, Mexico and Trinidad for discussing promotion of
Indian exports to this region.
President Johnson's victory in the U.S. elections on November 4,
1964 by a record number of votes provided convincing proof of the
ability of democratic forces to curb the growth of extremism in the
U.S.A. India along with other countries welcomed President
Johnson's re-election as the U.S. President. The President of India
sent a message to President Johnson conveying warmest felicitations
and good wishes. The President also expressed the hope that the two
countries will continue to have close and friendly relations and
work to promote cooperation and understanding between nations.
CENTRAL AMERICA-MEXICO
Mexico occupies a very important place in this hemisphere. Her
relations with the U.S.A. improved further when the El Chamizal
issue was solved satisfactorily. This area, which was occupied by the
U.S.A. long ago, was returned to Mexico after a series of negotiations.
The country has been enjoying democracy, stability and progress
without being subject to violent changes of government and internal
disorders.
Whereas most other countries in Latin America have severed
diplomatic relations with Cuba, Mexico is the only country still
maintaining diplomatic relations with that country. She has suggested that O.A.S. resolutions passed against Cuba should be referred to the International Court of Justice at The Hague before they
become binding on the member States.
Elections were held recently in Mexico and the new President H.
E. Lic. Gustavo Diaz Ordaz took over on the 1st December, 1964. Like
his predecessor, H. E. Adolfo Lopez Mateos, be belongs to the Party
of Revolutionary Institutions. The Mexican economy has continued
to make steady progress and under wise and able leadership a better
and more equitable social order is being established.
The Mexicans are second to none in the warmth of their feelings
towards India. They have a rich cultural heritage which in many
ways has close affinities with that of India. It is a happy sign that

<pg77>
the cultural exchanges between these two countries are on the increase. This year a number of professors, artists and musicians from
Mexico visited India to give talks and performances. On the occasion
of the opening of the National Museum at Chapultepec in Mexico
last September, a set of plaster casts of Mohanjodaro and Harappa
art was sent as a gift to Mexico. The Government of Mexico have
presented a prefabricated school building to the Government of
India as a gesture of goodwill.
CUBA
The year 1964 was not marked by any major developments in
USA-Cuba relations. There were verbal duals and occasional irritants but, generally speaking, the political situation was less
threatening than in the preceding years. The American embargo on
Cuba continued and it affected the Cuban economy to a certain extent. There were, however, dents in the embargo when U.K., France
and some other countries persisted in trading with Cuba. The
economic position of Cuba continued to be difficult, though Cuba received massive assistance from the U.S.S.R.
India sent medicines, clothes and other relief supplies for the victims of a hurricane which caused widespread devastation in Cuba.
LATIN AMERICA
Countries in Central and South America are engaging increasing
international attention. There are some obvious similarities in the
problems of economic development faced by these countries and
India. India has good relations with the countries in this region,
where there is abundant goodwill for India and appreciation of the
ideas of Mahatma Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru. However, China
has been lately making a strong bid to increase her economic and
cultural ties with this area and secure a foothold for spreading political Propaganda.
The World Conference on Trade and Developments which was
held in Geneva brought out the similarity of problems faced by
developing countries and Latin American countries and revealed the
advantage of a joint approach for furthering the interests of developing countries.
There is also greater appreciation of the policy of non-alignment
among these countries. Whereas only Brazil, Bolivia and Ecuador
sent observers to the First Conference of Non-Aligned Nations at
Belgrade in 1961, 7 countries sent observers to the recent Cairo Conference: Mexico, Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Chile, Uruguay and
Venezuela. Cuba attended both the Conferences as a full participant.

<pg78>
An Indian trade delegation visited Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia,
Peru, Chile, Venezuela and Colombia in June-July, 1964. The delegation found that with some effort India's trade with these countries
could be increased significantly.
WEST INDIES
Our relationship with the countries in the Carribean area continued to be good. Sir Solomon Hochoy, Governor-General of Trinidad and Tobago and Lady Hochoy visited India between the 14th and
23rd June, 1964.
The People's Progressive Party, led by Dr. Chedi Jagan, emerged
as the largest single group in the Assembly but failed to secure an
overall majority. The constitution was amended to enable the other,
two parties, i.e., the People's National Congress, led by Mr. L. F. S.
Burnham, and the United Force, led by Mr. P. S. d'Augiar, to form a
coalition government. The coalition government is led by Mr. Burnham who in his first statement has assured everyone, including the
Indian settlers, of impartial and fair treatment.
CANADA
INDIA USA SRI LANKA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC CHINA PAKISTAN MEXICO CUBA
FRANCE UNITED KINGDOM SWITZERLAND BOLIVIA BRAZIL ECUADOR EGYPT YUGOSLAVIA
ARGENTINA CHILE URUGUAY VENEZUELA COLOMBIA PERU
Jan 08, 1964

EXTERNAL PUBLICITY
CHAPTER XII
EXTERNAL PUBLICITY
Communal troubles in East Pakistan and the flight of hundreds;
and thousands of refugees were all reported in the world press. It.
was, however, the flight of some 50,000 Christian refugees from:
East Pakistan into the Garo Hills that caught the imagination of the
Western press which at last gave some inkling of the harassment to
which these minorities in Pakistan were subject. The flight of the
refugees to the Garo Hills was televised in some 60 countries. This.

would not have been possible had not the XP Division made immediate arrangements for foreign correspondents and three foreign
television agencies, French, West German and British, which are
also linked up with American agencies, to visit the Garo Hills.
The XP Division paid particular attention to foreign television
as the foremost media of publicity in the developed countries. Thus,
during the year, the XP Division invited 104 television teams from
14 countries to visit India. The television correspondents and
cameramen were given all possible facilities and interviews were
arranged for them with the Prime Minister and other Ministers of
the Cabinet and leading personalities in India. A French television.
team also visited the Mana Refugee Camp and French televisioncarried a detailed feature on these refugees and on what our Government was doing for them.
A great deal of attention was also paid to the publications produced or commissioned by this Division. Special publications were
brought out for the Non-aligned Conference. Attention was also
paid to the production of attractive, colourful publications.
Our efforts to project India through the written word are increasingly directed towards producing material in various languages
and orienting it for given areas. Emphasis has been placed on visual publicity. The year under review has 'seen a notable impetus in
this effort.
Copies of 5,000 new books were added to our libraries abroad during the year under review. They covered India in its various aspects-historical, cultural, social and economic. Added emphasis wasplaced upon supplying books in Hindi to selected areas. Books in
Sanskrit were also supplied where special interest was shown. The
supply of books was supplemented by newspapers and periodicals
from India on general or specialised subjects. Over a thousand
<pg79>
<pg80>
books were supplied to our Missions abroad for presentation to individuals and institutions. This supply was distinct from presentations made through the Indian Council of Cultural Relations.
Publicity by the written word is conducted through wide distribution of pamphlets and articles as well as through a fortnightly
magazine, the "Indian & Foreign Review", produced in English and
French at headquarters. This material supplements the daily, weekly or fortnightly papers and bulletins brought out by our Missions
in various local languages. Our Information Posts are also supplied
with newspapers, periodicals and books from India.

In addition to the material produced by the External Publicity
Division, a considerable amount of publicity brochures, pamphlets
and other material produced by other Government Departments is
supplied to our Missions abroad. Private publishers too have produced material which has proved suitable for wide distribution.
Pamphlets produced at Headquarters are increasingly being translated into foreign languages for distribution abroad. A special effort
during the year has been the publication of a quarterly in the Russian language by our Embassy in Moscow. This will be widely distributed both in the Soviet Union and in East European countries.
Several foreign dignitaries and delegations paid visits to India
during the year. Compilation films were prepared and supplied to
our Missions to cover these visits. Newsreel coverage was also undertaken. 8 feature films and children's films were purchased for
non-commercial exhibition through our Missions abroad and negotiations were conducted for the purchase of more quality films which
could be creditably exhibited. Deserving special mention is the film
"Nehru, man of two worlds", a product of the B.B.C. TV London,
of which 25 prints were sent out to our Missions. Prints of film made
by the French TV on "Interview with late Prime Minister Nehru"
were purchased for distribution.
India participated in no less than 24 International Film Festivals
during the year and some of our films were adjudged as award
winners. Indian feature and documentary films remained in considerable demand abroad. Our Information Posts arranged hundreds of shows to audiences totalling several thousands.
55 documentaries were previewed during the year and most of
those found suitable for external publicity have been despatched to
the Indian Missions. Requests by Indian Missions for 50 additional
prints were met. Arrangements have been concluded successfully
with some firms for the supply of prints of coloured films. The work
<pg81>
of dubbing films in various foreign languages has been undertaken
both through our Missions abroad and at headquarters.
Film projectors were supplied to ten more of our Missions abroad
during the year; tape recorders, radio sets, generators for cinema vans
and film screens were also supplied.
Over 45,000 photographs depicting the cultural heritage of India
and special postage stamps which were issued in commemoration of
important occasions were distributed.
A set of 13 gramophone records, representing a cross section of
Indian music, has been supplied to 15 selected Missions abroad and
our Embassies at Washington and Brussels were supplied with spe-

cial L.P. recordings of memorable speeches by the late Prime Minister. All India Radio had recorded special programmes on 280
tapes in Indian and foreign languages on the subjects of festivals
and national days of India, feature talks, plays, vocal and instrumental songs. These were found very suitable for use by our Missions
abroad and were accordingly distributed.
All Missions organised Nehru Memorial meetings on the
Nov 14, 1964 the birth anniversary of Jawaharlal Nehru.
Some of these meetings were combined with exhibitions and presentations of photographs and books.
During the year, clippings from the Indian Press numbering over
65,000 were scrutinized, classified and filed and 35,000 clippings from
the foreign press received through our Missions abroad were scrutinized for inclusion in reviews of the world Press. Over a thousand
enquiries from our overseas Posts as well as individuals and institutions in India, covering various subjects, were received and answered.
576 press releases were issued besides a number of publications
produced by the Division. Special press briefings were given regularly by senior officials of the Ministry. The Division played host to
a number of delegations and individual journalists, prominent among
them being delegations from Lebanon, Nigeria, Nepal and Thailand.
The last two months of the year have, as is customary, seen a num
ber of visiting foreign journalists. Hospitality during this period
alone was extended to journalists from West Asia, Ceylon, France,
Australia, the Philippines and the Agence France Correspondent in
Peking.
The following changes were made in the cadre,
(i) Two permanent posts viz., those of Press Attaches in Peking and Buenos Aires were converted into the Senior
Scale of the Indian Foreign Service (A);
<pg82>
(ii) The post of Assistant Press Attache in Tunis was converted into Grade II of the Indian Foreign Service (B).
The External Publicity Division at headquarters and its Information Service Units abroad employed a total staff of 572 which consisted of 11 Public Relations Officers, one Deputy Director (ISI), one
Under Secretary (Information), 40 Information Officers/Press Attaches, 26 Assistant Information Officers/Assistant Press Attaches/Attaches (information), one Research Officer, 5 Publicity Officers, 146
India-based ministerial staff and 341 locally recruited staff.
A new Publicity Unit was set up at Dakar (Senegal), manned by
an Assistant (Grade IV of IFS 'B') and a Personal Assistant.

Another Publicity Unit was opened at Tunis, headed by an Attache (Information). The Information Unit at Leopoldville has been
expanded, to cope with the increasing publicity work in Congo.
The post of Assistant Press Attache at Kabul has been transferred to Nairobi. The post of Press Attache at Sydney has been transferred to Kabul, which is likely to be converted into Grade I of the
IFS(B) in the near future.
The India-based posts-one of Assistant (Grade IV of IFS 'B')
and the second of French translator-have been created in Lagos
and Algiers respectively.
A temporary post of First Secretary (Information) in the Embassy of India, Stockholm was abolished with effect from 24th September, 1964.
A local post of senior editor-cum-translator was created in the
Information Service of India, Colombo.
A temporary post of Information Officer has been transferred
from the External Publicity Division, New Delhi, to the Permanent
Mission of India, New York.
One post of local Editor in the Information Service of India,
Gangtok, has been converted into that of an India-based editor from
the date it was filled.
The post of Counsellor (Information) in London has been changed to, that of Public Relations officer.
7 temporary posts at headquarters and abroad, viz., those of
Director (Press Relations), Dy. Director (ISI), 2 Information Officers/Press Attaches, Press Attache at San Francisco and Assistant
Press Attache in Washington have been declared permanent.
The officers of the Information Service of India have been offered
permanent/quasi-permanent status with pensionary benefits in lieu
<pg83>
of their long-term or short-term contracts with contributory provident fund.
The total budget of the External Publicity Division including the
Information Service Units abroad amounts to Rs. 1,21,49,800. (This
does not include some Information Units whose budgets are included in that of the Missions concerned). Of this amount, Rs. 38,91,600
is for expenditure at headquarters. With the remainder, the External Publicity Division runs 56 separate information Units and provides an Information service to all Indian Missions and Posts abroad.

PAKISTAN
USA INDIA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC RUSSIA UNITED KINGDOM BELGIUM LEBANON
NEPAL NIGER NIGERIA THAILAND FRANCE AUSTRALIA PHILIPPINES ARGENTINA TUNISIA
SENEGAL CONGO AFGHANISTAN KENYA ALGERIA SWEDEN SRI LANKA
Nov 14, 1964

TECHNICAL & ECONOMIC COOPERATION

CHAPTER XIII
TECHNICAL & ECONOMIC COOPERATION
INTRODUCTION
With the achievement of independence, the most important task
before the Asian and African States has been the promotion of the
social and economic development of their peoples which had been
retarded during the years of colonial rule. Unfortunately, they all
suffer in varying degrees from lack of skilled manpower and shortage
of financial resources. It has come to be recognised that these handicaps cannot be overcome without the assistance of the developed
countries on the one hand and a cooperative effort by the developing
countries themselves on the other.
It has, accordingly, been decided by the Government of India to
provide technical and economic assistance to the other developing
countries to the maximum extent possible within the limits of their
financial and manpower resources. The promotion of economic collaboration is the responsibility of the Ministry of Commerce and
technical assistance under such multi-lateral programmes as the
Colombo Plan, the SCAAP, the U.S. Third Country Programme and
the technical assistance programmes of the United Nations and its
Specialised Agencies, is provided by the Department of Economic
Affairs of the Ministry of Finance. The Economic Division of the
Ministry of External Affairs is responsible only for operating the
programme of technical cooperation on a bilateral basis.
An Economic and Co-ordination Division was created in the Ministry of External Affairs towards the end of 1961. In the economic
field, its functions were consultative and advisory vis-a-vis the technical Ministries of the Government of India and especially the Ministries of Commerce and Finance. In the field of co-ordination, it was

responsible for dealing with matters-political and economic-which
required co-ordination within the, Ministry of External Affairs on
the one hand and with the other Ministries of the Government of
India and our Missions and Posts abroad on the other. It soon became clear that in view of the nature, quantum and importance of
the economic work handled by the Division and especially in view
of the growing volume of work relating to technical cooperation,
some other arrangements should be made for dealing with the work
of co-ordination. Accordingly, it was decided in January 1964 that
the Economic Division should deal exclusively with economic matters,
including technical cooperation.
<pg84>
<pg85>
Intensive thought was given thereafter to the question of improving our existing arrangements for technical and economic cooperation on the basis particularly of the recommendations made at the
Conferences of our Heads of Mission/Post in South and South East
Asia held in New Delhi in June 1963 and of our Heads of Mission in
West Asia and Africa held in November 1963. After prolonged consultations with the other Ministries concerned, detailed proposals
were formulated regarding the nature of the programme to be undertaken and the administrative and financial arrangements to be made
for the purpose. These were approved by the Cabinet on Sep 15, 1964.
Action was then initiated, through the Ministries
concerned, for the implementation of the proposals made. Experience had shown that there were many questions on which the decision could only be taken at a high inter-Ministerial level and that
the programme of technical cooperation could not be implemented in
the desired manner until such decisions had been taken, Meetings
of the inter-Ministerial Co-ordinating Committee, which is responsible for the supervision, direction and control of the bilateral programme of technical and economic cooperation, were therefore, held
on 23rd and 30th November 1964. The decisions taken at the meetings are expected to remove some of the existing bottlenecks and
to make it possible to implement the approved programme of technical and economic cooperation in a more expeditious manner.
The various forms of technical cooperation between India and
the other developing countries include the deputation of Indian
experts, provision of educational and training facilities in India,
assistance in the setting up of training institutions abroad, collaboration in research programmes of common interest, survey of natural
and human resources, special courses for senior foreign officials and
experts in the fields of planning and development, visits of experts
and officials for study and exchange of ideas and participation in
Conferences, Seminars etc. which deal with the problems of social
and economic development.

Economic collaboration can take such forms as the provision of
Industrial consultancy services, visits of delegations of industrialists
to explore the possibilities of setting up joint industrial ventures,
participation in the equity capital of joint, enterprises, granting of
credit facilities for obtaining capital goods and technical know-how
and improved facilities for banking and insurance, transport and
communications.
The work of the Economic Division in the field of technical and
economic cooperation during the first two years of its existence was
limited in scope and of an ad hoc character. A more purposeful
<pg86>
approach was adopted during the year under review. It was decided that adequate funds and staff should be provided to administer
the programme in a planned and well-co-ordinated manner.
During 1964, a number of concrete and specific proposals for
technical and economic cooperation with interested foreign countries
were made by our Heads of Mission/Post in the Asian and African
countries. On the basis of the recommendations made by them, programmes have since been drawn up for the current financial year
and for the next financial year. Valuable information has also been
collected regarding the requirements of some countries, their development plans, policies and programmes, the opportunities for foreign
investment and the facilities provided for the purpose, the most practicable ways of implementing the agreed proposals, the channels
which can be utilised and the manner in which the work should
be undertaken. Thus the foundations of our programme of technical
and economic cooperation have been laid during the year under review.
Indian experts were deputed for service in a number of countries
such as Laos, Cambodia, Iraq, Kenya and Nigeria. Educational and
training facilities were provided to students from many countries of
Asia and Africa. Plans were worked out for the setting up of training institutions in such fields as education, public health and smallscale industries. There were many visits by foreign experts and administrators to India, and by Indian officials and technicians to a
number of Asian and African countries. The details are given in
Appendix VIII. There was a comprehensive exchange of views with
the delegation led by the Executive Secretary of the Economic Commission for Africa and Goodwill Delegations of Indian industrialists
visited a number of countries. Some headway was made in the field
of promoting joint industrial ventures in such countries as Malaysia.
Iraq, Ethiopia, Nigeria, Sudan, Uganda, Sierra Leone and Liberia.
The details are given in Appendix IX.
It is hoped that technical and economic cooperation between India
and the other developing countries of Asia and Africa will be on a
somewhat larger scale during 1965 than was possible in the preced-

ing year. The assistance given by the developing countries to each
other will serve not only to reduce their dependence on the assistance
of the developed countries and thus make their burden a little lighter
but also promote international cooperation for mutual benefit.
Apart from the work relating to economic and technical cooperation, the Economic Division has, as mentioned earlier, many other
functions also of an advisory as well as administrative character.
<pg87>
The Division continued to play an advisory role in such matters
as trade agreements, credit and payment agreements and negotiations relating to other economic matters. It was closely associated
with the preparation of briefs for the Indian delegations to various
international conferences such as those organised by the ECAFE,
the U.N. Conference on Trade and Development, the Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Nations at Cairo and
the meeting of the Colombo Plan Consultative Council etc.
The Division processes invitations forwarded by the U.S. Embassy
for Indian nationals under such cultural exchange programmes as
the Cleavland International programme and the Foreign Specialists'
programme etc. A number of cases relating to the assistance given
by the various American Foundations such as the Ford Foundation
and the Asia Foundation are also dealt with by the Division.
An Agreement was concluded in October, 1964 with the Government of the United Kingdom for the duty-free entry of relief supplies and packages. Under this Agreement, the Government of
India have agreed to permit duty-free imports of specified categories
of supplies for relief and rehabilitation from the United Kingdom.
The Government of India will defray the internal transportation
charges but the freight and insurance upto the port of entry will be
paid by the donating agencies in the United Kingdom.
INDIA
SRI LANKA USA CAMBODIA IRAQ KENYA LAOS NIGER NIGERIA MALAYSIA ETHIOPIA
LIBERIA SIERRA LEONE SUDAN UGANDA EGYPT
Sep 15, 1964

CONSULAR AND PASSPORT SERVICES

CHAPTER XIV
CONSULAR AND PASSPORT SERVICES
The Consular Division of the Ministry of External Affairs is
responsible for guiding the Indian Missions/Posts abroad on Consular work. It also renders assistance and tenders advice to
foreign Missions in India on Consular matters. Broadly speaking,
the Consular Division deals with the following items of work:(1) It advises the Missions/Posts abroad regarding the assistance and financial relief that should be given to Indian
nationals when they become destitutes abroad and also
arrange for their repatriation back to India. When
Indian nationals abroad are deported by the Foreign.
Governments for offences committed by them against
those Governments, the Consular Division advises the
Indian Missions/Posts abroad on the action to be taken by
the latter regarding such deportation. It also renders
assistance to find out the whereabouts of Indian nationals
abroad when requests to trace the whereabouts of such
Indian nationals are received by them from their relatives in India. It ascertains the whereabouts of foreigners in India in consultation with the State Governments
concerned when requests to trace the whereabouts of
such foreigners are received.
(2) It also renders assistance for the proper maintenance and
disposal of the properties and estates of Indian nationals
abroad and also renders necessary assistance to Foreign
Missions in India for the disposal of the properties and
estates of foreigners in India.
(3) The Consular Division also makes reciprocal arrangements with other countries for services of summonses in
civil cases under section 29(c)C.P.C., execution of decrees under section 444 C.P.C., examination of witnesses
in criminal cases, under section 504(3) & 508 A Cr. P.C.
enforcement of Maintenance orders under section 3 of the
Maintenance Orders enforcement Act, 1921 and administration of properties of deceased Indian citizens under
section 57 of the Administrators General's Act, 1913. It
also makes reciprocal arrangements with foreign Governments for the extradition of Indian citizens from
foreign countries for extradition offences committed by
<pg88>
<pg89>
them in India. This arrangement also provides for the

extradition of foreigners abroad for extradition offences
committed by them in India.
(4) It also deals with complaints from abroad against individuals, firms, etc. in India and complaints from India
against individuals and firms abroad.
The Consular Division is also responsible for determining the
jurisdiction of Indian Missions/Posts abroad.
(5) Whenever foreign nationals desire to adopt they make
requests to the Consular Division either through Indian
Missions/Posts abroad or through their Missions in India
for this purpose. Such requests are considered and the
legal implications for adopting children by foreigners are
explained to the Foreign Missions. Assistance is rendered to the foreigners to take their adopted children to
their countries when they fulfil the various conditions
laid down by the Government of India for this purpose.
(6) When Foreign Governments request the Government of
India to do consular and quasi-consular functions on their
behalf, the Consular Division considers such requests. It
is also responsible for legalisation of documents which
are to be produced abroad.
(7) Besides the functions mentioned above the Consular
Division also deals with citizenship cases in consultation
with the Ministry of Home Affairs and advises the latter
regarding conferment of Indian citizenship on persons of
Indian origin as well as foreigners.
The work relating to the compilation of the Consular Manual is
in progress.
69 Letters of Request and comissions for examination of witnesses abroad and vice-versa were forwarded to the authorities concerned after due scrutiny. Similarly 38 Summonses and 11 Maintenance
Orders and other processes were sent for execution or service
abroad.
There is a proposal to make reciprocal arrangements under section 29(c) of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 for service of summons
and other processes with Japan, West Germany, Belgium, Hong
Kong, U.A.R., the U.S.S.R., and Switzerland, but this proposal could
<pg90>
not be put through unless Order 5 Rule 26(b) is amended. The
Ministry of Law have taken up, these cases with the various High
Courts for enabling such summonses being sent abroad by our Courts

through Diplomatic Channel. The cases relating to Nepal, France,
Spain, Thailand and New Zealand could not be, finalised for want
of final replies from the respective Governments.
Cases relating to reciprocal arrangements for executions of
decrees under section 44A ibid with Japan, Trinidad and Tobago
are pending for want of final replies from the Governments concerned.
Negotiations for reciprocal arrangements under Section 504(3)
of the Code of Criminal Procedure were completed with Gambia
and Swaziland and notifications declaring these countries as reciprocating territories for the purposes of the aforesaid section were
issued, by the Judicial Section of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
The case relating to similar arrangements with the Central African
Federation has been deferred due to impending constitutional
changes in that Federation. The cases in regard to similar
arrangements with Nepal. West Germany, Nigeria, Liberia, Czechoslovakia, the U.A.R.. Sierra Leone, Federal Republic of Cameroons,
Aden, Afghanistan and Libya are still under correspondence with
the respective countries.
779 commercial and judicial documents including powers of
attorney and births, deaths, marriages and educational certificates,
etc. were attested for use in foreign countries.
Negotiations to have reciprocal arrangements under section 14
of the Notaries Act, 1952 for recognition of notarial acts with
Belgium and New Zealand were finalised and necessary notifications
were also issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs. A proposal to
have similar arrangements with Burma was dropped as the
Burmese courts and authorities recognise Notarial Acts done by
notaries in foreign countries provided that such acts are authenticated by diplomatic or consular representatives of the Burmese
Government in the State concerned and the requirements of the
Burmese Stamp Act are fulfilled. Cases relating to similar
arrangements with some other countries are being pursued.
On a reference received from the Commission of India, Hong
Kong that the Certificates of Origin issued by the Indian Chamber
of Commerce, Hong Kong, were not being accepted by certain
countries who art, signatories to the International Convention Relating to the Simplification of Customs formalities, 1923, even
<pg91>
though the Government of Hong Kong had designated that Chamber as competent to issue such Certificates of Origin in accordance
with the provisions of that Convention the matter was taken up
with the countries concerned through our Missions for giving recognition to the Certificate of Origin issued by the Indian Chamber
of Commerce, Hong Kong. As a result of these efforts, the Gov-

ernments of Sweden and Denmark have agreed to accept such Certificates issued by the above Chamber. The Government of Austria
have not agreed to give recognition to such Certificates. The
matter is still under correspondence with the Governments of
Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Belgium, Philippines, Ruanda Burundi and
West Germany.
Negotiations for reciprocal arrangement under Maintenance
Orders Enforcement Act, 1921 (18 of 1921) with the Government of
Isle of Man were completed and a notification declaring that country as a reciprocating country for the purpose of the aforesaid act
was issued by the Ministry of Law on Jun 04, 1964. The proposal
for reciprocal arrangement with the U.S.A. has been dropped since
that Government has intimated that the problems concerning
maintenance and divorce fell within the competence of the various
States of the Union, and it would not be possible for the Federal
Government to enter into bilateral arrangements with the Government of India. The U.S. Government has further added that if we
desire they would be prepared in specific cases to transmit to the
Attorney General of the State concerned for delivery of the State
Court a paper prepared by our Embassy setting forth the relevant
portions of the Indian law in regard to divorce and maintenance.
83 cases of estates and properties of Indians abroad and 31 cases
relating to foreigners in respect of their properties in India were
dealt with during the period under review.
Reciprocal arrangements under section 57 of Administrator
General's Act, 1913 with Czechoslovakia, Poland, Afghanistan, Iran,
Denmark and U.S.A. could not be put through and finalisation of
such arrangements is awaiting issue of requisite revised notifications by the Ministry of Law. The latter is awaiting replies from
various State Governments in the matter.
During the period under review 147 persons (134 adults and 13
minors) were repatriated from foreign countries by our various
Missions on public expense at a total expenditure of Rs. 56,678.72.
Out of this, a sum of Rs. 7,275.86 has been recovered and efforts are
being made to recover the balance through the State Governments.
<pg92>
A sum of Rs. 4,878.20 has been written off from the advances given
in the previous years because of the indigent circumstances of the
repatriates or for the reason that the repatriates are not traceable.
A total sum of Rs. 5,051.32 was advanced to 19 Indian citizens
to enable them to tide over temporary difficulties which arose due
to unforeseen circumstances such as theft, illness, delay in the departure of ships or their traveller cheques not being endorsed for
the country where they were stranded. A sum of Rs. 2,907.78 has
been recovered from the amount so advanced.

During the period under review, 23 cases relating to extradition
of offenders from or to India, trial of citizens of India for offence
committed abroad and trial of foreigners in the country of their
nationality for offences committed in India were dealt with in the
Section. In addition, 55 cases of deportation of Indian citizens from
other countries were also dealt with.
A number of cases for the grant of Indian citizenship referred by
the Ministry of Home Affairs for our views was returned to them
with our comments. Besides, 98 references on this subject received
from our Missions abroad, foreign Missions in India, Goa Administration etc. were handled. This includes requests received from
persons of Goan origin who failed to surrender their foreign passports within the prescribed time limit for being recognised as Indian
Citizens.
91 cases relating to marriage, desertion, bigamy etc. and 17 cases
of adoption of Indian children by foreigners were dealt with. 110
cases of whereabouts and welfare of Indian nationals abroad were
also dealt with.
63 cases of death of foreigners in India were reported to the
foreign Missions concerned. In addition, 55 cases of death reports
were sent to the foreign Missions concerned by the State Governments direct. 34 cases of death of Indian nationals abroad were dealt
with.
29 cases relating to remittance facilities from or to India were
dealt with. 210 cases relating to complaints against Indians abroad
and foreigners in India, and against Indian firms and vice-versa,
recovery of private outstanding dues from Indians abroad, 13 cases
of assistance relating to Civil and Criminal Proceedings against
Indian nationals abroad, were handled during the period under review. Also 36 cases regarding issue of birth, death, marriage certificates were dealt with. 53 cases relating to issue of No Obligation
to return to India' Certificates to Indian students who wanted to
settle down in Canada and U.S.A. were dealt with during this period
<pg93>
54 cases relating to settlement of claims of Indian citizens for
pay, pension, gratuity, etc. against foreign Governments were received and pursued with the governments concerned.
During the period under review several officers and staff who were
either fresh appointees or who had not handled consular work in
Missions/Posts abroad previously were imparted training in consular
matters
During the period 1942-47, a sum of Rs. 7,18,03,561.00 was advanced to the evacuees from War Zones during World War II on repay-

able basis. Out of this amount, a sum of Rs. 25,53,381.65 is debitable
to the Government of Burma. So far, a sum of Rs. 38,12,596.03 has
been recovered, a sum of Rs. 3,64,48,682.49 has been written off, and
a sum of Rs. 4,15,42,282.48 is still outstanding. This outstanding
amount will be further reduced by Rs. 25,53,381.65 when debits are
accepted by the Government of Burma. The matter is being pursued with that Government. Efforts are also being made to recover
the outstanding balance from the evacuees through the State Governments concerned and to write off the irrecoverable amount.
It has been decided to perform Consular and Quasi-consular functions on behalf of the Jamaican Government in India with effect from
the 15th November, 1964.
Diplomatic Missions and Consular Posts in India
At the end of the year there were 54 Embassies, 11 High Commissions and 3 Legations, including the Apostolic Internunciature.
During this period, the Embassies of Ireland and Kuwait and the
High Commission for Uganda were established in India. H.E. Mr.
William Warnock and H. E. Mr. Yacob Abdul Aziz Al-Rashaid were
accredited as the First Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of Ireland and Kuwait respectively while H.E. Mr. George
W. M. Kamba was accredited as the First High Commissioner for
Uganda. They presented their letters of Credence and the letter of
Commission on the 14th April, 13th August and 7th October, 1964
respectively. During the period under review the Legation of Peru
was raised to Embassy level. H.E. Mr. Eduardo Sarmiento Calmet
was accredited as the First Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of Peru. He presented his letter of Credence on the 20th
June, 1964.
A list of the diplomatic Missions in India and a list of the suboffices of the High Commissions of the Commonwealth countries are
given at Appendix X.
<pg94>
The total number of foreign Consular Posts was 105. The status
of the Consulate of the Federal Republic of Germany in Madras was
raised to that of a Consulate General. The following new Consular
Offices were opened:
(1) Consulate (Honorary) of Bolivia at Bombay.
(2) Consulate General (Honorary) of Thailand at Bombay.
(3) Consulate (Honorary) of Jordan at Bombay.
A list of the Consular Posts in India is given at Appendix XI.
The Passport and Visa Division continued to be responsible for

the implementation of the passport and emigration policy of the Government of India and control of the Central Passport and Emigration
Organisation including Regional Passport and Emigration Offices in
Delhi, Bombay, Calcutta, Madras and Lucknow.
An idea of the work of the five zonal passport offices can be had
from the fact that they received 54,685 fresh passport applications
during this period besides 2,082 applications, which were pending at
the end of the last year. The revenue realised by way of passport
and emigration fees by these offices during the year amounted to
Rs. 10,56,769.72
There were many cases of persons wishing to go to Britain for
employment-some on employment vouchers and others without
them. There were also many cases of Indian boys and girls settled
in Britain who wished to obtain partners from India. There were
yet other cases of uncles or brothers settled in Britain who wished to have their nephews or brothers join them. Every application
for passport facilities was given thorough consideration. This entailed protracted correspondence for verification of genuineness and for
obtaining the requisite details necessitated by the rules of the Commonwealth Immigrants Act, 1962 of Britain. It became necessary
to advise passport applicants in each case to procure documents from
foreign countries to justify the bona fides of the purpose of their visit.
References had also to be made to other Departments of the Government. In many cases requests had to be made to Indian Missions
abroad to verify these documents and make sure that the prospective
travellers would not be refused admission by the immigration authorities of the country of their destination.
Most of the cases of rejection were those in which the passport
officers felt that the prospective travellers did not have sufficient
documents to satisfy the requirements of the foreign immigration
authorities. Even so, the total number of passport applications.
<pg95>
rejected during this period amounted to 1,143, which is less than 3 per
cent of the total applications considered. 4,563 cases were, however,
closed as applicants failed to furnish the documents necessary for
completion of their passport applications.
In all 41,459 passports were issued by the Regional Passport
Offices and, 2,367 Official passports and 355 Diplomatic passports
issued to officials of the Government of India directly by the headquarters of the Ministry.
The British Government drastically reduced the issue of employment vouchers to Indian nationals. As a result the emigration of unskilled workers from India to Britain was negligible. During the
first 1 1/2 years, after the Commonwealth Immigrants Act was introduced i.e. from July 1, 1962 to December 31, 1963, they issued 22,753

employment vouchers to Indian nationals seeking employment in
Britain. As against this, during the first 10 months of this year only
5,036 vouchers were issued to Indian nationals. Of these 3,272 are
for skilled workers-mostly doctors, teachers and nurses. 549 employment vouchers were issued to unskilled Indian workers of whom
holders were ex-servicemen.
With effect from February 1, 1964, Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi and
Madras were declared airports from which emigration for the purpose of skilled workers is lawful. The Protectors of Emigrants in
charge of the ports at Bombay, Calcutta and Madras were made the
Protectors of Emigrants in charge of the airports in these areas also.
Consequent on the declaration of the Delhi airport as an emigration
port, a Protector of Emigrants has been appointed in Delhi.
For the prevention of illicit emigration from the coastal areas of
Madras, three conferences of police officers of the Madras Government, the Ceylon Government and Protectors of Emigrants in the
Madras region was held in the Madras State. Arrangements for
prevention of illicit emigration were further tightened as a consequence of the recommendation of these conferences. During the
period from January to September 1964, 1,531 Indian nationals were
deported from Ceylon on charges of illicit emigration to that country.
During the year commencing 1st January, 1964, 3,481 Indian passports
were cancelled as the holders became citizens of Malaysia.
INDIA
USA BELGIUM GERMANY JAPAN SWITZERLAND FRANCE NEPAL NEW ZEALAND SPAIN
THAILAND TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO SWAZILAND LIBERIA NIGER NIGERIA CAMEROON
SIERRA LEONE SLOVAKIA AFGHANISTAN LIBYA BURMA HONG KONG MALI DENMARK
SWEDEN AUSTRIA BURUNDI PHILIPPINES IRAN NORWAY POLAND CANADA JAMAICA
IRELAND KUWAIT UGANDA PERU BOLIVIA JORDAN MALAYSIA
Jun 04, 1964

ORGANISATION & ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER XV
ORGANISATION & ADMINISTRATION
1. ORGANISATION
(i) Headquarters

During the year 1964 two important changes were made in the
organisational set up of the Ministry of External Affairs at the
highest level. For the first time after independence a separate
Minister of Cabinet rank took over the portfolio of External Affairs
from the Prime Minister on Jul 19, 1964. The Office of the Secretary General was abolished with effect from 30th November, 1964
after the retirement of the last Secretary General.
Another important change was the revival of the Foreign Service
Inspectorate which is now headed by an officer of the rank of
Additional Secretary. The terms of reference of the Inspectorate
have been considerably enlarged to include not only a review of the
allowances admissible to the Officers and the staff posted abroad, but
also an overall assessment of the working and effectiveness of the
Missions.
In pursuance of the recommendations contained in the Shelvankar report for the reorganisation of the External Publicity Division, a new post of Joint Secretary (Coordination & Information)
was created. In addition to overall charge of External Publicity,
Joint Secretary (C & I) also took over the work of political coordination and the Economic and Coordination Division was redesignated
as Economic Division. In January 1965 the post of Director (External Publicity Division) was held in abeyance and Joint Secretary
(Coordination & Information) took over complete charge of the
External Publicity Division as Joint Secretary (External Publicity).
The work relating to Goa and Pondicherry which was hitherto
being handled by this Ministry was transferred to the Ministry of
Home Affairs on 1st September. 1964 and consequently the post of
Director (Goa and Pondicherry) was abolished. The Africa and West
Asia Division was split up into two Divisions-one dealing with countries of West Asia and North Africa and the other dealing with the
remaining African countries south of the Sahara. It has also been
decided to split up the Western Division into two Divisions-one
dealing with Europe and the other with the Americas.
<pg96>
<pg97>
Apart from the above changes, the organisation of the Ministry
has remained basically the same.
(ii) Missions Abroad
During the year under review there was further expansion of
India's diplomatic representation abroad. A resident Embassy under the charge of an Ambassador was set up at Mogadisco in
Somalia. Consequent upon Malawi and Zambia attaining indepen-

dence, it was decided to set up resident Missions In these countries.
The High Commission in Blantyre (Malawi) has already started
functioning under the charge of an Acting High Commissioner
while a High Commission in Lusaka (Zambia) will be opened
shortly under the charge of a High Commissioner. It has also been
decided to post a resident Charge d' Affaires at Conakry (Guinea).
The Mission in Dublin which was hitherto under a Charge d'Affaires
is being converted into a resident Embassy. Two Honorary Consulates were opened at Genoa (Italy) and Asuncion (Paraguay). The
Trade Commission at Mombasa was converted into a Vice Consulate.
It has also been decided to establish an Assistant Commission at
Georgetown (British Guiana) and an Assistant High Commission
at Zanzibar.
India now maintains diplomatic and consular relations with as
many as 122 countries and, has 72 Embassies, 17 High Commissions,
14 Commissions, 4 Legations, 16 Consulates General, 15 Consulates,
5 Vice Consulates, 2 Deputy High Commissions, 4 Trade Commissions & Offices, 1 Visa Office and 3 Special Missions. The rapid
growth in India's diplomatic activity is indicated by the fact that
in the last decade the total number of Missions and Posts has
increased from 92 to 153. A complete list showing the locations
of Indian Missions and Posts abroad is at Appendix XII.
(iii) Indian Foreign Service
The total strength of the IFS cadre (both permanent and temporary posts) increased from 345 during 1963-64 to 383 representing
a total increase of 38 posts. In order to, meet the increasing requirements of personnel it has been decided to step up the rate of recruitment to IFS through the Union Public Service Commission.
The number of Officers recruited in 1964 was 19 (including 4 from
Scheduled Castes and Tribes) as against 16 during 1963.
The total strength of the IFS(B) cadre (both permanent and
temporary posts) is 2,473 which represents a reduction of 57 from the
last year's strength. This reduction was carried out in our Missions
abroad as a result of the review by the Special Reorganisation
Committee.
<pg98>
An important development during the year was the promulgation of the IFS(B) (Recruitment, Cadre, Seniority and Promotion)
Rules which had been under consideration for a fairly long time.
These rules came into effect on the 1st June 1964 after which the
question of confirmation of temporary officials in the various
grades was taken up.
(iv) Reorganisation
The Reorganisation Unit of the Ministry is responsible for cons-

tant assessment of the work load both at Headquarters and in Missions
abroad and makes recommendations for necessary adjustments in the
personnel strength with a view to achieving greater efficiency and
speedy disposal of work. A Work Study team of the Ministry
visited the Office of the Political Officer at Gangtok (Sikkim) and
submitted a detailed report on its working. Many of the recommendations of this Committee for improvement in the methods of
work, reorganisation and rationalisation of staff have been accepted
and implemented.
The standard filing system which was introduced in the Ministry in 1962-63 has been extended to Indian Missions and Posts
abroad. The work of submission of various periodical returns was
reviewed and superfluous returns were discontinued.
2. ADMINISTRATION
(i) Foreign Service Inspectorate
The Inspectors undertook three inspection tours during the
period under review. The first tour covered countries in Central
and North Africa and Italy, the second covered South East Asia
and the third Latin America and Norway. Several useful recommendations were made by the Inspectors most of which have already
been accepted and implemented.
(ii) IFS Hostel
The newly constructed IFS HOSTEL at Curzon Road was inaugurated in January 1965. it will consist of 100 residential units and
will provide transit accommodation for Officers and staff of the
Ministry. The first block consisting of 60 single room units has
recently started functioning.
(iii) Acquisition of Property Abroad
In order to provide Indian Missions and their staff abroad with
appropriate accommodation and to avoid heavy expenditure on
rents in some countries, the Ministry continued its phased programme of acquisition and construction of office and residential
accommodation. The construction of residences of Heads of Mission in Lagos and Ankara and of a 10-bed hospital and 8 staff
<pg99>
quarters at Kathmandu has been completed. Proposals for the
construction of 7 more staff quarters in Kathmandu and 24 residential flats in London and the addition of another floor to India House,
London have been approved and the construction is expected to
commence shortly. Proposals for the construction of office and
residential buildings on the lands acquired previously in Kabul
and Islamabad are under consideration. Similarly schemes for the

addition of more floors to the buildings of India Supply Mission,
Washington and construction of office and residential buildings on
the Indian Gymkhana Club land in London, and Chancery building in Lagos are also under consideration. Buildings for the residence of our representatives in Aden and Kampala have been
purchased and negotations for the acquisition of more buildings in
Colombo, Dar-es-Salaam, Leopoldville, Algiers and Rabat are under way. The local government in Rio de Janeiro has made a free
gift of land to our Embassy and plans for the utilisation of this land
will be formulated shortly.
(iv) Miscellaneous
As a result of the constitution of the Central Vigilance Commission and the Samyukta Sadachar Samiti, the work of the Vigilance
Unit has increased. The complaints forwarded by the Samiti are
investigated by the Vigilance Unit.
The purchase unit of the Ministry is responsible for the purchase of furniture, furnishings and objects d'art and other items for
the Mission abroad and most of the bulk purchases for Headquarters.
The work relating to the weeding of records progressed satisfactorily and nearly 67000 files were destroyed during the year.
3. EXPENDITURE
(i) Revised estimates
Under the Revised Estimates the expenditure of this Ministry in
1964-65 is expected to be Rs. 40.11 crores and falls under the three
main heads as shown below:In crores of
Rupees
1. Tribal Areas (North East Frontier Agency)
2. External Affairs

15.04

11.33

3. Other Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry of External
Affairs
13.74
-----------TOTAL
40.11
-----------The expenditure on 95 resident Missions and Posts abroad
amounts to Rs. 5.32 crores. This works out to an average of Rs. 5.60
<pg100>
lakhs per Mission/post. Of this an average of Rs. 1.71 lakhs per
Mission/Post is spent on the pay and allowances of Officers, Rs. 1.78

lakhs on the pay and allowances of staff, about Rs. 1 lakh on office
and residential accommodation, and the balance on contingent and
other expenditure.
(ii) Review of Standing Charges
The sanctioned grant under 'Standing Charges' and the anticipated requirements for the year 1964-65 are indicated below, along with
the corresponding figures of the Revised Estimates for the year
1963-64:
(Figures in Lakhs of Rupees)
Revised
Original
Revised
Estimates
Grant
Requirefor
for
ments for
1963-64
1964-65
1964-65
Tribal Areas
External Affairs

186.67

304.83

425.09

309.80

428.14

467.52

Other Revenue Expenditure of
the Ministry of
External Affairs
3.52
3.03
3.02
--------- -------------------615.28
736.00
780.34
--------- -------------------The broad break down of the figures is as follows:(i) Assam Rifles

140.38

(ii) Political and Administrative
Charges in Tribal Areas
22.27
(iii) Social and Developmental
Services in Tribal
Areas and Miscellaneous
Expenditure
24.02

251.48

24.34

29.01

255.87

24.10

29.83

(iv) Ministry of External Affairs 121.40

120.80

144.65

(v)

286.47

300.82

Missions and Posts abroad

(vi) Emigration and Passport
Establishment
9.50

282.90
9.62

10.71

(vii) Special Diplomatic Expenditure 10.00

10.00

10.00

(viii) Other Miscellaneous Expenditure 1.29

1.25

1.34

(ix) Other Revenue expenditure
-- Loss by ex-

change and expenditure on
pilgrimage beyond India

3.52

3.03

3.02

The anticipated excess of Rs. 44.34 lakhs in the Revised Estimates
for 1964-65 (as compared to the sanctioned grants) is largely due to
(i) Excess of Rs. 4.97 lakhs in Tribal Areas on account of conversion of temporary posts into permanent ones, (ii) Excess of Rs. 39.38
lakhs due to increased expenditure on Air-freight on Diplomatic
Bags, telegrams and publicity abroad.
<pg101>
The comparative figures of the Revised Estimates for 1963-64 and
1964-65 show that the current year's figures have exceeded those of
last year by about Rs. 165.06 lakhs. The excess is mainly due to:(i) Revision of pay scales of Assam Rifles and grant of
rations to the Assam Rifles personnel at the Army scales,
and conversion of temporary posts into permanent ones
in the North East Frontier Agency; and
(ii) Increase in expenditure on cost of passages and additional requirement for external publicity.
4. NORTH EAST FRONTIER AGENCY
(i) Nefa Administration
During 1964-65 the Administration in this area was further consolidated. Two administrative centres viz., Adane in Dibang Valley
and Miao in Tirap Frontier Division were opened. The establishment of administrative centres at Limeking in Daporijo Area and
Tate in Siang Frontier Division has been approved.
The question of opening branches of the State Bank of India at
Divisional Headquarters has been taken up with the State Bank
authorities. Nineteen new post offices, including two with telegraph
facilities, have been opened, making a total of fifty in NEFA. Pasighat in the Siang Division has been provided with land line telephone facilities.
Arrangements have been made for increased air tonnage to lift
foodstuffs, etc., due to induction of more police battalions and Survey of India parties in the interior of NEFA. A contract for airlifting 15,500 tonnes of foodstuff was given to Messers Kalinga Air Lines
Ltd. 14 airstrips are being maintained and of these 5 are being made
fit for all weather landing by Dakotas.
The Health Units in NEFA now number 97. During 1964-65,
1,61,396 patients were treated and 69,821 were vaccinated against
smallpox. Two BCG teams tested 25,812 persons and vaccinated

18,733 persons. 17 Anti-Malaria spraying units were sanctioned
during the year, raising the total number to 72. A pilot project on
mass treatment of skin disease was launched in Koloriang area. 10
X-Ray plants and 18 jeep ambulances have been procured for the
Health Units.
2,148 acres of land were developed for cultivation during the
year and 1,000 acres were brought under irrigation. 2,100 maunds
of cereals and potatoes, 250 lbs. of vegetable seeds and 10,700 fruit
seedlings and 97 pairs of work animals were distributed to cultivators.
<pg102>
In the sphere of education, a Degree College, named after the
late Jawaharlal Nehru, has been started at Pasighat. Two High
Schools have been raised to Higher Secondary level and one M.E.
School to High School level. 50 new Junior Basic Schools have been
established. 46 NEFA Tribal students are studying in different colleges in and outside Assam and have been awarded stipends. 4
NEFA tribal boys and 4 NEFA tribal girls have been deputed to
Sainik School, Bhubaneswar and Banasthali Vidyapith respectively.
Scout and Guide units have been introduced in NEFA.
In the field of co-operation, 13 new Societies were registered. 43
persons have been trained as managers for co-operative societies.
Under Bomdila Co-operative Society, a petrol pump has been opened at Bomdila in Kameng Division. The question of starting a printing press at Shillong on a co-operative basis is under consideration.
23 books and publications have been sent to press for printing. Of
these the brochure "NEFA on the March", four pamphlets,
one illustrated folder and one book on emotional integration
have been published. Preparation of guide books on Aka and Gallong and a grammar in the Monpa language has been undertaken.
Preparation of a book on Parasuram Kunda, and a short history of
NEFA has made good progress.
About 7,000 East Pakistan refugees are proposed to be settled in
Miao-Vijoynagar area of Tirap Frontier Division. 488 persons have
already arrived and settlement is in progress. A sum of Rs. 92,187
was spent for relief to the people of NEFA who suffered losses due
to natural calamities, accidents, etc.
Developmental activities have been intensified during the year.
A sum of Rs. 246.38 lakhs is being spent under various development
heads:Agriculture
Rs. 16.61 lakhs
Forest
Rs. 13.55 lakhs
Cooperative
Rs. 13.86 lakhs
Community Development
Rs. 17.05 lakhs

Power
Industries
Roads
Airstrips
Education
Medical
Statistics
Publicity
Research

Rs. 22.34 lakhs
Rs. 6.32 lakhs
Rs. 60.00 lakhs
Rs. 11.70 lakhs
Rs. 32.91 lakhs
Rs. 46.50 lakhs
Rs. 0.74 lakhs
Rs. 3.00 lakhs
Rs. 1.80 lakhs
<pg103>

(ii) Indian Frontier Administrative Service
The permanent strength of the service remained unchanged. As
a result of increased work and deputation of a large number of officers for service elsewhere, five officers were recruited during the year
in the junior scale of the Service. Two officers of the service were
deputed for training at the National Defence College and 3 for training as District Officers at the Indian Institute of Public Administration. Of the five new junior scale officers, three were deputed for
training at the National Academy of Administration.
One more officer of the service was Promoted to officiate in the
supertime scale consequent upon the creation of a post of Additional
Security Commissioner at Tezpur.
5. NAGALAND
The State of Nagaland was formed on the 1st December, 1963 and
elections to the Nagaland Legislative Assembly were completed in
January, 1964 in the forty constituencies of the districts of Kohima
and Mokokchung. Shri Shilu Ao's Party, the Naga Nationalist
Organisation, won 28 seats while Shri Kevichusa's Democratic
Party got 12 seats. In the Tuensang district, the six seats allocated
to that district were filled by persons elected by the members of the
Tuensang Regional Council from among themselves.
Following a resolution passed by the Nagaland Baptist convention
in a meeting held at Wokha in January/February, 1964, the Naga
Baptist Church leaders invited Shri B. P. Chaliha, Chief Minister of
Assam, Shri Jai Prakash Narayan and Rev. Michael Scott to Nagaland to find ways and means of restoring peace and normalcy. With
the approval of the Government of Nagaland and the Government of
India these three gentlemen who came to be known as the Peace
Mission, contacted the underground Naga leaders and, after several
discussions with them and the Government of India brought about
a suspension of operations, effective from midnight of the 5th/6th
September, 1964, as a prelude to the talks to be held between the
representatives of the Government of India and those of the 'Underground' Nagas. The peace talks which began on the 23rd September, 1964, are still continuing.

Meanwhile there has been an improvement in the law and order
situation after the suspension of operations on the 6th September,
1964. Some violations by the hostiles of the terms of the agreement
for suspension of operations such as collection of money from villages and the movement of parties of hostiles to Burma, on their way
to East Pakistan, have occurred. These violations have been brought
193 M of EA--8
<pg104>
to the notice of the Peace Mission with the request that such violations cease.
The Planning Commission has approved an outlay of Rs. 404.3
lakhs for expenditure on plan schemes during the current year. The
Third Five Year Plan outlay was tentatively fixed at Rs. 715 lakhs.
Against this, the expenditure during the first three years was
Rs. 323.21 lakhs, while for the current year it is anticipated that
the expenditure will be Rs. 381.37 lakhs. Planned schemes cover all
aspects of development but the Government of Nagaland have
given importance to increasing food production, extending education,
developing power and road communications and expanding medical
facilities. Under Community Development, a new Community
Development Block has been opened. This brings the total of the
Blocks in Nagaland to 17.
INDIA
MALAWI MALI SOMALIA ZAMBIA USA GUINEA IRELAND ITALY PARAGUAY GUYANA
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC NORWAY TURKEY NEPAL UNITED KINGDOM AFGHANISTAN
PAKISTAN UGANDA ALGERIA MOROCCO SRI LANKA LATVIA BURMA
Jul 19, 1964

APPENDIX I DECLARATION OF CONFERENCE OF
NON-ALIGNED COUNTRIES
APPENDIX I
DECLARATION OF CONFERENCE OF NON-ALIGNED COUNTRIES
PROGRAMME FOR PEACE AND INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION
Declaration as Adopted by the Conference

INTRODUCTION
The Second Conference of Heads of State or Government of the following
non-aligned countries:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Burma, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Cuba, Cyprus,
Dahomey, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Islamic Republic
of Mauritania, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Laos, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya,
Malawi, Mali, Morocco, Nepal, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Republic, United
Republic of Tanganyika and Zanzibar, Yemen, Yugoslavia and Zambia was
held in Cairo from Oct 05, 1964 to 10 October 1964.
The following countries:
Argentine, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Finland, Jamaica, Mexico, Trinidad and
Tobago, Uruguay and Venezuela were represented by observers.
The Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity and the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States were present as observers.
The Conference undertook an analysis of the international situation with
a view to making an effective contribution to the solution of the major
problems which are of concern to mankind in view of their effects on peace
and security in the world.
To this End, and on the basis of the principles embodied in the Belgrade
Decloration of September 1961, the Heads of State or Government of the
above-mentioned countries proceeded, in an amicable, frank and fraternal
atmosphere, to hold detailed discussions and an exchange of views on the
present state of international relations and the predominant trends in the
modern world. The Heads of State or Government of the participating
countries note with satisfaction that nearly half of the independent countries
of the world have participated in this second Non-Aligned Conference.
The Conference also notes with satisfaction the growing interest and
confidence displayed by peoples still under foreign domination, and by those
whose rights and sovereignty are being violated by imperialism and neocolonialism, in the highly positive role which the non-aligned countries are
called upon to play in the settlement of international problems or disputes.
The Conference expresses satisfaction at the favourable reactions
throughout the world to this second meeting of non-aligned countries. This
emphasises the rightness, efficacy and vigour of the policy of non-alignment,
and its constructive role in the maintenance and consolidation of international peace and security.
<pg105>
<pg106>

The principles of non-alignment, thanks to the confidence they inspire in
the world, are becoming an increasingly dynamic and powerful force for the
promotion of peace and the welfare of mankind.
The participating Heads of State or Government note with satisfaction
that, thanks to the combined efforts of the forces of freedom, peace and progress, this second Non-Aligned Conference is being held at a time when the
international situation has improved as compared with that which existed
between the two power blocs at the time of the historic Belgrade Conference. The Heads of State or Government of the non-aligned countries
are well aware, however, that, despite the present improvement in international relations, and notwithstanding the conclusion and signature of the
Treaty of Moscow, sources of tension still exist in many parts of the world.
and

This situation shows that the forces of imperialism are still powerful

that they do not hesitate to resort to the use of force to defend their
interes
ts
and maintain their privileges.
This policy, if not firmly resisted by the forces of freedom and peace,
is likely to jeopardise the improvement in the international situation and
the lessening of tension which has occurred, and to constitute a threat to
world peace.
The policy of active peaceful co-existence is an indivisible whole. It
ca
nnot be applied partially, in accordance with special interests and criteria.
Important changes have also taken place within the Eastern and Western
blocs, and this new phenomenon should be taken into account in the objective assessment of the current international situation.
The Conference notes with satisfaction that the movements of national
liberation are engaged in different regions of the world, in a heroic struggle
against neocolonialism, and the practices of apartheid and racial discrimination. This struggle forms part of the common striving towards freedom, justice and peace.
The Conference reaffirms that interference by economically developed
foreign States in the internal affairs of newly independent, developing countries and the existence of territories which are still dependent constitute a
standing threat to peace and security.
The Heads of State or Government of the non-aligned countries, while
appreciative of the efforts which resulted in the holding of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, and mindful of the results
of that Conference, nevertheless note that much ground still remains to be
covered to eliminate existing inequalities in the relationships between industrialised and developing countries.
The Heads of State or Government of the non-aligned countries, while
declaring their determination to contribute towards the establishment of

just and lasting peace in the world, affirm that the preservation of peace and
the promotion of the well-being of peoples are a collective responsibility
deriving from the natural aspirations of mankind to live in a better world.
The Heads of State or Government have arrived in their deliberations at
a common understanding of the various problems with which the world is
now faced, and a common approach to them. Reaffirming the basic principles of the Declaration of Belgrade, they express their agreement upon
the following points:
<pg107>
I
Concerted action for the Liberation of the Countries still dependent;
Elimination of Colonialism, Neo-Colonialism and Imperialism
The Heads of State or Government of the non-aligned countries declare
that lasting world peace cannot be realised so long as unjust conditions
prevail and peoples under foreign domination continue to be deprived of their
fundamental right to freedom, independence and self-determination.
Imperialism, colonialism and neocolonialism constitute a basic source of
international tension and conflict because they endanger world peace and
security. The participants in the Conference deplore that the Declaration
of the United Nations on the granting of independence to colonial countries
and peoples has not been implemented everywhere and call for the unconditional, complete and final abolition of colonialism now.
At present a particular cause of concern is the military or other
assistan
ce
extended to certain countries to enable them to perpetuate by force
colonialist
and neo-colonialist situations which are contrary to the spirit of the Charter
of the United Nations.
of

The exploitation by colonialist forces of the difficulties and problems

recently liberated or developing countries, interference in the internal
affair
s
of these States, and colonialist attempts to maintain unequal relationships,
particularly in the economic field, constitute serious dangers to these young
countries. Colonialism and neo-colonialism have many forms and manifestations.
Imperialism uses many devices to impose its will on independent nations.
Economic pressure and domination, interference, racial discrimination, subversion, intervention and the threat of force are neo-colonialist devices
again
st

which the newly independent nations have to defend themselves. The
Conference condemns all colonialist, neo-colonialist and imperialist policies
applied in various parts of the world.
Deeply concerned at the rapidly deteriorating situation in the Congo, the
participants:
(1) support all the efforts being made by the Organisation of African
Unity to bring peace and harmony speedily to that country;
(2) urge the Ad Hoc Commission of the Organisation of African Unity
to shirk no effort in the attempt to achieve national reconciliation
in the Congo, and to eliminate the existing tension between that
country and the Republic of Congo (Brazzaville) and the Kingdom
of Burundi;
(3) appeal to the Congolese Government and to all combatants to
cease hostilities immediately and to seek, with the help of the
Organisation of African Unity, a solution permitting of national
reconciliation and the restoration of order and peace;
(4) urgently appeal to all foreign powers at present interfering in
the internal affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
particularly those engaged in military intervention in that country,
<pg108>
to cease such interference, which infringes the interests and
sovereignty of the Congolese people and constitutes a threat to
neighbouring countries;
(5) affirm their full support for the efforts being made to this end by
the Organisation of African Unity's Ad Hoc Commission of good
offices in the Congo;
(6) call upon the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to discontinue the recruitment of mercenaries immediately
and to expel all mercenaries, of whatever origin who are already
in the Congo, in order to facilitate an African solution.
The newly independent countries have, like all other countries, the right
of sovereign disposal in regard to their natural resources, and the right to
utilise these resources as they deem appropriate in the interest of their
peoples, without outside interference.
The process of liberation is irresistible and irreversible. Colonized
peoples may legitimately resort to arms to secure the full exercise of their
right to self-determination and independence if the colonial powers persist
in opposing their natural aspirations.
The participants in the Conference undertake to work unremittingly to
eradicate all vestiges of colonialism, and to combine all their efforts to
render all necessary aid and support, whether moral, political or material,
to the peoples struggling against colonialism and neocolonialism. The
participating countries recognize the nationalist movements of the peoples
which are struggling to free themselves from colonial domination as being
authentic representatives of the colonial peoples, and urgently call upon the

colonial powers to negotiate with their leaders.
Portugal continues to hold in bondage by repression, persecution and
force, in Angola, Mozambique, so-called Portuguese Guinea and the other
Portuguese colonies in Africa and Asia, millions of people who have been
suffering far too long under the foreign yoke. The Conference declares its
determination to ensure that the peoples of these territories accede immediately to independence without any conditions or reservations.
The Conference condemns the government of Portugal for its obstinate
refusal to recognize the inalienable right of the peoples of those territories
to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations and the Declaration on the granting of independence
to colonial countries and peoples.
The Conference:
(1) urges the participating countries to afford all necessary material
support-financial and military-to the Freedom Fighters in the
territories under Portuguese colonial rule;
(2) takes the view that support should be given to the Revolutionary
Government of Angola in exile and to the nationalist movements
struggling for the independence of the Portuguese colonies and
assistance to the Special Bureau set up by the OAU in regard
to the application of sanctions against Portugal;
<pg109>
(3) calls upon all participating States to break off diplomatic and
consular relations with the Government of Portugal and to take
effective measures to suspend all trade and economic relations
with Portugal;
(4) calls upon the participating countries to take all measures to
compel Portugal to carry out the decisions of the General Assembly
of the United Nations;
(5) addresses an urgent appeal to the Powers which are extending
military aid and assistance to Portugal to withdraw such aid and
assistance.
The countries participating in the Conference condemn the policy of the
racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia, which continues to defy the
Charter and the Resolutions of the United Nations in that it denies fundamental freedoms to the people by acts of repression and terror.
The participating countries urge all States not to recognize the independence of Southern Rhodesia if proclaimed under the rule of the racist
minority, and instead to give favourable consideration to according
recognition
to an African nationalist government in exile, should such a government be
set up. To this effect, the Conference states its opposition to the Sham
consultation through tribal chiefs envisaged by the present Minority
Government of Southern Rhodesia.

The Conference deplores the British Government's failure to implement
the various resolutions of the United Nations relating to Southern Rhodesia
and calls upon the United Kingdom to convene immediately a Constitutional
Conference, to which all political groups in Southern Rhodesia would be
invited, for the purpose of preparing a new constitution based on the "one
man, one vote" principle, instituting universal suffrage, and ensuring
majority
rule.
The Conference urges the Government of the United Kingdom to call for
the immediate release of all political prisoners and detainees in Southern
Rhodesia.
The Conference reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of South
West Africa to self-determination and independence and condemns the
Government of South Africa for its persistent refusal to co-operate with the
United Nations in the implementation of the pertinent resolutions of the
General Assembly.
It urges all States to refrain from supplying in any manner or form any
arms or military equipment or petroleum products to South Africa, and to
implement the Resolutions of the United Nations.
The Conference recommends that the United Nations should guarantee
the territorial integrity of Swaziland, Basutoland and Bechuanaland and
should take measures for their speedy accession to independence and for
the subsequent safeguarding of their sovereignty.
The participants in the Conference call upon the French Government to
take the necessary steps to enable French Somaliland to become free and
independent in accordance with paragraph 5 of Resolution 1514 (XV) of the
United Nations.
The Conference appeals to all participating countries to lend support
and assistance to the Liberation Committee of the Organization of African
Unity.
<pg110>
The Conference condemns the imperialistic policy pursued in the Middle
East and, in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations, decides to:
(1) endorse the full restoration of all the rights of the Arab people
of Palestine to their homeland, and their inalienable right to
self-determination;
(2)

declare their full support to the Arab people of Palestine in their

struggle for liberation from colonialism and racism.
The Conference condemns the continued refusal of the United Kingdom
Government to implement the United Nations Resolutions on Aden and the
Protectorates, providing for the free exercise by the peoples of the territory
of their right to self-determination and calling for the liquidation of the
British military base in Aden and the withdrawal of British troops from
the territory.
The Conference fully supports the struggle of the people of Aden and

the Protectorates and urges the immediate implementation of the Resolutions
of the United Nations which are based on the expressed wishes of the people
of the territory.
The countries participating in the Conference condemn the continued
armed action waged by British Colonialism against the people of Oman who
are fighting to attain their freedom.
The Conference recommends that all necessary political, moral and
material assistance be rendered to the liberation movements of these territories in their struggle against colonial rule.
The Conference condemns the manifestations of colonialism and neocolonialism in Latin America and declares itself in favour of the implementation in that region of the right of peoples to self-determination and
independence.
Basing itself on this principle, the Conference deplores the delay in
granting full independence to British Guiana and requests and United
Kingdom to grant independence speedily to that country. It notes with
regret that Martinique, Guadaloupe, and other Caribbean Islands are still
not self-governing.
It draws the attention of the Ad Hoc Decolonization
Commission of the United Nations to the Case of Puerto Rico and calls upon
that commission to consider the situation of these territories in the light
of Resolution 1514 (XV) of the United Nations.
II
of

Respect for the right of peoples to self-determination and condemnation
the use of force against the exercise of this right
The Conference solemnly reaffirms the right of peoples to self-determina-

tion and to make their own destiny.
It stresses that this right constitutes one of the essential principles of
t
he
United Nations Charter, that it was laid down also in the Charter of the
Organisation of African Unity, and that the Conferences of Bandung and
Belgrade demanded that it should be respected, and in particular insisted
that it should be effectively exercised.
<pg111>
The Conference notes that this right is still violated or its exercise
den
ied
in many regions of the world and results in a continued increase of tension
and the extension of the areas of war.
The Conference denounces the attitude of those Powers which oppose
the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination.
It condemns the use of force, and all forms of intimidation, interference
and intervention which are aimed at preventing the exercise of this right.

III
Racial discrimination and the policy of apartheid
The Heads of State or Government declare that racial discriminationand particularly its most odious manifestation, apartheid-constitutes a
violation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and of the principle
of the equality of peoples. Accordingly, all governments still persisting in
the practice of racial discrimination should be completely ostracized until
they have abandoned their unjust and inhuman policies. In particular the
governments and peoples represented at this Conference have decided that
they will not tolerate much longer the presence of the Republic of South
Africa in the comity of Nations. The inhuman racial policies of South Africa
constitute a threat to international peace and security. All countries
interested in peace must therefore do everything in their power to ensure that
liberty and fundamental freedoms are secured to the people of South Africa.
The Heads of State or Government solemnly

affirm their absolute respect

for the right of ethnic or religious minorities to protection in particular
against the crimes of genocide or any other violation of a fundamental
human right.
Sanctions against the Republic of

South Africa

(1) The Conference regrets to note that the Pretoria Government's
obstinacy in defying the conscience of mankind has been strengthened by the refusal of its friends and allies, particularly some
major powers, to implement United Nations resolutions concerning
sanctions against South Africa.
(2)

The Conference therefore :

(a) calls upon all States to boycott all South African goods and
to refrain from exporting goods, especially arms, ammunition,
oil and minerals to South Africa;
(b) calls upon all States which have not yet done so to break off
diplomatic, consular and other relations with South Africa;
(c) requests the Governments represented at this Conference to
deny airport and overflying facilities to aircraft and port
facilities to ships proceeding to and from South Africa, and
to discontinue all road or railway traffic with that country;
(d) demands the release of all persons imprisoned, interned or
subjected to other restrictions on account of their opposition
to the policy of apartheid;
(e) invites all countries to give their support to the special bureau
set up by the Organisation of African Unity for the application
of sanctions against South Africa.
<pg112>

IV
Peaceful co-existence and the codification of its principles by the
United Nations
Considering the principles proclaimed at Bandung in 1955, Resolution
1514 (XV) adopted by the United Nations in 1960, the Declaration of the
Belgrade Conference, the Charter of the Organization of African Unity, and
numerous joint declarations by Heads of State or Government on peaceful
co-existence;
Reaffirming their deep conviction that, in present circumstances, mankind
must regard peaceful co-existence as the only way to strengthen world peace,
which must be based on freedom, equality and justice between peoples
within a new framework of peaceful and harmonious relations between the,
States and nations of the world;
Considering the fact that the principle of peaceful co-existence is based
on the right of all peoples to be free and to choose their own political,
economic and social systems according to their own national identity and
their ideals, and is opposed to any form of foreign domination;
Convinced also that peaceful co-existence cannot be fully achieved
throughout the world without the abolition of imperialism, colonialism and
neocolonialism;
Deeply convinced that the absolute prohibition of the threat or use of
force, direct or disguised, the renunciation of all forms of coercion in
international relations, the abolition of relations of inequality and the promotion
of international co-operation with a view to accelerating economic, social
and cultural development, are necessary conditions for safeguarding peace
and achieving the general advancement of mankind,
The Heads of State or Government solemnly proclaim the following
fundamental principles of peaceful co-existence :
(1)

The right to complete independence, which is an inalienable right,
must be recognized immediately and unconditionally as pertaining
to all peoples, in conformity with the Charter and resolutions of
the United Nations General Assembly; it is incumbent upon all
states to respect this right and facilitate its exercise.

(2)

The right to self-determination, which is an inalienable right, must
be recognized as pertaining to all peoples, accordingly, all nations
and peoples have the right to determine their political status and
freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development
without intimidation or hindrance.

(3)

Peaceful co-existence between States with differing social and
political systems is both possible and necessary; it favours the
creation of good-neighbourly relations between States with a view
to the establishment of lasting peace and general well-being, free
from domination and exploitation.

(4)
thei
r

The sovereign equality of States must be recognised and respected.
It includes the right of all peoples to the free exploitation of
natural resources.

(5)
States;

States must abstain from all use of threat or force directed against
the territorial integrity and political independence of other
a situation brought about by the threat or use of force shall not
<pg113>
be recognised, and in particular the established frontiers of States
shall be inviolable. Accordingly, every State must abstain from
interfering in the affairs of other States, whether openly, or
insidiously, or by means of subversion and the various forms of
political, economic and military pressure. Frontier disputes shall
be settled by peaceful means.

(6)

All States shall respect the fundamental rights and freedoms of
the human person and the equality of all nations and races.

(7)

All international conflicts must be settled by peaceful means, in
a spirit of mutual understanding and on the basis of equality and
sovereignty, in such a manner that justice and legitimate rights
are not impaired, all States must apply themselves to promoting
and strengthening measures designed
to diminish international
tension and achieve general and complete disarmament.

(8)

All States must co-operate with a view to accelerating economic
development in the world, and particularly in the developing
countries. This co-operation, which must be aimed at narrowing
the gap, at present widening, between the levels of living in the
developing and developed countries respectively, is essential to
the maintenance of a lasting peace.

(9)

States shall meet their international obligations in good faith in
conformity with the principles and purposes of the United Nations.

The Conference recommends to the General Assembly of the United
Nations to adopt, on the occasion of its twentieth anniversary, a declaration
on the principles of peaceful co-existence.

This declaration will constitute

an important step towards the codification of these principles.
V
Respect for the Sovereignty of States and their Territorial Integrity:
problems of divided nations
(1) The Conference of Heads of State or Government proclaims its full
adherence to the fundamental principle of niternational relations, in
accordanc

e
with which the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States, great and
small, are inviolable and must be respected.
(2) The countries participating in the Conference, having for the most
part achieved their national independence after years of struggle, reaffirm
their determination to, oppose by every means in their power any attempt to
compromise their sovereignty or violate their territorial integrity. They
Pledge themselves to respect frontiers as they existed when the States gained
independence; nevertheless, parts of territories taken away by occupying
powers or converted into autonomous bases for their own benefit at the time of
independence must be given back to the country concerned.
(3) The Conference solemnly reaffirms the right of all peoples to adopt
the form of government they consider best suited to their development.
(4) The Conference considers that one of the causes of international
tensi
on
lies in the problem of divided nations. It expresses its entire sympathy with
the peoples of such countries and upholds their desire to achieve unity. It
exhorts the countries concerned to seek a just and lasting solution in order
to achieve the unification of their territories by peaceful methods without
outside interference or pressure. It considers that the resort to threat or
force can lead to no satisfactory settlement, cannot do otherwise than
jeopardize international security.
<pg114>
Concerned by the situation existing with regard to Cyprus, the Conference
calls upon all states in conformity with their obligations under the Charter
of
the United Nations, and in particular under Article 2, paragraph 4, to respect
the sovereignty, unity, independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus and
to refrain from any threat or use of force or intervention directed against
Cyprus and from any efforts to impose upon Cyprus unjust solutions
unacceptable to the people of Cyprus.
Cyprus, as an equal member of the United Nations, is entitled to and
should enjoy unrestricted and unfettered sovereignty and independence, and
allowing its people to determine freely, and without any foreign intervention
or interference, the political future of the country, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations.
The Conference, considering that foreign pressure and intervention to
impose changes in the political, economic and social system chosen by a
country are contrary to the principles of international law and peaceful coexistence, requests the Government of United States of America to lift the
commercial and economic blockade applied against Cuba.
The Conference takes note of the readiness of the Cuban Government to
settle its differences with the United States on an equal footing, and invites

these two Governments to enter into negotiations to this end and in conformity
with the principles of peaceful co-existence and international co-operation.
Taking into account the principles set forth above and with a view to
restoring peace and stability in the Indo-China Peninsula, the Conference
appeals to the Powers which participated in the Geneva Conference of 1954
and 1962:
(1)

to abstain from any action likely to aggravate the situation which
is already tense in the Peninsula;

(2)

to terminate all foreign interference in the internal affairs of the
countries of that region;

(3)

to convene urgently a new Geneva Conference on Indo-China with
a view to seeking a satisfactory political solution for the peaceful
settlement of the problems arising
namely:

in

that

of

the

part of the world,

(a)

ensuring the strict application
Laos;

1962 agreements on

(b)

recognizing and guaranteeing the neutrality and territorial
integrity of Cambodia;

(c)

ensuring the strict application of the 1954 Geneva Agreement
on Vietnam, and finding a political solution to the problem in
accordance with the legitimate aspirations of the Vietnamese
people to freedom, peace and independence.
VI

Settlement of disputes without threat or use of force in accordance with
the principles of the United Nations Charter
(1) As the use of force may take a number of forms, military, political
and economic, the participating countries deem it essential to reaffirm the
principles that all States shall refrain in their international relations from
<pg115>
the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political
indep
endence of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of
the Charter of the United Nations.
(2) They consider that disputes between States should be settled by
peaceful means in accordance with the Charter on the basis of sovereign
equality and justice.
(3) The participating countries are convinced of the necessity of
exerting
all international efforts to find solutions to

all situations

which threaten

international peace or impair friendly relations among nations.
(4) The participating countries gave special attention to the problems
of frontiers which may threaten international peace or disturb friendly relations among States, and are convinced that in order to settle such problems,
all States should resort to negotiation, mediation or arbitration or other
peaceful means set forth in the United Nations Charter in conformity with
the legitimate rights of all peoples.
(5) The Conference considers that disputes between neighbouring States
must be settled peacefully in a spirit of mutual understanding, without
foreign
intervention or interference.
VII
General and complete disarmament, peaceful use of Atomic Energy, prohibition
of all Nuclear Weapon tests, establishment of Nuclear-Free Zones,
prevention of dissemination of Nuclear Weapons and abolition of all
Nuclear Weapons.
The Conference emphasises the paramount importance of disarmament as
one of the basic problems of the contemporary world, and stresses the
necessity of reaching immediate and practical solutions which would free
mankind from the danger of war and from a sense of insecurity.
The Conference notes with concern that the continuing arms race and the
tremendous advances that have been made in the production of weapons of
mass, destruction and their stockpiling threaten the world with armed conflict
and annihilation. The Conference urges the Great Powers to take new and
urgent steps towards achieving general and complete disarmament, under
strict and effective international control.
The Conference regrets that despite the efforts of the members of the
18-Nation Committee on Disarmament, and in particular those of the nonaligned countries, the results have not been satisfactory. It urges the Great
Powers, in collaboration with the other members of that Committee, to renew
their efforts with determination with a view to the rapid conclusion of an
agreement on general and complete disarmament.
The Conference calls upon all States to accede to the Moscow Treaty
partially banning the testing of nuclear weapons, and to abide by its provisions in the interests of peace and the welfare of humanity.
The Conference urges the. extension of the Moscow Treaty so as to include
underground tests, and the discontinuance of such tests pending the extension
of the agreement.
The Conference urges the speedy conclusion of agreements on various other
partial and collateral measures of disarmament proposed by the members of
the 18-Nation Committee on Disarmament.

<pg116>
The Conference appeals to the Great Powers to take the lead in giving
effect to decisive and immediate measures which would make possible substantial reductions in their military budgets.
The Conference requests the Great Powers to abstain from all policies
conducive to the dissemination of nuclear weapons and their by-products among
those States which do not at present possess them. It underlines the great
danger in the dissemination of nuclear weapons and urges all States, particularly those possessing nuclear weapons, to conclude non-dissemination
agreements and to agree on measures providing for the gradual liquidation of
the existing stock-piles of nuclear weapons.
As part of these efforts, the Heads of State or Government declare their
own readiness not to produce, acquire or test any nuclear weapons, and call
on all countries including those who have not subscribed to the Moscow Treaty
to enter into a similar undertaking and to take the necessary steps to prevent
their territories, ports and airfields from being used by nuclear powers for
the deployment or disposition of nuclear weapons. This undertaking should be
the subject of a treaty to be concluded in an international conference convened under the auspices of the United Nations and open to accession by all
States. The Conference further calls upon all nuclear Powers to observe the
spirit of this declaration.
The Conference welcomes the agreement of the Great Powers not to orbit
in outer space nuclear or other weapons of mass destruction and expresses
its conviction that it is necessary to conclude an international treaty
prohibi
ting
the utilisation of outer space for military purposes. The Conference urges
full international co-operation in the peaceful uses of outer space.
The Conference requests those States which have succeeded in exploring
outer space to exchange and disseminate information related to the research
they have carried out in this field, so that scientific progress for the
peacef
ul
utilization of outer space be of common benefit to all. The Conference is of
the view that for this purpose an international conference should be convened
at an appropriate time.
The Conference considers that the declaration by African States regarding
the denuclearization of Africa, the aspirations of the Latin American
countries
to denuclearize their continent and the various proposals pertaining to the
denuclearization of areas in Europe and Aria are steps in the right direction
because they assist in consolidating
lessening international tensions.
The Conference recommends the

international

establishment

peace and security and
of denuclearized zones

covering these and other areas and the oceans of the world, particularly
those which have been hitherto free from nuclear weapons, in accordance
with the desires expressed by the States and peoples concerned.
The Conference also
denuclearized zones.

requests

the

nuclear

Powers to respect these

The Conference is convinced that the convening of a world disarmament
conference under the auspices of the United Nations to which all countries
would be invited, would provide powerful support to the efforts which me
being made to set in motion the process of disarmament and for securing the
further and steady development of this process.
the

The Conference therefore urges the participating countries to take, at

forthcoming General Assembly of the United Nations, all the necessary steps
<pg117>
for the holding of such a conference and of any other special conference for
the conclusion of special agreements on certain measures of disarmament.
The Conference urges all nations to join in the cooperative development
of the peaceful use of atomic energy for the benefit of all mankind; and in
particular, to study the development of atomic power and other technical
aspects in which international cooperation might be most effectively
accomplished through the free flow of such scientific information.
VIII
Military Pacts, Foreign Troops and Bases
The Conference reiterates its conviction that the existence of military
blocs, Great Power alliances and pacts arising therefrom has accentuated
the cold war and heightened international tensions, The Non-Aligned
Countries are therefore opposed to taking part in such pacts and alliances.
The Conference considers the maintenance or future establishment of
foreign military bases and the stationing of foreign troops on the territories
of other countries, against the expressed will of those countries, as a gross
violation of the sovereignty of States, and as a threat to freedom and
international peace. It furthermore considers as particularly indefensible
the existence or future establishment of bases in dependent territories which
could be used for the maintenance of colonialism or for other purposes.
Noting with concern that foreign military bases are in practice a means
of bringing pressure on nations and retarding their emancipation and development, based on their own ideological, political, economic and cultural ideas,
the Conference declares its full support to the countries which are seeking
to secure the evacuation of foreign bases on their territory and calls upon
all States maintaining troops and bases in other countries to remove them
forthwith.
The Conference considers that the maintenance at Guantanamo (Cuba)

of a military base of the United States of America, in defiance of the will
of the Government and people of Cuba and in defiance of the provisions
embodied in the Declaration of the Belgrade Conference, constitutes a
violation of Cuba's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Noting that the Cuba Government expresses its readiness to settle its
dispute over the base of Guantanamo with the United States on an equal
footing, the Conference urges the United States Government to negotiate the
evacuation of this base with the Cuban Government.
The Conference condemns the expressed intention of imperialist powers
to establish bases in the Indian Ocean, as a calculated attempt to intimidate
the emerging countries of Africa and Asia and an unwarranted extension
of the policy of neocolonialism and imperialism.
The Conference also recommends the elimination of the foreign bases
in Cyprus and the withdrawal of foreign troops from this country, except
for those Stationed there by virtue of United Nations resolutions.
<pg118>
IX
The United Nations: Its role in International Affairs, implementation of its
Resolutions and Amendment of its Charter
The participating countries declare:
The United Nations Organisation was established to promote international
peace and security, to develop international understanding and co-operation,
to safeguard human rights and fundamental freedom and to achieve all the
purposes of the Charter. In order to be an effective instrument, the United
Nations Organization must be open to all the States of the world. It is
particularly necessary that countries still under colonial domination should
attain independence without delay and take their rightful place in the
community of nations.
It is essential for the effective functioning of the United Nations that.
all nations should observe its fundamental principles of peaceful
co-existence,
co-operation, renunciation of the threat or the use of force, freedom and'
equality without discrimination on grounds of race, sex, language or religion.
The influence and effectiveness of the United Nations also depends upon
equitable representation of different geographical regions in the various.
organs of the United Nations and in the service of the United Nations.
The Conference notes with satisfaction that with Resolution 1991 (XVIII),
the General Assembly has taken the initial positive step towards transformation of the structure of the United Nations in keeping with its increased
membership and the necessity to ensure a broader participation of States
in the work of its Organs. It appeals to all Members of the United Nations
to ratify as speedily as possible the amendments to the Charter adopted at

the XVIII Session of the General Assembly.
The Conference recognises the paramount importance of the United
Nations and the necessity of enabling it to carry out the functions entrusted
to it to preserve international co-operation among States.
To this end, the Non-Aligned Countries should consult one another at
the Foreign Minister or Head of Delegation level at each session of the
United Nations.
The Conference stresses the need to adapt the Charter to the dynamic
changes and evolution of international conditions.
The Conference expresses the hope that the Heads of State or Government of the States Members of the United Nations will attend the regular
Session of the General Assembly on the occasion of the 20th anniversary
of the Organisation.
Recalling the recommendation of the Belgrade Conference the Conference
asks the General Assembly of the United Nations to restore the rights of the
People's Republic of China and to recognize the representatives of its Government as the only legitimate representatives of China in the United Nations.
The Conference recommends to the States Members of the United Nations
to respect the resolutions of the United Nations and to render all assistance
necessary for the Organization to fulfil its role in maintaining international
peace and security.
<pg119>
X
Economic Development and Co-operation
The Heads of State or Government participating in this Conference,
CONVINCED that peace must rest on a sound and solid economic foundation,
that the persistence of poverty possess a threat to world peace and prosperity,
that economic emancipation is an essential element in the struggle for
the elimination of political domination,
that respect for the right of peoples and nations to control and dispose
freely of their national wealth and resources is vital for their economic
development;
CONSCIOUS that participating States have a special responsibility to do
their utmost to break through the barrier of underdevelopment;
BELIEVING that economic development is an obligation of the whole
international community,

that it is the duty of all countries to contribute to the rapid evolution
of a new and just economic order under which all nations can live without
fear or want or despair and rise to their full stature in the Family of
Nations,
that the structure of world economy and the existing international
institu
tions of international trade and development have failed either to reduce
the disparity in the per capita income of the peoples in developing and
developed countries or to promote international action to rectify serious
and growing imbalances between developed and developing countries;
EMPHASIZING the imperative need to amplify and intensify international
co-operation based on equality, and consistent with the needs of accelerated
economic development;
NOTING that as a result of the proposals adopted at Belgrade in 1961 and
elaborated in Cairo in 1962, the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development met in Geneva in 1964;
CONSIDERING that while the Geneva Conference marks the first step in
the evolution of a new international economic policy for development and
offers a sound basis for progress in the future, the results achieved were
neither adequate for, nor commensurate with, the essential requirements of
developing countries;
SUPPORT the Joint Declaration of the "Seventy-Seven" developing
countries made at the conclusion of that Conference, and PLEDGE the
co-operation of the participating States to the strengthening of their
solidari
ty;
URGE upon all States to implement on an urgent basis the recommendations contained in the Final Act of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development and in particular to co-operate in bringing into existence as
early as possible the new international institutions proposed therein, so that
the problems of trade and economic development may be more effectively
and speedily resolved;
CONSIDER that democratic procedures, which afford no position of
privilege, are as essential in the economic as in the political sphere,
193 M of EA-9
<pg120>
that a new international division of labour is needed to hasten the
industrialization of developing countries and the modernization of their
agriculture, so as to enable them to strengthen their domestic economies
and diversify their export trade,
that discriminatory measures of any kind taken against developing
countries on the grounds of different socioeconomic systems are contrary
to the spirit of the United Nations Charter and constitute a threat to the
free flow of trade and to peace and should be eliminated;

AFFIRM that the practice of the inhuman policy of apartheid or racial
discrimination in any part of the world should be eliminated by every
possible means, including economic sanctions;
RECOMMEND that the target of economic growth set for the development
Decade by the United Nations should be revised upwards,
that the amount of capital transferred to developing countries and the
terms and conditions governing the transfer should be extended and improved
without political commitments, so as to reinforce the efforts of these
countrie
s
to build self-reliant economies,
that a programme of action should be developed to increase the income
in foreign exchange of developing countries and, in particular, to provide
access for primary products from developing countries to the markets of
industrialized countries, on an equitable basis and for manufactured goods
from developing countries on a preferential basis,
that the establishment of a Specialized Agency for industrial development
should be expedited,
that members of regional economic groupings should do their utmost to,
ensure that economic integration helps to promote the increase of imports
from the developing countries either individually or collectively,
that the recommendation of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development to convene a conference of plenipotentiaries to adopt an
International Convention to ensure the right of landlocked countries to free
transit and access to the sea be implemented by the United Nations early
next year, and that the principle of economic co-operation adopted by the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in relation to the
transit trade of landlocked countries be given consideration;
CALL upon participating countries to concert measures to bring about
closer economic relations among the developing countries on a basis of
equality, mutual benefit and mutual assistance, bearing in mind the obligations of all developing countries to accord favourable consideration to the
expansion of their reciprocal trade, to unite against all forms of economic
exploitation and to strengthen mutual consultation.
<pg121>
XI
Cultural, Scientific and Educational Co-operation and consolidation of the
International and Regional Organizations working for this purpose
The Heads of State or Government participating in the Conference:
CONSIDERING that the political, economic, social and cultural problems
of mankind are so interrelated as to demand concerted action;
CONSIDERING that co-operation in the fields of culture, education and
science is necessary for the deepening of human understanding, for the consolidation of freedom, justice and peace, and for progress and development;
BEARING IN MIND that political liberation, social emancipation and

scientific advancement have effected fundamental changes in the minds and
lives of men;
RECOGNISING that culture helps to widen the mind and enrich life;
that all human cultures have their special values and can contribute to the
general progress; that many cultures were suppressed and cultural relations
interrupted under colonial domination; that international understanding
and progress require a revival and rehabilitation of these cultures, a free
expression of their identity and national character, and a deeper mutual
appreciation of their values so as to enrich the common cultural heritage of
man;
CONSIDERING that education is a basic need for the advancement of
humanity and that science not only adds to the wealth and welfare of
nations but also adds new values to civilisation;
APPRECIATING the work of the international and regional organisations in the promotion of educational, scientific and cultural co-operation
among nations;
BELIEVING that such cooperation among nations in the educational,
scientific and cultural fields should be strengthened and expanded;
RECOMMEND that international co-operation in education should be
promoted in order to secure a fair opportunity for education to every person
in every part of the world, to extend educational assistance to develop
mutual understanding and appreciation of the different cultures and ways of
life through the proper teaching of civics, and to promote international
understanding through the teaching of the principles of the United Nations
at various levels of education;
PROPOSE that a free and more systematic exchange of scientific information be encouraged and intensified and, in particular, call on the
advanced countries to share with developing countries their scientific
knowledge and technical knowledge so that the advantages of scientific and
technological advance can be applied to the promotion of economic
development.
URGE all states to adopt in their legislation the principles embodied in
the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights;
<pg122>
AGREE that participating countries should adopt measures to strengthen
their ties with one another in the fields of education, science and culture;
EXPRESS their determination to help, consolidate and strengthen the
international and regional organisations working in this direction.
Special Resolution
I
The Conference of Heads of State or Government of non-aligned countries meeting in Cairo from 5 to 10 October 1964;
Considering their common will to work for understanding between
peoples and for international cooperation;

con-

Reaffirming their solidarity with the African States fighting for the

solidation of their independence and the total emancipation of their continent, through concerted action and close cooperation;
Noting with satisfaction that in that historic document, the Charter of
Addis Ababa, adopted on 29 May 1963, and in subsequent decisions, the
African States members of the Organisation of African Unity have unreservedly adhered to the positive policy of non-alignment in relation to all
great blocs;
Firmly resolved to unite their efforts and actions to fight colonialism,
neocolonialism and imperialism by all appropriate means;
Considering the outstanding work for peace and harmony which the
Organisation of African Unity has accomplished, since its recent creation, in
the interest of both the African Continent and the international community as a whole;
(1) EXPRESS their conviction that the establishment of the Organisation of African Unity is an important contribution to the strengthening of
world peace, the triumph of the policy of non-alignment, and the fundamental values laid down by this policy,
(2) DECIDE to coordinate and concert their efforts with those of the
Organisation of African Unity, with a view to safeguarding their joint interests in economic, social and cultural development and in international
cooperation.
Special Resolution
II
The Heads of State or Government attending the Second Conference
of Non-Aligned Countries are happy to express their warmest appreciation
to the brave people, the Government and the distinguished President of the
United Arab Republic, His Excellency Gamal Abdel Nasser, for the superb
way in which they organized this Conference both materially and morally,
and for the generous and most brotherly hospitality extended to all delegations.
They wish to say how deeply satisfied they are with the astounding
success of the Conference, which opens up new prospects for positive action
and general advancement towards mutual understanding, active solidarity
and the strengthening of cooperation between nations dedicated to freedom,
peace and justice.
AFGHANISTAN
ALGERIA ANGOLA BURMA BURUNDI CAMBODIA CAMEROON CHAD CONGO CUBA
CYPRUS USA ETHIOPIA GHANA GUINEA INDIA INDONESIA IRAQ JORDAN KENYA
KUWAIT LAOS LEBANON LIBERIA LIBYA MAURITANIA MALAWI MALI MOROCCO
NEPAL NIGER NIGERIA SAUDI ARABIA SENEGAL SIERRA LEONE SOMALIA SUDAN
SYRIA TUNISIA UGANDA YEMEN YUGOSLAVIA ZAMBIA EGYPT BOLIVIA BRAZIL
CHILE FINLAND JAMAICA MEXICO URUGUAY VENEZUELA RUSSIA PORTUGAL
MOZAMBIQUE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC SOUTH AFRICA SWAZILAND OMAN CHINA

SWITZERLAND

VIETNAM

Oct 05, 1964

APPENDIX II International Organisations of which India is a Member

Jan 01, 1964
APPENDIX II
International Organisations of which India is a Member
United Nations
1. General Assembly.
2.

Committees and Commissions of the General Assembly.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(o)
(p)

Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.
Committee on Arrangements for a Conference for the purpose of
Reviewing the Charter.
Special Committee of 24 on the situation with regard to the
implementation of the Declaration on the granting of independence
to Colonial Countries and peoples.
Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation.
Peace Observation Commission.
Disarmament Commission.
International Law Commission.
Committee on Contributions.
Administrative Tribunal.
18-Nation Disarmament Committee.
Investment Committee.
Working Group of 21 to examine Administrative and Budgetary
Procedures of the United Nations.
Staff Pension Committee.
U.N. Committee for International Co-operation year.
U.N. Advisory Committee on Congo.
Scientific Advisory Committee.

3.

Economic and Social Council.

4.

Functional Commissions of the Economic and Social Council.
(i) Commission on International Commodity Trade.
(ii) Human Rights Commission.
(iii) Narcotic Drugs Commission.
(iv) Statistical Commission.
(v) Population Commission.

5. Regional Commission of the Economic and Social Council: Economic
Commission for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE).

6. Other Subsidiary Bodies of the Economic and Social Council.
(i) United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF).
(ii) Committee for Industrial Development.
(iii) Permanent Central Opium Board.
(iv) Technical Assistance Committee and Technical Assistance Board.
<pg124>
(v) Special Fund.
(vi) Committee on the International Year for Human Rights.
7.

Specialized Agencies:(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)

Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO).
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
International Bank of Re-construction and Development (IBRD).
International Monetary Fund (IMF).
International Finance Corporation (IFC).
International Development Association (IDA).
International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO).
International Tele-communication Union (ITU).
World Meteorological Organisation (WMO).
Universal Postal Union (UPU).
International Labour Organisation (ILO).
United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organisation
(UNESCO).
World Health Organisation (WHO).
International Maritime Consultative Organisation (IMCO).

8. International Atomic Energy Agency.
Other International Organisations
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)

Asian African Legal Consultative Committee, New Delhi.
Asian Broadcasting Conference.
Asian Productivity Organisation, Tokyo.
Asian Statisticians Conference.
American Society of Travel Agents, New York.
Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works as
revised at Brussels in 1948.
Commonwealth Air Transport Council.
Commonwealth Advisory Aeronautical Research Committee.
Commonwealth Agriculture Bureau, U.K.
Commonwealth Broadcasting Conference.
Commonwealth Statisticians Conference.
Commonwealth Tele-communications Board, London.
Conference Internationale Des Grands Reseans Electriques (CIGRE),
Paris.
Central Bureau of the International Map of the World of the millionth
scale, subsequently incorporated in the U.N. Cartographic Office of the
UNESCO.

(15) Committee on Space Research, The Hague.
(16) Federation Internationale des Agences de Voyage, Paris.
(17) International Association for Bridges and Structural Engineering,
Zurich.

(18) International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage, New Delhi.
<pg125>
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
(23)
(24)
(25)
(26)
(27)
(28)
(29)
(30)
(31)
(32)
(33)
(34)
(35)
(36)
(37)
(38)
(39)
(40)
(41)
(42)
(43)
(44)
(45)
(46)
(47)
(48)
(49)
(50)
(51)
(52)
(53)
(54)
(55)
(56)
(57)
(58)

International Commission on Large Dams, Paris.
International Committee of the Red Cross, Geneva.
International Conference of Social Works, Paris.
International Cotton Advisory Committee, Washington.
International Council of Building Research Studies and Documentation,
Paris.
International Council of Archives, Paris.
International Criminal Police Commission, Paris.
International Customs Tariff Bureau, Brussels.
International Electro-Technical Commission, Geneva.
International Federation for Documentation, The Hague.
International Federation for Housing and Town Planning, The Hague.
International Federation for University Women, London.
International Hydrographic Bureau, Monte Carlo.
International Institute for Administrative Sciences, Brussels.
International Mathematical Union, Zurich.
International Organisation of Legal Metrology, Paris.
International Organisation for Standardisation, Geneva.
International Railway Congress Association, Brussels.
International Scientific Radio Union, Brussels.
International Tea Committee, London.
International Union of Biological Sciences, Paris.
International Union of Crystallography, Cambridge.
International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics, Paris.
International Union of Geography, New York.
International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry, Paris.
International Union of Pure and Applied Physics, Paris.
International Union of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics, Delft.
International Union of Official Travel Organisation, Geneva and its
allied Commission, viz. the South Asian Travel Commission.
International Hide and Allied Trade Improvement Society, U.K.
International Union for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works
and Universal Copy Right Convention, Geneva.
International Association of Hydraulic Research, Delft.
International Bureau of Weights and Measures, Sevres (France).
International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, London.
International Commission of Table of Constants.
International Dairy Federation (IDF), Brussels.
International Society of Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering,
London.
International Union of the History and Philosophy of Sciences, Paris.
International Union of Astronomy, Greenwich (UK).
International Statistical Institute Conference, The Hague.
International Wheat Council, London.
<pg126>

(59)
(60)
(61)
(62)
(63)
(64)

International Council for Museums, Paris.
International Committee on Monuments, Artistic and Historical Sites
and Archaeological Excavations.
International Lead and Zinc Group, New York.
International Seed Testing Association, Washington.
International Society for Photogrammetry, London.
International Union Against the Venereal Diseases and the Treponematoses, Paris.

(65)
(66)
(67)
(68)
(69)
(70)
(71)
(72)
(73)
(74)
(75)
(76)
(77)
(78)
(79)
(80)
(81)
(82)
(83)
(84)
(85)
(36)
(87)
(88)
(89)
(90)
(91)
(92)
(93)
(94)
(95)
(96)

International Folk Music Council, London.
International Council for Bird Preservation, British Museum (Natural
History), London.
International Council of Scientific Unions, London.
International Union of Anthropological Sciences, Mexico.
International Organisation for Pure and Applied Bio-physics.
International Association for the Exchange of Students for Technical
Experience.
International Association of Lighthouse Authorities.
International Union of Railways.
International Office of Epizootics.
International Society for Horticultural Sciences.
International Council of Scientific International Unions of Geography.
International Union of Chemistry.
International Union of Radio Sciences.
International Union of Biochemistry.
International Advisory Committee on Research in Natural Sciences
Programme of UNESCO.
International Association for Shell Structures, Madrid.
International Geological Congress.
International Institute for the Unification of Private Law, Rome.
International Union of Geological Sciences.
League of Red Cross Societies, Geneva.
Lithographic Technical Foundation Inc., New York.
Pacific Area Travel Association, San Francisco.
Pan Indian Ocean Science Association.
Permanent Court of Arbitration, The Hague.
Permanent International Association of Navigation Congress, Brussels.
Permanent International Association of Road Congress, Brussels.
Special Committee on Oceanic Research.
The British Electrical and Allied Industries Research Association,
England.
Universal Copyright Convention.
Union Internationale Centre le Cancer, Paris.
World Power Conference, Paris.
World Poultry Science Association.

INDIA
USA CONGO JAPAN SWITZERLAND BELGIUM UNITED KINGDOM
AFRICAN REPUBLIC LATVIA MEXICO SPAIN ITALY

FRANCE

Jan 01, 1964

APPENDIX III Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference

APPENDIX III
Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference
Final Communique

CENTRAL

The following is the text of the final communique issued in London on
Jul 15, 1964, at the conclusion of the Commonwealth Prime Ministers
conference:
The meeting of Commonwealth Prime Ministers ended today (July 15).
Pakistan, Ghana, and Tanganyika and Zanzibar were represented by their
Presidents. Britain, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Ceylon, Malayasia,
Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, Kenya, and Malawi were
represented by their Prime Ministers. India was represented by the Ministerof Finance; Cyprus by the Minister of Foreign Affairs; and Jamaica by the
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance.
This was the first meeting at which Uganda and Kenya were represented
as independent members; and the other Commonwealth heads of government
were glad to greet their Prime Ministers. They expressed their satisfaction
at the establishment of Malaysia which they had welcomed at their last meeting in 1962, and they greeted Tunku Abdul Rahman as Prime Minister of
Malaysia. They also welcomed the attainment of independence by Malawi
on July 6, 1964, and agreed that Malawi should be admitted to membership
of the Commonwealth. They invited the Prime Minister of Malawi, Dr.
Banda, to join their meeting; and Dr. Banda took his seat on July 9. They
noted that Northern Rhodesia would become independent on October 24, 1964,
as the Republic of Zambia; and they looked forward to welcoming Zambia
as a member of the Commonwealth on the completion of the necessary consitutional processes.
In the course of their discussion, the Presidents and Prime Ministers,
reviewed the major issues of the day.
They agreed that one of the most important of these is race relations. It
was agreed that the Commonwealth has a particular role to play in the
search for solutions to the inter-racial problems which are threatening the
orderly development of mankind in general, and of many particular areas in
the world today. As a community of many different races, the Commonwealth is itself an almost unique experiment in international co-operation
among peoples of several races and continents. Within their own borders,
many of its members have faced and are facing issues raised by the co-existence of differing cultures within a democratic society. The Prime Ministers
affirmed their belief that, for all Commonwealth Governments, it should be
the objective of policy to build in each country a structure of society which
offers equal opportunity and non-discrimination for all its people,
irrespectiv
e
of race, colour or creed. The Commonwealth should be able to exercise
constructive leadership in the application of democratic principles in a manner which will enable the people of each country of different racial and
cultural groups to exist and develop as free and equal citizens.
<pg128>
The Prime Ministers recalled the critical international situation which
ha
d
developed shortly after their last meeting in the autumn of 1962 and the grave
threat to peace which it had implied.

They believed that the fact that it

was successfully resolved may have been in some sense a turning point in
the relations between the major Powers and may have marked the beginning
of a new period in international affairs in which the world may hope for a
gradual relaxation of tension. This will not be a short or simple process;
but the Prime Ministers noted with satisfaction the further steps which had
already been taken to reduce the causes of friction, particularly the
conclusio
n
of the tests-ban treaty and the subsequent agreements between the Governments of the United Kingdom, the United States and the Soviet Union not
to place nuclear weapons in outer space. They also welcomed the reductions
in the output of issue material for military purposes which these Governments
have made.
Against this background. the Prime Ministers expressed their hope that
these steps would lead progressively to general and complete disarmament.
They reaffirmed their support for the work of the Geneva disarmament conference and their determination to seek to extend the scope of disarmament
in accordance with the principles expressed in their statement of March 17,
1961, particularly by endeavouring to promote an agreement to prohibit the
further dissemination of nuclear weapons and of knowledge relating to their
manufacture and use. They will maintain their efforts to reduce the areas
of international disagreement by all the means within their power, while
maintaining both the strength and the resolution to resist aggression from
without or subversion from within. In this connection, they assured the
Prime Minister of Malaysia of their sympathy and support in his efforts to
preserve the sovereign independence and integrity of his country and to
promote a peaceful and honourable settlement of current differences between
Malaysia and neighbouring countries. They discussed the great significance
of China for South and South-East Asia. They also discussed the question
of relations with China and for her membership of the United Nations. They
expressed anxiety about the continuing tension in South-East Asia and affirmed their support for all measures which might promote a just and peaceful
settlement and help to reestablish stability in the area.
The Prime Ministers noted with satisfaction the friendly public
statements
by the President of Pakistan and the Prime Minister of India and expressed
their hopes that the problems between their countries will be solved in the
same friendly spirit.
While recognizing that it was not a function of the Commonwealth to act
as an arbiter in disputes between member-nations, the Prime Ministers agreed
that Commonwealth countries could play a role of liaison and, where possible,
consider using their good offices to help towards the settlement of disputes
between member-nations provided the parties concerned accepted such
mediation.
The Prime Ministers renewed their support for the United Nations and
its efforts to resolve disputes in various parts of the world. They
reaffirmed
their adherence to the principles of the Charter and emphasized the importance of reinforcing the strength and capacity of the United Nations to respond
to the demands which it must meet if the Charter is to be fulfilled.

The Prime Ministers expressed concern about the situation with regard
to Cyprus. They reaffirmed their full support for the United Nations Security
<pg129>
Council's
Ministers
framework
democracy

resolutions of March 4, March 13 and June 20, 1964. The Prime
asserted that the Cyprus problem should be solved within the
of the United Nations and in accordance with the principles of
and justice.

They appealed to all countries concerned to refrain from any action which
might undermine the task of the United Nations peace-keeping force, to which
a number of Commonwealth countries are contributing, or might prejudice
the endeavours of the United Nations to find a lasting solution in conformity
with the Charter of the United Nations.
The Prime Ministers undertook to consider practical measures to
strengthen
the peace-keeping machinery of the United Nations and to reduce the degree
of improvision required in an emergency. They agreed that consultation and
co-operation among interested Governments in this matter could be of great
value in contributing to the improvement of the peace-keeping effectiveness
the United Nations.
The Prime Ministers expressed their concern at the possible effect on
United Nations operations in all fields of a prolongation of the United
Nations
financial crisis. They expressed a common desire to work towards a longterm equitable solution of the problem of financing large-scale United Nations
peace-keeping operations, and agreed that any such solution should be based
on the principles of collective financial responsibility and relative capacity
to pay.
Britain made the following statement to the meeting about the progress
of British colonial dependencies towards independence:
Already more than 20 countries (with a total population of some
700,000,000) had achieved sovereign independence under British guidance.
This process was continuing all the time. Northern Rhodesia would be
independent in October, and the Gambia very soon after. Basutoland
had been promised that she could have independence in about 18 months'
time, Bechuanaland would be free to follow when she wished; and
Swaziland's new constitution had now set her on the same course. In
addition, it had been agreed that the Federation of South Arabia should
become independent within the next 31 years. British Guiana would
become independent as soon as she was able to assure internal peace.
Southern Rhodesia would attain full sovereignty as soon as her governmental institutions were sufficiently representative.
There were a number of other colonies which already enjoyed a
wide measure of self-government. These included the Bahamas,
Barbados, British Honduras, and Mauritius. In addition, there were

some 20 other colonies and protectorates with a combined Population of
about 5,000,000. Of these, over 3,000,000 were in Hong Kong, where the
circumstances were exceptional. Of the remainder, only two territories
had a population of more than 100.000. Several had less than 10,000.
The smallest (Pitcairn) in the Pacific had only 90 inhabitants. It was
clear that no uniform pattern would fit all these very different
territori
es.
Some might feel strong enough to proceed to independence on their own.
Some might join with others to form larger and more viable units. Some
might wish to people independence with a treaty of friendship such as
<pg130>
Western Samoa concluded with New Zealand.
present prefer to remain as they were.

Some would for the

The Prime Ministers of the other Commonwealth countries welcomed the
progress of British territories to independent membership of the Commonwealth. They recognized that the authority and responsibility for leading
her remaining colonies to independence must continue to rest with Britain.
At the same time, Prime Ministers of other Commonwealth countries
expressed their views to the Prime Minister of Britain on the question of
the progress of Southern Rhodesia towards independence within the Commonwealth. They welcomed the decision already announced by the British
Government that, as in the case of other territories, the existence of sufficiently representative institutions would be a condition of the grant of
independence to Southern Rhodesia. They also noted with approval the
statement already made by the British Government that they would not
recognize any unilateral declaration of independence; and the other Prime,
Ministers made it clear that they would be unable to recognize any such
declaration. The view was also expressed that an independence conference
should be convened which the leaders of all parties in Southern Rhodesia
should be free to attend. The object would be to seek agreement on the
steps by which Southern Rhodesia might proceed to independence within the
Commonwealth at the earliest practicable time on the basis of majority rule.
With a view to diminishing tensions and preparing the way for such a conference, an appeal was made for the release of all the detained African
leaders. The Prime Ministers called upon all leaders and their supporters
to exercise moderation and to abstain from violence; and they affirmed their
belief that the best interest of all sections of the population lay in
developing confidence and co-operation, on the basis of tolerance, mutual understanding and justice. In this connection, they recognized the necessity for
giving confidence to the minority community in Southern Rhodesia that their
interests would be protected.
The Prime Minister of Britain said that he would give careful
consideratio
n
to all the views expressed by other Commonwealth Prime Ministers. At the
same time, he emphasized that the Government of Southern (Rhodesia was
constitutionally responsible for the internal affairs of that territory, and
th
at
the question of the granting of independence was a matter for decision by
the British Parliament.

The meeting expressed concern at the Political rivalries in British
Guiana
which had led to disorder and inter-racial
attainment of independence. While several
on the methods to be employed, a number of
hope that the Political leaders of British

strife and had prejudiced the
different views Were expressed
Prime Ministers expressed the
Guiana would seek urgently a basis

for collaboration in the interest of their fellow-countrymen of all races in
order to restore mutual confidence among the races and to strengthen a spirit
of national purpose and unity. Only in these circumstances could British
Guiana hope to sustain true independence.
The question of the progress of the smaller dependent territories in the
Caribbean to independence was raised. It was emphasized that the problem
for the territories was mainly one of viability; and the hope was expressed
that every practicable effort would be made to help them to strengthen their
economies and so enable them to sustain the obligations of independence,
whether in a federation or in some other form Of association.
<pg131>
The Prime Ministers reaffirmed their condemnation of the policy of
apartheid practised by the Government of the Republic of South Africa.
Some Commonwealth Prime Ministers felt very strongly that the only effective means of dealing with the problem of apartheid was the application of
economic sanctions and an arms embargo. It was recognized, however, that
there was a difference of opinion among Commonwealth countries as to the
effectiveness of economic sanctions and as to the extent to which they regarded it as right or practicable to seek to secure the abandonment of apartheid
by coercive action, of whatever kind. But the Prime Ministers were unanimous in calling upon South Africa to bring to an end the practice of
apartheid, which had been repeatedly condemned by the United Nations and
was deplored by public opinion throughout the world.
The Prime Ministers expressed their regret that Portugal had not so far
given recognition to the principle of self-determination for her territories
in Africa.
The Prime Ministers agreed that the issues of Commonwealth and international relations which confront them in the political field, however complex and contentious, must be seen in perspective in relation to the many
factors which bring together the peoples of the Commonwealth and enable
them to make a unique contribution to the promotion of peaceful development. The Commonwealth now consists of 18 independent member-countries,
widely distributed over the globe and accounting for nearly a quarter of
the population of the world. It is, indeed, a cross-section of the world
itsel
f;
and its citizens have an unparalleled opportunity to prove that, by mutual
co-operation, men and women of many different races and national cultures
can live in peace and work together for the common good.
The Prime Ministers reviewed the world economic situation as it affects
their countries, and reaffirmed the resolve of their Governments to promote
the economic development of their countries. To this end they emphasized

the need of developing countries for improved and more remunerative outlets
for their trade and for increased financial aid on easier terms and on a
continuing basis. They took note of the problems presented to developing countries by the conditions and terms often attached by donor governments to
their aid, of the desirability of the encouragement of private investment in
developing countries, and also of the upward trend in the level of financial
aid extended by the more developed countries in the Commonwealth and
of the easier terms on which it is offered.
There was agreement on the importance for all Commonwealth countries
of following up the work of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, in particular with regard to expanding international trade in
primary products through freer access to markets and, in appropriate cases,
through commodity agreements and stabilized prices at equitable levels;
working out arrangements for increasing access by preferences or otherwise
to markets in developed countries for manufactured goods from developing
countries; and elaborating proposals for supplementary finance to assist
countries whose development might be threatened by adverse movements in
their export earnings. The Prime Ministers affirmed their intention of
working for a solution of these and other problems of the developing countries through the new institutions resulting from the conference as well as
through existing international bodies such as the GATT.
<pg132>
The Prime Ministers reaffirmed the resolve of the member-countries of
the Commonwealth to promote the economic and social progress of developing countries. They wished to maintain their support of the work of the
United Nations, its specialized agencies, the Colombo Plan, and other similar
arrangements in this field. At the same time, they wished to establish how
best the members of the Commonwealth could make a further distinctive
contribution of their own to the development of its member-countries. They
conceived that the purpose of any new initiative in this respect should be
not merely to increase the economic strength and material well-being of the
recipients, vital though these considerations are, but also to strengthen the
links between the countries of the Commonwealth by encouraging their
peoples to work more closely together in a variety of practical ways. For
this purpose they selected for further examination several fields of action
in which they believed the practice of Commonwealth co-operation mightbe extended; and they agreed that these schemes should not be in substitution
for existing arrangements but supplementary to them.
COMMONWEALTH DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
In particular, they considered a proposal that development projects
might.
be launched in individual Commonwealth countries, which would be implemented by various members acting in close collaboration and contributing
whatever resources in men, money, materials and technical expertise
they could most appropriately provide. Such projects, which would be additional to the support which Commonwealth countries already provide to the
United Nations Special Fund and Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance, could be directed to a number of different purposes the improvement
of agricultural production and the development of natural resources through

extension services, training and research; the enlargement of professional
and technical training; the development of new industries; and so forth.
But they would all be inspired by the common purpose of promoting the
development of the Commonwealth by a coordinated programme of joint
or bilateral projects. The British Government said that they would be,
prepared to make a substantial contribution to projects of this kind within
their expanding programme of development aid. The other member-governments expressed support for the objective of the proposal and agreed that
further consideration should be given to the basis on which such a programme might be established.
ADMINISTRATIVE TRAINING
Development projects of this kind would need to be planned, carefully
and thoroughly, at all stages in their execution; and the Prime Ministers
therefore considered that it might be valuable to supplement the existing
arrangements for promoting the study of the techniques of administration and
development planning throughout the Commonwealth. They considered that
there might be advantage in making arrangements, which could include the
formation of a new institute, to provide facilities for specialized training
an
d
research for senior administrators concerned with administrative and development problems in relation to the needs of new countries. They agreed
that further consideration should be given to the most appropriate form for
arrangements for additional training including the strengthening of existing
institutions.
<pg133>
EDUCATION
The Prime Ministers took note of the scope which exists for co-operation
between the Governments and peoples of the Commonwealth in social as well
as economic development. They noted with satisfaction that the third Commonwealth Education Conference will be held in Ottawa in August; and they
expressed warm wishes for its success, together with appreciation for the
British Government's offer to increase to an average of 5,000,000 a year,
over the five years starting in 1965-66, the capital assistance which they
already provide for higher education in developing Commonwealth countries,
both independent and dependent.
They decided in principle that an initiative similar to that which was
launched in the field of education by the first of the Commonwealth Education Conference several years ago should now be taken in the field of medicine, and that for this purpose consideration should be given to the convening of a Commonwealth Medical Conference during the course of 1965. Such
a conference would enable the members of the Commonwealth to discuss
mutual assistance in medical education, including links between institutions,
the provision of ancillary staffs, the development and planning of health
services, and the supply of medical equipment and facilities for research.
COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY ASSOCIATION
The links between the countries of the Commonwealth are strengthened
not only by co-operation between their Governments in initiatives of this
kind, but even more by frequent personal contacts between individuals who
share common professional interests.

The Prime Ministers recorded their support for the valuable work which
the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association performs in bringing together
members of the parliaments of all Commonwealth countries. The British
Government stated that they would be prepared, if other Commonwealth
Governments would do the same, to increase their contribution to the Association.
COMMONWEALTH FOUNDATION
The Prime Ministers considered that further steps should be taken to
promote contacts in other fields, and that it might be desirable to establish
a Commonwealth Foundation to administer a fund for increasing interchanges between Commonwealth organizations in professional fields. This
Foundation could be administered by an independent board; and while it
could be financed by contributions from Commonwealth Governments. It
would also welcome support from all quarters, whether public or private.
SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS
The Prime Ministers also took note of the current international
discussion
s
on the establishment of a global system of satellite communications. They
endorsed the desirability of establishing such a system, and considered how
Commonwealth countries could best co-operate with each other and with
ether countries in its development. They discussed the provision of technical
assistance to the developing countries in this field, particularly as regards
t
he
establishment of ground stations and inter-connections in Commonwealth
countries. They agreed that further consideration should be given to the
<pg134>
feasibility of such a plan and the basis on which it might best be implemented.
The Prime Ministers directed that the Commonwealth liaison committee,
with the assistance of special representatives, should now give more detailed
consideration to all aspects of these new initiatives in the hope that they
could be launched and carried forward at an early date. They noted that
thereafter further opportunities to review many of these projects would be
afforded by the third Commonwealth Education Conference in Ottawa in
August and by the Commonwealth Economic Consultative Council meeting
in Kuala Lumpur in September.
COMMONWEALTH SECRETARIAT
Finally, they were anxious that some permanent expression should be
given to the desire, which had been evident through their deliberations, for
closer and more informed understanding between their Governments on the
many issues which engage their attention and for some continuing machinery
for this purpose. They therefore instructed officials to consider the best
basis for establishing a Commonwealth Secretariat, which would be available
inter alia to disseminate factual information to all member-countries on matters of common concern; to assist existing agencies, both official

and un-

official, in the promotion of Commonwealth links in all fields; and to help
to co-ordinate, in co-operation with the host country, the preparations for
future meetings of Commonwealth heads of government and, where appropriate, for meetings of other Commonwealth Ministers. This secretariat,
being recruited from member-countries and financed by their contributions,
would be at the service of all Commonwealth Governments and would be a
visible symbol of the spirit of co-operation which animates the Commonwealth.
UNITED KINGDOM
USA GHANA PAKISTAN AUSTRALIA CANADA NEW ZEALAND KENYA MALAWI NIGER
NIGERIA SIERRA LEONE TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO UGANDA INDIA CYPRUS JAMAICA
MALAYSIA ZAMBIA SWITZERLAND RUSSIA CHINA THE GAMBIA SWAZILAND BAHAMAS
HONDURAS MAURITIUS HONG KONG WESTERN SAMOA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC SOUTH
AFRICA PORTUGAL SRI LANKA
Jul 15, 1964

APPENDIX IV INDO-CEYLON AGREEMENT

APPENDIX IV
INDO-CEYLON AGREEMENT
PRIME MINISTER
No. 446/PMO/64.

India
New Delhi, Oct 30, 1964

Your Excellency,
I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your letter No. CIT/ICP/62
of date, which reads as follows:
"I have the honour to refer to the discussions which we have had from
the 24th to the 30th October 1964 regarding the status and future of persons
of Indian origin in Ceylon and to
tween us which are as follows:-

refer to the main heads of agreement be-

(1)

The declared objective of this agreement is that all persons of
Indian origin in Ceylon who have not been recognised either as,
citizens of Ceylon or as citizens of India should become citizens
either of Ceylon or of India.

(2)

The number of such persons is approximately 975,000 as of date.
This figure does not include illicit immigrants and Indian passport
holders.

(3)

300,000 of these persons together with the natural increase in that

number will be granted Ceylon citizenship by the Government of
Ceylon; the Government of India will accept repatriation to India
of 525,000 of these persons together with the natural increase in
that number. The Government of India will confer citizenship on
these persons.
(4)

The status and future of the remaining 150,000 of these persons
will be the subject matter of a separate agreement between the
two governments.

(5)

The Government of India will accept repatriation of the persons
to be repatriated within a period of 15 years from the date of
this agreement according to a programme as evenly phased as
possible.

(6)

The grant of Ceylon citizenship under paragraph 3 and the process of repatriation under paragraph 5 shall both be phased over
the period of 15 years and shall, as far as possible, keep pace with
each other in proportion to the relative numbers to be granted
citizenship and to be repatriated respectively.

(7)

The Government of Ceylon will grant to the persons to be repatriated to India during the period of their residence in Ceylon the
same facilities as are enjoyed by citizens of other states (except
facilities for remittances and normal facilities for their continued
residence, including free visas). The Government of Ceylon agrees
that such of these persons as are gainfully employed on the date of
this agreement shall continue in their employment until the date
of their repatriation in accordance with the requirements of the

193 M of EA--10

<pg136>

phased programme or until they attain the age of 55 years, whichever is earlier.
(8)

Subject to the Exchange Control Regulations for the time being:
in force which will not be discriminatory against the persons to be.
repatriated to India, the Government of Ceylon agrees to permit
these persons to repatriate, at the time of their final departure

for
-

India, all their assets including their Provident Fund and gratuity
amounts. The Government of Ceylon agrees that the maximum
amount of assets which any family shall be permitted to repatriateshall not be reduced to less than Rs. 4,000.
(9)

Two registers will be prepared as early as possible, one containing
the names of persons who will be granted Ceylon citizenship, the
other containing the names of persons to be repatriated to India.
The completion of these registers, however, is not a condition pre-

cedent to the commencement of the grant of Ceylon citizenship,
and the process of repatriation.
(10) This Agreement shall come into force with effect from the date
hereof and the two Governments shall proceed with all despatch to
implement this Agreement and, to that end, the officials of the
two Governments shall meet as soon as possible to establish joint
machinery and to formulate the appropriate procedures for the
implementation of this agreement.
I have the honour to propose that the above sets out correctly the Agreement reached between us. My letter and your reply thereto shall constitute
an Agreement between the Government of India and the Government of
Ceylon.
Accept, Your Excellency, the assurances of my highest consideration".
I have the honour to confirm that the above correctly sets out the Agreement reached between us. Your letter and my reply thereto shall constitute
an Agreement between the Government of India and the Government of
Ceylon.
Accept, Your Excellency, the assurances of my highest consideration.
Yours sincerely,
LAL BAHADUR,
Prime Minister of India

Her Excellency
Sirimavo R. D. Bandaranaike,
Prime Minister of Ceylon,
New Delhi.
INDIA
USA
Oct 30, 1964

APPENDIX V Distinguished Visitors From Abroad

APPENDIX V
Distinguished Visitors From Abroad.
Heads of States
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sl.
Full Name and Designation
Period of visit
No.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
H.E. General Ne Win, Chairman of the RevoFeb 08, 1964 to 9th
Febr
uary, 1964.
lutionary Council of Burma accompanied by
a party of 20 persons.
2
Their Majesties the King and Queen of Belgium
1
964.
accompanied by a party of 43 persons.

10th to 12th February,

3.
H.E. Field Marshal Abdul Salam Mohammad
April,
1964.
Arif, President of the Republic of Iraq accompanied by a party of 21 persons.

26th March to 1st

4

17th to 18th May, 1964.

Their Majesties the King and Queen of Nepal
accompanied by a party of 11 persons.

5.

H.E. Farik Ibrahim Abboud, President of the

17th to 24th May, 1964.

Supreme Council for the Armed Forces of the
Republic of Sudan accompanied by a party of
25 persons.
6

His Highness the
panied by H.H.

Maharaja of Sikkim accom-

27th to 31st May, 1964.

Maharani and 3 others.
Heads of Governments

1
H.E. Mr. Lee Kuan Yew, Prime Minister of Bhutan
1
964.
Singapore accompanied by a party of 26
persons.

25th to 26th February,

2
Shri Jigmie Dorji, Prime Minister of Bhutan
Mar
ch, 1964.
accompanied by a party of 10 persons.

25th February to 5th

3
19
64.

22nd to 30th October,

H.E. Mrs. Sirimavo R. D. Bandaranaike, Prime
Minister of Ceylon, accompanied by a party of
13 persons.

4
H.H. Shaikh Sabah Al Salem Al Sabhah, Crown
1
964.
Prince & Prime Minister of the State of Kuwait

17th to 28th November,

accompanied by a party of 11 persons.
Other Dignitaries
1
H.I.H. Princess Ashraf Pahlavi of Iran and 6
30th Dec. 1963 to loth
J
an. 1964.
others.
2
19
64.

Sir Olaf Caroe of Britain, Ex-Governor of

24th Jan. to 1st Feb.

3
19
64.

Senator A. R. Perera of Ceylon

10th to 16th January,

4
19
64.

Earl Mountbatten of Burma and 13 others

24th to 30th January,

5
19
64.

Nepalese Trade Delegation of 5 persons

27th Jan. to 4th Feb.

N.W.F.P.

6
Prince Reza of Iran and 2 others
17th to 30th January,
19
64.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg137>
<pg138>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------7
French Parliamentary Delegation of 5 persons
Febr
uary,

31st January to 3rd

8
Mr. Sargent Shriver, Director of the US Peace
1
964.
Corps and party.

23rd to 24th

9
19
64.

Dr.Carlos P.Romulo, President of the University

6th to 14th February,

10
1

Dr.K.Haseeb, Governor of the Central Bank of

1964.
January,

of Philippines and 3 others.
11th to 21st February,

964.

Iraq.

11
H.E. Mr. Bruno Leuscher, Deputy Prime Mini1
964.
ster of the German Democratic Republic and
30 others.

14th to 21st February,

12
Mrs. Magsaysay, wife of former President of
1
964.
Philippines accompanied by one person.

14th to 19th February,

13
French Economic and Cultural Delegation of 8
1
964.
persons.

16th to 18th February,

14
Sir Ralph Petting, former Lord Mayor of
1
964.
London accompanied by Lady Petting.

19th to 25th February,

15
H.E. Dr. Abdul Karim al-Ali, Minister of
Ma
rch,
Planning, Government of Iraq accompanied
by one person.

22nd February to 6th
1964.

16
196
4.

Mr. Phillips Talbot, Assistant Secretary of State,

17

Mr. Bigirwenkya, Permanent Secretary of the 18th to
Uganda Foreign Office accompanied by 1
person.

6th to 10th March,

U.S.A.
22nd March, 1964.

18
H. E. Mr. Minani Frodauld, Rwanda Informa1964
.
tion Minister.

27th to 30th March,

19
H. E. Mr. Venizehem Cotsapas, Ambassador of
1964
.
Cyprus in the U.S.A.

29th to 30th March,

20
Mr. H. A. Gudal, Director-General, Ministry
April,
1964.
of Education, Government of Somalia.

29th March to 7th

21
H. E. Mr. Barboza, Brazilian Ambassador in
April,
1964.
Vienna.

30th March to 1st

22

31st March to 4th

H. E. Mr. Tailb Slim, Tunisian Permanent

April,
1964.
Representative to U. N. accompanied
1 person.

by

23
H. E. Mr. Buwghana Atthakor, Deputy MinisApril,
1954
ter for National Development of Thailand
accompanied by one person.

29th March to 6th

24

1st to 6th April, 1964.

Sir Robert Black, retiring Governor of Hong
Kong accompanied by 1 person.

25
Mission of seven members of the French Senate
1964.

3rd to 12th April,

led by M. Vincent Totinant, Chairman of the
Committee for Foreign Affairs and Defence.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg139>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------26
H. E. Khan Habibullah Khan, Home Minister
1964.

6th to 13th April,

of Pakistan, Leader of Pakistan Delegation
for Indo-Pakistan Home Minister's Conference
and 14 others.
27
H. E. Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmed Al-Jaber, Fore1964
.
ign Minister of Kuwait and 3 others.

11th to 13th April,

28
H. E. Mr. A. A. Nekyon, Minister of Planning,
1964
.
Uganda and 2 others.

13th to 19th April,

29
Dr. Ralph Bunche, Under Secretary, United
1964
.
Nations and 3 others.

15th to 17th April,

30
H. E. Mr. Ahmed Benabud, Member of
1964
.
Moroccan Delegation to Djakarta and
former Ambassador in Delhi accompanied

17th to 19th April,

by one person.
31
H. E. Mr. Simon Nko-O Eloungon,
1964
.
Ambaassador of Cameroon to Tunisia.

19th to 22nd April,

32

16th to 18th May, 1964.

H. E. Mr. Ahmed Zaki Yamani, Minister for
Petroleum and Mineral Wealth, Government
of Saudi Arabia accompanied by Mrs.
Yamani.

33

His Holiness Mar Ignatius Yakoob

III,

16th to 19th May, 1964.

Patriarch of Antioch and All the East, and
5 others.
34
H. E. Mr. Phan Huy Quat, Foreign Minister
1964.

10th to 12th June,

of the Republic of Vietnam and 2 other
35
H. E. Sir Solomon Hochy, Governor General
1964.

14th to 23rd June,

of Trinidad and Tobago accompanied by
one person.
36
Mr.
1964.

Heramba

Prasad

Upadhyay, Chief

15th to 26th June,

Engineer, Leader of the Nepalese Team, IndoNepal Telecom Conference & 3 others.
37

H. E. Mr. A. I. Mikoyan, First Deputy Chair-

20th to 21st June 1964.

man of the Council of Ministers of the U.S.S.R.
and 34 others.
38
Australian Parliamentary Delegation of 9 per1
964.
sons.

27th June to 4th July,

39

9th to 14th July, 1964.

Mr. Pavicavic Miso, Assistant State Secretary
for Foreign Affairs, Yugoslavia.

40
Governors of the Governments of the U.A.R.
1964.

15th to 17th July,

(5 Governors and 2 others).
41
Nepalese Delegation for Bilateral Air Services
August,
1964.
agreement between India and Nepal and 3
others.

25th July to 4th

42
Mr. Henri Cochaux, President of the InternaAugust,
1964.
tional Law Association accompanied by wife.

31st July to 3rd

43
H.E. Dr. J.M.A. Luns, Foreign Minister of
1964.

3rd to 5th August,

the Netherlands accompanied by wife &
Secretary.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg140>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------44
Mr. E. G. Whitlam, Deputy Leader of the
1964.

4th to 6th August,

Opposition, Australia.
45
Acting Prime Minister of Bhutan, Mr. Lhendup
1964.

6th to 9th August,

Dorji and 2 others.
46
196
4.

Sir Arthur Tange, Secretary of Deptt. of

20th to 24th August,

External Affairs of Australia accompanied by
wife.

47
Nepalese Delegation Of 4 persons led by H. E.
Septe
mber,
Mr. Y. N. Khanal, Ambassador of Nepal
in India for Postal Agreement Negotiations.

28th August to 7th

48
A Group of nine French Senators led by the
1
964.
Secretary-General of the UNR-UDT Party,
Mr. Jacques Baumel.

7th to 11th September,

49
H. E. Mr. Paul Bomani, Finance Minister of the
1964.
United Republic of Tanganyika and Zanzibar
and 4 others.

15th to 22nd September,

50
Mr. R. K. A. Gardiner, Executive Secretary of
1964.
the Economic Commission for Africa and
4 others.

15th to 29th September,

1964.

51
H. E. Dr. Abdel Moneim Kaissouni, Deputy
1964.
Prime Minister and Minister for Treasury and
Planning, Government of U.A.R. accompanied
by wife and 4 others.
52
H. E. Dr. Abdullah Yaftali, Minister of Planning,
September,
1964.
Royal Government of Afghanistan and 3 others.

17th to 20th September,

17th to 24th

53
H.E.Dr. Ali Attiga, Permanent Under Secre1964.
tary, Ministry of Planning and Development,
Govt. of Libya, accompanied by wife.

17th to 27th September,

54
Her Excellency Dr. Margarete Wittkowski,
1964.
Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers
of the German Democratic Republic and 2
others.

19th to 23rd September,

55
H. E. Dr. Agustin Yanez, Deputy Minister in
1964.
the Ministry of Presidency, Government of
Mexico accompanied by wife and one other.

20th to 21st September,

56
196
4.

9th to 20th October,

Mr. J. A. Omange, Permanent Secretary in the
Ministry of Health and Housing, Kenya.

57
The Hon'ble Yvon Dupuis, Minister without
Novm
ber,
Portfolio, Canada, accompanied by wife and
four others.

30th October to 4th

58
Mr. Gordon M. Bryant, Member of the AustraNo
vemlian Federal Parliament, accompanied by wife.

11th November to 27th

59
H. E. Mr. S. G. Lapin, Vice Foreign Minister
1
964.
of U.S.S.R. accompanied by one person.

1964.

ber, 1964.
17th to 19th November,

60
Mr. Mohd. Tawfik Ramzi, Secretary General
18th to 20th November,
1
964.
to the Central Machinery for Organisation and
Administration of the U.A.R.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg141>

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------61
H. E. Mr. Zvonko Brikic, Vice President of the
1
964.
Federal Assembly of the Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia accompanied by 1.

20th to 26th November,

62
Mr. Mursi Saadeldine, Deputy Secretary Gene1
964.
ral of the Afro-Asian Solidarity Organisation
of the U.A.R.

20th to 23rd November,

63
Mr. O. P. Ankrah, Assistant Man-Power Officer,
1
964.
Ghana Young Pioneer, Ghana.

21st to 26th November,

64
Dec
em-

Mr. Nwamba, Treasurer of the UNI Party of

24th November to 4th

Zambia.

ber, 1964.

65
Mr. Emmamul Kounzika, Vice Prime Minister of
1
964.
Angolan Govt. in Exile.

24th to 3oth November,

66
H. S. H. Princess Poon Pismai Diskul, Presi1964.
dent of the World Fellowship of Budhists
accompanied by 6.

26th and 27th November,

67
H. E. Mr. Oun Hueun Norasingh, Minister
1
964.
for Culture of Laos accomanied by I.

26th to 28th November,

68
H. E. Dr. G. P. Malalasekera, High Commis1
964.
sioner for Ceylon in U.K.

27th to 28th November,

69
196
4.

Cyprus Goodwill Delegation headed by Mr. M.

4th to 8th December,

70
19
64.

Cambodian Delegation to the US-Cambodia

Sparsis accompanied by 2.

Talks headed by H. E. Mr. Sonn Sann, accompanied by 3.

4th to 19th December,

71

U.S.Delegation to the US-Cambodia talks headed
by H. E. Ambassador Phillip Bonsal accompanied by 3.

72
Mr. Mvinda, Parliamentary
1
964.
Zambia (Northern Rhodesia)

Secretary,

-do-

12th to 17th December,

73
Dr. Tong Won Lee, Foreign Minister of Re20th to 22nd December,
1
964.
public of Korea, accompanied by 3.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------BURMA
BELGIUM IRAQ NEPAL SUDAN BHUTAN REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE KUWAIT IRAN
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC USA PHILIPPINES UNITED KINGDOM UGANDA RWANDA
CYPRUS MALI SOMALIA BRAZIL AUSTRIA TUNISIA GHANA THAILAND PAKISTAN
INDONESIA CAMEROON SAUDI ARABIA VIETNAM TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO AUSTRALIA
YUGOSLAVIA INDIA THE NETHERLANDS OMAN AFGHANISTAN LIBYA MEXICO KENYA
CANADA ZAMBIA ANGOLA LAOS CAMBODIA KOREA
Feb 08, 1964

APPENDIX VI Visits of Indian Dignitaries to foreign countries

APPENDIX VI
Visits of Indian Dignitaries to foreign eountries and of other
delegations-Othe
r than those,
mentioned in the Report.
1.

Shri Manubhai Shah, Minister of Commerce visited Moscow in April, 1964.

2.
Professor Humayun Kabir, Minister of Petroleum and Chemicals visited
Sovie
t Union
in May, 1964.
3.

The Defence Minister, Shri Y. B. Chavan visited U.S.A. in May, 1964.

4.
An Indian Trade Delegation visited Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Peru,
Chile
, Venezuela
and Columbia in June-July, 1964.
5.

Shri M. C. Chagla, Minister of Education paid a goodwill visit to the

Sovi
et Union
during July, 1964.
6.
Shri M. C. Chagla, Minister of Education paid a goodwill visit to
Bulgaria
in July,
1964.
7.
Shri D. Sanjeeviah, Minister of Labour paid a visit to Belgrade in July,
1
964.
8.
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Minister of External Affairs, paid a goodwill
vi
sit to the
Soviet Union on an invitation from the Soviet Government in August, 1964.
9.
Professor Humayun Kabir, Minister of Petroleum and Chemicals visited
Ruman
ia
in August, 1964.
10. Professor Humayun Kabir, Minister of Petroleum and Chemicals paid a visit
to Italy
as a guest of the E.N.I. from Aug 04, 1964 to 9th August, 1964.
11. The Education Minister, Shri M. C. Chagla, attended the Commonwealth
Educa
tion
Ministers' Conference at Ottawa in August, 1964.
12. The
1964.

Foreign Minister, Sardar Swaran Singh, visited Afghanistanin August,

13. Shri Y. B. Chavan , Minister of Defence, accompanied by defence experts
an
d senior
officials visited Soviet Union in August-Sept., 1964.
14. Shrimati Indira Gandhi, Minister for Information and Broadcasting visited
Belgrade
in October, 1964.
15. A Trade Delegation headed by Shri S. V. Ramaswami, Deputy Minister of
Comm
erce
visited Czechoslovakia in October, 1964.
16. An Indian Parliamentary Delegation led by the Speaker of the Lok Sabha
vis
ited the
Federal Republic of Germany from the 11th to 22nd October, 1964.
17. The Secretary General, Ministry of External Affairs visited Gangtok form
t
he 16th
to 19th October, 1964 on the invitation of the Maharaja of Sikkim.
18. Shrimati Indira Gandhi paid a visit to Moscow in October, 1964.

19.
pai
d a

An Indian Parliamentary delegation led by the Speaker of the Lok Sabha

goodwill visit to Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hurgary and Pelard in
OctoberNovember, 1964.
20. Prime Minister, Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri visited Cairo to attend the
Confe
rence of
Non-Aligned Nations in October, 1964.
<pg142>
<pg143>
21. The Vice-President, Dr. Zakir Hussain, paid a goodwill visit to the three
maghreb
countries-Algeria, Tunisia and Morocco.
22. An Indian Folk Dance Group called the Revival Group held successful
showsa
t the
Izmir International Trade Fair.
23. In September, 1964 an Indian Youth Delegation of various Youth
Delegations
of India
went to Moscow to participate in the World youth Conference.
24. Five members of the Indian table tennis team visited south Korea to
compet
e in the
7th Asian Table Tennis Championship held in seoul from 25th September to
1
0th
October, 1964.
INDIA
RUSSIA USA ARGENTINA BOLIVIA BRAZIL CHILE PERU VENEZUELA BULGARIA
YUGOSLAVIA ITALY CANADA AFGHANISTAN NORWAY SLOVAKIA GERMANY EGYPT
ALGERIA MOROCCO TUNISIA KOREA
Aug 04, 1964

APPENDIX VII Soviet-Indian Joint Communique

APPENDIX VII
Soviet-Indian Joint Communique

At the conclusion of the visit of the President of India to the Soviet
Uni
on,
a joint communique was issued in Moscow.
The full text of the joint communique follows:
At the invitation of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet, the
President of the Republic of India, Dr. Sarvapalli Radhakrishnan, visited the
Soviet Union from Sep 11, 1964 to 19 September 1964.
The President of India was accompanied by the Minister of State in the
Ministry of External Affairs, Mrs. Lakshmi N. Menon, the Secretary to the
President, Mr. S. Dutt, and the Director of the Historical Division in the
Ministry of External Affairs, Dr. S. Gopal.
During their stay in the Soviet Union, the President of India and his
party visited, apart from Moscow, the capital of the USSR, the cities of
Leningrad, Eyrie and Yalta, and saw a number of scientific and cultural
establishments. They studied various aspects of the life of the great Soviet
people and their work and achievements in the fields of economy, science,
culture. health and the arts.
and

In Moscow and other cities of the Soviet Union, the President of India

his party met and talked with workers, scientists and other intellectuals.
Everywhere they went, they received a most cordial welcome and hospitality
and expressions of the sincere friendship and warmth of the Soviet people
towards the great Indian people.
The President of India attended a mass rally of Soviet-Indian friendship
in the Kremlin. The rally, which was addressed by the Chairman of the
Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet, Mr. A. I. Mikoyan, and the President
of India, Dr. Radhakrishnan was a striking demonstration of Soviet-Indian
friendship.
During his stay in the Soviet Union, the President of India had full and
friendly talks with the Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers, Mr. N. S.
Khrushchev. There were also talks with the Chairman of the Presidium of
the USSR Supreme Soviet, Mr. A. I. Mikoyan.
During the talks which took place in an atmosphere of mutual friendship
and cordiality, there was an exchange of views on various important international issues and on matters pertaining to further development of SovietIndian relations and mutually advantageous cooperation.
The two sides affirmed with satisfaction that, in spite of local
conflicts
in
various parts of the world, there had been a general relaxation of tension in
International relations, because of the influence of the forces of peace and
democracy. They welcomed, in this context, the Moscow treaty banning the
testing of nuclear weapons in the atmosphere, in outer space and under water,

the achievement of agreement between the Governments of the USSR and the
United States not to place in orbit objects carrying nuclear weapons and the
agreed decision to reduce the production of fissionable materials for military
purposes.
<pg145>
The two sides felt that the implementation of these measures would
facilitate the further improvement of relations between states on the basis
of the principles of peaceful co-existence. They agreed that there exists
now a real possibility for the solution of international disputes by peaceful
means through negotiations.
The talks affirmed that the Soviet Union and India held a similar
position
on many basic problems facing the world. The development of Soviet-Indian
relations on the basis of the principles of equality and mutual benefit and
respect for territorial integrity and sovereignty is, a striking example of
th
e
successful implementation of the policy of peaceful co-existence of States
with different political and social systems.
Aware of the pressing need for an active effort for the radical
improvemen
t
of the international situation and the consolidation of peace, the two sides
expressed their firm resolve to spare no effort in the quest for ways to
achieve a prompt solution of international issues, eliminate the peril of
thermonuclear war and guarantee a stable peace.
In this connection the President of India expressed the high appreciation
by the Government and people of India of the assiduous efforts of the Soviet
Government and its head, Mr. N. S. Khrushchev, in the struggle for the
maintenance and consolidation of peace, and in particular of the outstanding
role of the Soviet Union in the conclusion of the Moscow treaty partially
banning the testing of nuclear weapons.
The two sides reaffirmed their conviction that territorial disputes
betwee
n
states should be solved by peaceful methods. The Indian side welcomed the
proposal of Mr, N. S. Khrushchev of 31st December 1963 for the conclusion
of an international agreement that states should refrain from the use of force
in the solution of their territorial and border disputes, and should pay due
regard to historically formed boundaries.
The two sides reaffirmed their unshakable conviction that the policy of
peaceful co-existence of states with different political and social systems is
today the sole alternative to a devastating thermonuclear war. Both sides
welcomed the growing recognition in the world of the Policy of non-alignment
with military blocs, pursued by most of the developing nations in Asia and
Africa. They also welcomed the conference of non-aligned countries which
is to be held shortly in the expectation that it would help in promoting

peaceful and friendly cooperation among nations and in facilitating the settlement
of international problems.
The two sides gave their support to the forthcoming Afro-Asian conference
and hoped that it would lead to strengthening the unity and solidarity of the
African and Asian countries in the struggle for Peace and for the liquidation
of colonialism.
The two sides expressed concern over the fact that such fundamental
questions as the problem of general and complete disarmament. a peaceful
settlement of the German problem and the problem of the final elimination
of the remnants of the colonial system, still remain unresolved. The solution
of these problems requires the persistent efforts of all Peace-loving states
an
d
peoples.
An identity of views was re-affirmed by the two sides on the need to
implement general and complete disarmament under strict and effective
international control. The two sides declared, in particular, that as members
<pg146>
of the 18-Nations Committee for Disarmament, the Governments of India and
the Soviet Union will spare no effort to promote in the discussions at Geneva
the elaboration of concrete measures which would enable a start to be made
on the implementation of disarmament and the release of funds for peaceful
construction, including economic aid to the developing nations.
The two sides attach importance to partial agreements which would
facilitate and draw nearer the achievement of the paramount goal of general
and complete disarmament. These would be, in the first instance, such
measures as the withdrawal. or at least a considerable reduction of foreign
troops on territories of other countries, the dismantling of foreign military
bases, the promotion of de-nuclearised zones in various parts of the world and
the achievement of agreements banning underground nuclear tests and on
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons.
Sincerely striving towards a peaceful settlement of all acute
internationa
l
issues and towards the betterment on that basis of relations between states,,
the Soviet Union and India believe that in the interests of a stable peace
there is a particular need for growing efforts aimed at eliminating the
vestige
s
of the Second World War by the attainment of a peaceful settlement of the
German problem.

The Soviet side believed that the signing of a German peace treaty and
the transformation on that basis of West Berlin into a de-militarized free
city
could, under present conditions, be a turning point in the improvement of the
entire international situation. The Indian side reiterated the statement of
the late Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru in the joint communique issued at
Moscow on 11 September 1961 that while at present the fact of the existence
of two German states could not be ignored and any attempt to change the
frontiers would have dangerous consequences, there was an imperative need
for finding a peaceful solution of the German problem by negotiation among
all parties concerned.
play

The two sides agreed that the United Nations has an important role to

in promoting international cooperation. They reaffirmed the determination
of their two countries to continue their efforts for the further strengthening
of the United Nations with the fuller participation in all its organs of all
the countries, particularly of Asia and Africa.
The two sides reaffirmed their loyalty to the decisions of the United
Nations and other international organisations which envisage the need to
eliminate the vestiges of colonialism and imperialism and to grant independence to all countries and peoples under foreign domination with a View to
achieving their liberation from all forms of colonialism and imperialism.
They expressed their full support for the just struggles for freedom in all
parts of the world, particularly in Asia and Africa, and they demand freedom
and independence without delay for the peoples of all countries under foreign
domination.
The two sides condemned the policy of racial discrimination which is
being pursued by the Government of the Republic of South Africa and
regard the policy of apartheid as a crime against humanity. This policy is in
complete contradiction of the United Nations Charter and the Declaration of
Human Rights. The two sides call upon states that have not yet implemented
the United Nations decision with regard to the Republic of South Africa, to
cease their cooperation with the Government of South Africa in order to
compel it to grant legitimate rights to the whole population of that country.
<pg147>
The two sides gave particular consideration to recent developments in
South-East Asia. They expressed concern at the aggravation of the situation
in this area and hoped that the problems of South-East Asia would be resolved
peacefully in the interests of the

peoples of these areas.

The two sides agreed that there should be no interference by foreign
powers in the internal affairs of the Congo.
The Soviet side declared its full support of the struggle of the Cuban
people for strengthening the independence and sovereignty of their
motherland.

The Soviet side expressed its high appreciation of the desire of the
India
n
people for peace and of their policy of peaceful co-existence and nonalignment
to which the outstanding statesman of our times, the late Prime Minister
of India, Jawaharlal Nehru, dedicated so much effort and energy. The Soviet
side noted with gratification that India was the first country, after the
three
initial signatories, to sign the Moscow treaty partially banning the testing
of
nuclear weapons. The Soviet side welcomed the fact that the new Government of India continue to pursue the policy of Jawaharlal Nehru, which is the
policy of non-alignment and friendship with the Soviet Union and other
peace-loving countries.
Both sides were happy to note the steady development of friendly relations and the many ties between India and the Soviet Union in economic,
cultural, scientific and technical matters, which have greatly benefited the
peoples of the two countries and the cause of the consolidation of peace.
The development of economic and technical cooperation between India
and the Soviet Union, which will complete a decade in 1965, is a matter of
particular satisfaction to both sides.
The President of India emphasised the great significance of the comprehensive cooperation of the Soviet Union in the development of the national
economy and the building of new India. The Soviet side declared its intention
to continue and develop Soviet-Indian cooperation and confirmed its readiness
to assist in the construction of the Bokaro metallurgical plant.
The two sides reaffirmed that meetings and personal contacts between
statesmen and public figures are of great importance for the development of
friendly relations between India and the Soviet Union. The present visit of
the President of India had proved very important in this connection. The
Soviet side stated that it looked forward greatly to the visit of the Prime
Minister of India, Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri.
The President of India expressed his high appreciation of the friendly
reception accorded to him and his party in the Soviet Union and stated that
he, the Government and the people of India, would welcome a visit to their
country by the Chairman of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet,
Mr. A. I. Mikoyan, and the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR,
Mr. N. S. Khrushchev. Mr. Mikoyan and Mr. Khrushchev accepted the
invitation and promised to visit India at a convenient date.
INDIA
USA RUSSIA
CONGO CUBA

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

Sep 11, 1964

SWITZERLAND

GERMANY

SOUTH AFRICA

APPENDIX VIII Technical Cooperation

Jan 01, 1964
APPENDIX VIII
Technical Cooperation
Training Facilities Provided
I. Training facilities have been provided to a number of students from
the Afro-Asian countries. The number of trainees received from the various
countries since January, 1964 on a bilateral basis, excluding those received
under the Colombo Plan, the SCAAP, the UNTAB etc., by the Ministry of
Finance, is given below:(i)

Two Iranian municipal employees are being trained at the AllIndia Institute of Local Self Government, Bombay.

(ii) 50 students from Yemen arrived in India in April/May, 1964 for
training in various trades. All the expenditure on their training,
including international travel, was met by this Ministry.
(iii) The X. P. Division, in consultation with the A.I.R., is making
arrangements to train 12 candidates during the winter.
II. Assistance is being provided to students from the Afro-Asian countries in securing admission to Indian training institutions and technical
colleges at their own expense.
Foreign Delegations
III. A number of delegations from the African countries visited India
with a view to acquiring first-hand knowledge of the developments in
India, have discussions with Indian experts and share their experiences.
Special mention may be made of the following delegations:(i)

A team led by Mr. R. K. A. Gardiner, the Executive Secretary of
the Economic Commission for Africa, visited India during September, 1964. The delegation had detailed discussions with various
authorities in India regarding the assistance which can be
rendered to the African countries. At the end of the visit, a
joint report was prepared giving details of the assistance which
could be provided by India.

(ii) Mr. F. D. Cardoso, the Accountant General of Nigeria, accompanied by Mr. F. A. Chinweze, his Principal Accountant has been in
India for discussions with his Indian counterparts and to study
the system of accounting in India.
(iii) Mr. Abraham Farmanfarmayan, Director-General of Community
Development to the Government of Iran has been in India to

study developments in the field of community development.
(iv) A 5-man Northern Nigerian delegation visited India during
November, 1964 to study the organisation for our water resources
development and to make recommendations to the Nigerian
Government for the Organisation of their newly established Ministry of Water Resources and Community Development.
(v)

Mr. T. E. Debekeme, an Industrial Officer of the Government of
Nigeria has been in India with a view to study the organisation
of small and medium scale industrial estates in India.
<pg149>

IV. Deputation of Experts (At our expense)
(i)

Kenya.-Shri P. N. Nayer, Director of Weights and Measures, was
sent on deputation in October for a period of six months to
Nairobi to advise the East African Common Services Organisation on the adoption of the metric system.

(ii) Shri S. S. Khera, Chairman, Administrative and Business Management Council, visited Kenya and Uganda during November/
December, 1964 to study the possibilities of technical and economic cooperation with those countries.
(iii) Uganda.-Dr. V. K. R. V. Rao, Member of the Planning Commission, visited Uganda during November, 1964 to advise the Government of that country regarding its development plan.
V. Deputation of Experts at the expense of the receiving countries
(i)

Nigeria.-(a) The services of Dr. B. S. Rao were made available
to the Government of Eastern Nigeria as Economic Adviser.

(b)

Offers of appointment were made to seven doctors and six marine
engineers.

(c)

A delegation of Nigerian officials visited India in August to interview candidates who had applied for assignments in Nigeria.
They were given every possible assistance.

(ii) Tanzania.--A delegation consisting of Mr. C. Othman, Principal
Establishment Secretary and another officer visited India (Delhi,
Bombay and Calcutta) in February, 1964 to interview candidates
who had applied for assignments in that country. As a result of
these interviews, offers of appointment were made to 10 Executive Engineers, one architect, ten medical officers, two veterinary
edu
-

officers, one research officer, four statistical officers and ten
cation officers.
Assistance was also provided to the High Commission of Tanzania
for interviewing the candidates in Delhi by making available the
services of experts.
(iii) Ghana.-The High Commission of Ghana was assisted in arranging interviews of candidates seeking assignments in Ghana by

providing experts.
(iv) Libya.-The Government of Libya was assisted in recruiting professors and experts from India.
(v)

Kuwait.-50 cable jointers were recruited with the assistance of
this Ministry and the Posts and Telegraphs Department for
service with the Kuwait Government.

VI. Supply of Equipment
(i)

Yemen.-Medicines, drugs and hospital equipment valued at
approximately Rs. 2 lakhs were presented to the Government of
Yemen during the year. We have also presented three diesel
water pumps to the Government of Yemen. 47 more water
pumps will be presented during the current financial year.

(ii) Uganda.-Twenty handlooms, at an estimated cost of Rs. 20,000
will be presented to Uganda.
<pg150>
VII.

Participation in Conferences

At the invitation of the Economic Commission for Africa, we sent observers to the annual session of the commission, to the meetings of its committees on various subjects, to conferences on special subjects like power
development, civil aviation, development of industry and natural resources,
planning, etc., and to the meeting of the Board of Governors of the African
Development Bank.
USA
SRI LANKA IRAN INDIA
KENYA UGANDA TANZANIA

YEMEN
GHANA

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
LIBYA KUWAIT

NIGER

NIGERIA

Jan 01, 1964

APPENDIX IX

Jan 01, 1964
APPENDIX IX
Economic Collaboration
Credits
The Government of India have given credits to some of the Afro-Asian
countries in order to assist them in setting up industrial units or to purchase Indian engineering goods. It has been decided to grant loans to
Sudan (Rs. 50 million), Ceylon (Rs. 50 million) and Nepal (Rs. 10 million). Details such as the terms and conditions of the loans are under
negotiation. A number of other proposals regarding the grant of credits are

also under consideration.
Joint Ventures
The Government of India have considered a number of proposals from
private industrialists in India for participation in industrial ventures in
the
Afro-Asian countries.

It is envisaged that the Indian collaborator will par-

ticipate in the capital structure of the industrial unit, supply capital goods
and technical know-how and train their technical personnel in Indian factories. The proposals for joint ventures, which have been approved, include: (1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

Factories for the manufacture of engineering goods and textiles
and expansion of an oil mill in Nigeria,
Enamel manufacture in Zambia,
Manufacture of textiles in Kenya,
Setting up of a textile mill in Ethiopia,
Manufacture of nonferrous semis and bicycles and the setting-up
of a trailer industry in Iran,
Manufacture of bicycles in Ceylon and
Manufacture of cotton and woollen textiles in Nepal.

A number of other proposals for industrial collaboration are under consideration.
With a view to exploring the prospects for industrial and economic collaboration, several Indian delegations visited a number of African countries. Special mention may be made of the following:
(1)

A goodwill delegation of Indian industrialists, sponsored by the
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry, visited Ethiopia, Sudan, Nigeria, Ghana, Kenya, Uganda, Tanganyika, Malawi and Zambia during September-October, 1964, with
the support of the Government of India.

(2)

A delegation led by the Commerce Secretary visited Uganda in
September, 1964 for detailed negotiations regarding the development of the sugar industry with Indian participation.

(3)

A team visited Liberia and Sierra Leone during September, 1964,
to study the possibilities of setting up sugar industries.

193 M of EA--11

<pg151>
<pg152>

The India-Africa Development Association was established during the
year, under the aegis of the Ministry of Commerce. The Association provides a forum for Indian industrialists to come together and to pool resources in order to undertake joint ventures in Africa. The Association also
arranges to disseminate information regarding investment laws and development programmes in African countries with a view to facilitating the participation of Indian industrialists in industrial development in Africa.

INDIA
USA NEPAL SUDAN RUSSIA NIGER NIGERIA ZAMBIA
GHANA UGANDA MALAWI LIBERIA SIERRA LEONE

KENYA

ETHIOPIA

IRAN

Jan 01, 1964

APPENDIX X Foreign Diplomatic Missions in India

Jan 01, 1964
APPENDIX X
Embassies
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.

Foreign Diplomatic Missions in India

Afghanistan
Argentina
Austria
Belgium
Bolivia
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burma
Cambodia
Chile
China
Columbia
Cuba
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Germany (Federal Republic of)
Greece
Hungary
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Italy
Japan

28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.

Jordan
Kuwait
Laos
Lebanon
Mexico
Mongolia
Morocco
Nepal
Netherlands
Norway
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Rumania
Saudi Arabia
Spain
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Thailand
Turkey
U.S.S.R.
U.A.R.
U.S.A.
Venezuela
Yugoslavia

High Commissions

Legations

1. Australia
Baghdad)

1. Albania (Stationed at

2. Britain
Internunciature(Holy
See)
3. Canada
4. Ceylon

2. Apostolic
3. Uruguay.

5. Ghana
6. Malaysia
7. New Zealand
8. Nigeria
9. Pakistan
10. Tanzania
11. Uganda
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg154>

<pg153>

Sub-Offices of High Commission
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Office
Office
Office
Office
Office
Office
Office

of
of
of
of
of
of
of

the
the
the
the
the
the
the

Assistant High Commission for Ceylon at Madras.
Assistant High Commission for Malaysia at Madras.
Deputy High Commission for Pakistan at Calcutta.
Assistant High Commission for Pakistan at Shillong.
Deputy High Commission for Britain at Bombay.
Deputy High Commission for Britain at Calcutta.
Deputy High Commission for Britain at Madras.

INDIA
AFGHANISTAN JORDAN ARGENTINA KUWAIT AUSTRIA LAOS USA BELGIUM LEBANON
BOLIVIA MEXICO BRAZIL MONGOLIA BULGARIA MOROCCO BURMA NEPAL CAMBODIA
CHILE NORWAY CHINA PERU PHILIPPINES CUBA POLAND SLOVAKIA DENMARK
SAUDI ARABIA ETHIOPIA SPAIN FINLAND SUDAN FRANCE SWEDEN GERMANY
SWITZERLAND GREECE SYRIA HUNGARY THAILAND INDONESIA TURKEY IRAN IRAQ
IRELAND ITALY VENEZUELA JAPAN YUGOSLAVIA ALBANIA AUSTRALIA CANADA
URUGUAY GHANA MALAYSIA NEW ZEALAND NIGER NIGERIA PAKISTAN TANZANIA
UGANDA
Jan 01, 1964

APPENDIX XI Foreign Consular Offices in India

APPENDIX XI
Foreign Consular Offices in India
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------Sl.
Country
Location
Status
No.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

Afghanistan
Austria
Austria
Austria
Belgium
Belgium
Belgium
Bolivia
Bolivia

Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Madras
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta

Consulate General
Hon. Consulate.
Hon. Consulate.
Hon. Consulate.
Consulate General.
Hon. Consulate.
Consulate General.
Hon. Consulate.
Hon. Consulate General.

10
11
12
13

Brazil
Burma
Burma
Costa Rica

Calcutta
Calcutta
Madras
Madras

Consulate.
Consulate General.
Vice Consulate.
Hon. Consulate General.

14

Costa Rica

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General.

15
16
17

Czechoslovakia
Czechoslovakia
Denmark

Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay

Consulate General.
Consulate General.
Hon. Consulate General.

18
19
20
21

Denmark
Denmark
Denmark
Dominican Republic

Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Bombay

Hon.
Hon.
Hon.
Hon.

Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate General.

22 Dominican Republic
23 Ecuador
24 El. Salvador
25 Ethiopia
26 Ethiopia
General.

Calcutta
Calcutta
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta

Hon.
Hon.
Hon.
Hon.
Hon.

Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate

27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38

Finland
Finland
Finland
France
France
France
France
France
Germany
Germany
Germany
Greece

Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Pondicherry
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay

Hon. Consulate.
Hon. Consulate.
Hon. Consulate.
Consulate General.
Consulate General.
Hon. Consular Agency.
Consulate.
Consulate General.
Consulate General.
Consulate General.
Consulate General.
Hon. Consulate General.

39

Greece

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg155>
<pg156>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------Serial
Country
Location
Status

No.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------40
41
42
43
cl
osed

Haiti
Haiti
Indonesia
Indonesia

Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta

Hon. Consulate.
Hon. Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate-(Since
from Dec 31,

1964).
44

Iran

Bombay

Consulate General.

45

Iraq

Bombay

Consulate General.

46
47

Israel
Italy

Bombay
Bombay

Consulate.
Consulate General.

48
Italy
49
Italy
Agenc
y.
50
Japan

Calcutta
Cochin

Consulate.
Hon. Consular

Bombay

Consulate General.

51

Calcutta

Consulate General.

52
Japan
Gene
ral.
53
Kuwait

Madras

Hon. Consulate

Bombay

Consulate General.

54
Liberia
Gene
ral.
55
Luxembourg

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

Bombay

Hon. Vice Consul.

56
Monaco
Gene
ral.
57
Nepal

New Delhi

Hon. Consulate

Calcutta

Consulate General.

58

Bombay

Consulate General.

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta

Hon. Consulate.
Hon. Consulate.
Hon. Consulate.
Consulate.
Hon. Consulate

Cochin

Hon. Vice

Madras

Hon. Consulate.

Japan

Netherlands

59
Netherlands
Gene
ral.
60
Netherlands
61
Nicaragua
62
Nicaragua
63
Norway
64
Norway
Gene
ral.
65
Norway
Consulate
.
66
Norway

67

Panama

Bombay

Consulate General.

68
Panama
(Vac
ant).
69
Panama
70
Peru

Madras

Hon. Consulate

Calcutta
Calcutta

Consulate.
Consulate General.

71
Philippines
Gene
ral.
72
Philippines
Gene
ral.
73
Poland
74
Poland
75
Spain
General.

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay

Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate

76
Spain
Consulate
.
77
Spain
Consulate
.
78
Sudan
General.

Calcutta

Hon. Vice

Madras

Hon. Vice

Bombay

Consulate

Sweden

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

Sweden
Sweden
Switzerland

Calcutta
Madras
Bombay

Hon. Consulate.
Hon. Consulate.
Consulate General.

79
Gene
ral.
80
81
82

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg157>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------Serial
Country
Location
Status
No.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------83
84

Switzerland
Switzerland

Calcutta
Cochin

Hon. Consulate.
Hon. Consular Agency.

85 Syria
86 Thailand
General.

Bombay
Bombay

Consulate General.
Hon. Consulate

87 Thailand
88 Turkey
General.

Calcutta
Bombay

Consulate General.
Hon. Consulate

89 Turkey
General.

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

90 Turkey
General.

Madras

Hon. Consulate

91 U.S.S.R.
Bombay
Consulate General.
92 U.S.S.R.
Calcutta
Consulate General.
93 U.S.S.R.
Madras
Consulate General.
94 U.A.R.
Bombay
Consulate General.
95 U.A.R.
Calcutta
Consulate General.
96 U.S.A.
Bombay
Consulate General.
97 U.S.A.
Calcutta
Consulate General.
98 U.S.A
Madras
Consulate General.
99 Yugoslavia
Bombay
Consulate General
100 Yugoslavia
Calcutta
Consulate General.
101 Korea (D.P.R.)
New Delhi
Consulate General.
102 Korea (Republic of)
New Delhi
Consulate General.
103 Viet-Nam (D.P.R.)
New Delhi
Consulate General.
104 Viet-Nam (Republic of)
New Delhi
Consulate General.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------INDIA
USA AFGHANISTAN AUSTRIA BELGIUM BOLIVIA BRAZIL BURMA COSTA!!NORWAY
SLOVAKIA DENMARK DOMINICA ECUADOR ETHIOPIA FINLAND FRANCE GERMANY
GREECE HAITI INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ ISRAEL ITALY JAPAN KUWAIT LIBERIA
MONACO NEPAL CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC NICARAGUA PANAMA PERU PHILIPPINES
POLAND SPAIN SUDAN SWEDEN SWITZERLAND SYRIA THAILAND TURKEY YUGOSLAVIA
KOREA
Dec 31, 1964

APPENDIX XII Indian Missions and Posts abroad

APPENDIX XII
Indian Missions and Posts abroad as on Dec 31, 1964
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------Country
Location
Remarks
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------I. EMBASSIES (a) Resident

1. Afghanistan

Kabul.

2. Algeria

Algeriers.

3. Argentina
concurre
ntly ac-

Buenos Aires

credited to

Paragu
ay as

Ambassador and

Urug
uay as,
4. Austria

Vienna.

5. Belgium
concurr
ently ac-

Brussels

Rio-de-janeiro

Ambassador
accredited to
Bolivia as

Ambassad
or.
7. Burma

Rangoon.

8. Cambodia

Phnom Penh.

9. Chile
concurre
ntly,

Santiago

Ambassador
accredited

Col
umbia

to

and Peru as

Ambassa
dor.
10. China

Peking.

11.

Leopoldville.

12. Cuba
First
Secy./

Ambassador

Ambassador.

Venez
uela and

Congo

Minister.

credited to

Luxembo
urg as
6. Brazil
concurr
ently,

Ambassador

Havana

In-charge of a
Cd'A.

r
esident
13.

Czechoslovakia

Prague.

14.

Denmark

Copenhagen.

Ambassador

in Mexico.

15.

Ethiopia

16. Finland
Cou
nsellor/

Addis Ababa.
Helsinki

Cd' A. Ambassador

r
esi-

dent in Stockholm

(
Sweden).
17. France

Paris.

18.

Germany

Bonn.

19.

Hungary

Budapest.

20. Italy
concurr
ently ac-

Rome

Ambassador
credited

Alba
nia as

to

Minister and

First
Secy.
accre
dited

In-charge of a

concurrently

to

the Republic of

San
Marino

as Consul General.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg158>
<pg159>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------Country
Location
Remarks
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------21.

Indonesia

Djakarta.

22.

Iran

Tehran.

23.

Iraq

Baghdad.

24.
Ireland
Counsello
r/Cd'A.

Dublin

In-charge of a
Ambassador

resident

in
25.

London.
Japan

26.
Kuwait
Sec
retary/

Tokyo.
Kuwait

Cd'A.

reside
nt
27.

Laos

28.
Lebanon
accre-

In-charge of a First
Ambassador

in Beirut.
Vientiane.
Beirut

Ambassador concurrently
dited as

to
,

Ambassador

Jordan and Kuwait and

ss

High Commissioner to

Cyp
rus.
29. Malagasy
concurrently

Tananarive

Ambassador
accredited as Consul

Gen
eral

to Re-union Island

and

Comores.
30. Mexico
concurrently

Mexico-City

accredited as

Ambassador
to
31. Morocco
concurrently

Ambassador

Cuba and Panama.
Rabat

Ambassador
accredited to Tunisia

a
s,
32.

Nepal

Kathmandu.

33.

Netherlands

The Hague.

34.

Norway

Oslo.

35.

Philippines

Manila.

Ambassador.

36.

Poland

Warsaw.

37.
to

Rumania

Bucharest

38.

Saudi Arabia

Ambassador

accredited

Bulgria as Ambassador.

39.
Senegal
concurrently
ac-

Jedda.
Dakar

Ambassador
credited as

to

Ambassador

Ivory Coast and Upper
Vo
lta.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg160>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------Country
Location
Remarks
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------40.

Somalia

Mogadiscio.

41.
Spain
Secr
etary/

Madrid

42.

Khartoum.

Sudan

43.
Sweden
concurrently

Cd'A.

Stockholm

Ambassador
accredited to

as

Finland

Ambassador.

44.
Switzerland
accre-

Berne

45.

Syrian Arab Republic

Damascus.

46.

Thailand

Bangkok

47.
Tunisia
Sec
retary-

Ambassador concurrently
dited to

as

reside

In-charge of First

Tunis

the

Vatican

Minister.

In-charge of a First
Cd'A. Ambassador

nt
48.

Turkey

49.
United Arab
concurrently

Ankara.
Republic

Cairo

50.
Union of Soviet Socialist
concurrently

Moscow

Republic.

Minister to

Ambassador
accredited to

United States of America

52. Yugoslavia
concurrently

as

Libya and

Y
emen.

51.

Ambassador
accredited

Ambassado
r to

as

in Rabat.

Washington.
Belgrade

Mongolia

Ambassador.
Ambassador
accredited to Greece

as

Ambassador.
EMBASSIES (b) Non-resident.
1.

Bolivia

Ambassador resident in Rio-de-Janeiro

2.

Bulgaria

Ambassador resident in Bucharest.

3.

Cameroon

Ambassador resident

in

Lagos.

4.
Columbia
(Chil
e)

Ambassador resident

in

Santiago

5.

Dahomey

Ambassador resident

in

Lagos.

6.

Greece

Ambassador resident

in

Belgrade.

7.

Guinea

Ambassador resident

in

Accra.

8.

Ivory Coast

Ambassador resident

in

Dakar.

9.

Jordan

Ambassador resident

in

Beirut.

10.

Liberia

Ambassador resident

in

Accra.

11.

Libya

Ambassador resident

in

Cairo.

12.

Luxembourg

Ambassador resident

in

Brussels.

13.

Mali

Ambasador resident in Accra.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg161>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------Country
Location
Remarks
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------14.

Mongolia

Ambassador resident in Moscow.

15.

Panama

Ambassador resident in Mexico.

16.

Paraguay

Ambassador resident in Buenos Aires.

17.

Peru

Ambassador resident in Santiago.

18.

Togo

Ambassador resident in Lagos.

19.

Upper Volta

Ambassador resident in Dakar.

20. Venezuela
Rio-de-Janeiro
.

Ambassador resident in

HIGH COMMISSIONS (a) Resident
1. Australia

Canberra.

2. Canada

Ottawa.

3. Ceylon

Colombo.

4. Ghana
concurrent-

Accra

High Commissioner
ly accredited to Guinea,
Liberia and Mali as Ambassador and as High Commissioner
to Sierra Leone.

5. Kenya

Nairobi

High Commissioner accredited
to Rwanda and Burundi as
Consul General.

6. Malawi

Blantyre

In charge of an Acting High
Commissioner.

7.

Malaysia

Kuala Lumpur.

8.

New Zealand

Wellington.

9. Nigeria
concurrent-

Lagos

High Commissioner
ly accredited to Togo, Daho-

10.

Pakistan

Karachi.

11.

Trinidad and Tobago

Port of Spain

High Commissioner concurrently accredited as High
Commisioner to Jamaica,
Commissioner to British
Guiana, Barbados, Antigua,
Grenada, Dominica, St.
Kitts, St. Lucia, St.

Vincent
,

12. Uganda

mey and Cameroon as Ambassador.

Montserrat and as Consul
General to Surinam.
Kampala

In charge of an Acting High
Commissioner.

13. United Kingdom
concurrent-

London

High Commissioner
ly accredited to Ireland as
Ambassador.

14. United Republic of
Dar-es-Salaam.
Tanzania.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg162>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------Country
Location
Remarks
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------HIGH COMMISSIONS (b) Non-resident.
1. Cyprus

High Commissioner resident at Beirut.

2. Sierra Leone

High Commissioner resident in Accra.

3. Jamaica

High Commissioner resident in Port of Spain.
COMMISSIONS (a) Resident

1.

Aden

Aden.

2.

Fiji

Suva.

3.

Hong Kong

Hong Kong.

4.

Mauritius

Port Louis.

5.

Rhodesia (Southern)

Salisbury

In-charge of an Acting Commissioner.

COMMISSIONS (b) Non-resident
1.

Antigua

Commissioner resident in Port of Spain.

2.

Barbados

Do.

3.

British Guiana

Do.

4.

Dominica

Do.

5.

Grenada

Do.

6.

Montserrat

Do.

7.

St. Kitts

Do.

8.

St. Lucia

Do.

9.

St. Vincent

Do.
LEGATIONS (Non-resident)

1.

Albania

Minister resident in Rome (Italy).

2.

Uruguay

Minister resident in Buenos Aires.

3.

Vatican

Minister resident in Berne.

4. Yemen
Minister resident in Cairo.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg163>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------Country
Location
Remarks
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------CONSULATES GENERAL (a) Resident
1. Denmark
(fun
c-

Copenhagen

Hon. Consul General
tioning under the

Ambass
a-

dor).

2. Germany
B
onn.

Berlin

3.

Do.

Frankfurt

Do.

4.

Do.

Hamburg

Do.

5.

Muscat

Muscat.

6.

Switzerland

7. United States
W
ashing8.
W
ashing9.
10.

Geneva.
of America

Vietnam

New York

Ambassador resident in
ton.

Do.

Vietnam

Ambassador resident in

San Francisco

(North)

Ambassador resident in
ton.

Hanoi.

(South)

Saigon.
CONSULATES GENERAL (b) Non-resident

1.

Burundi

Consul General resident in Nairobi.

2.

Comores

Consul General resident in Tananarive.

3.

Republic

4.

Re-Union Island

Consul General resident in Tananarive.

5.

Rwanda

Consul General resident in Nairobi.

6.

Surinam

Consul General resident in Port of Spain.

of San Marino

Consul General resident in Rome.

CONSULATES (Resident)
1. Belgium
resi-

Ghent

Hon. Consul. Ambassador
dent in Brussels.

2. Canary Islands
Secy./Cd'A

Las Palmas

Hon. Consul. First
resident in Madrid.

3. French Somaliland
resi-

Djibouti

Hon. Consul. Ambassador
dent in Paris.

4. Germany
resi-

Munich

Hon. Consul. Ambassador
dent in Bonn.

5.

Germany

6. Greece
resi-

Stuttgart
Athens

Do.
Hon. Consul. Ambassador
dent in Belgrade.

7. Iran
Tehran
.

Khorramshahr

Ambassador resident in

8. Italy
resi-

Genoa

Hon. Consul. Ambassador

dent in Rome.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg164>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------Country
Location
Remarks
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------9. Indonesia
Djaka
rta.

Medan

Ambassador resident

in

10. Iraq
Baghd
ad.

Basra

Ambassador resident

in

11. Paraguay
resi-

Asuncion

Hon. Consul. Ambassador
dent in Buenos Aires.

12. Japan
Tokyo.

Kobe

Ambassador resident in

13. U.S.S.R.
Moscow
.

Odessa

Ambassador resident in

14. U.S.A.
resi-

Cleveland

Hon. Consul. Ambassador
dent in Washington.

15. U.S.A.

Honolulu

Do.

VICE CONSULATES (Resident)
1. Afghanistan
Kabul.

Jalalabad

2.

Kandahar

Afghanistan

Ambassador resident in

Do.

3. Burma
Rangoo
n.

Mandalay

Ambassador resident in

4. Iran
Tehran
.

Zahidan

Ambassador resident in

5.
in

Mombasa

High Commissioner resident

Kenya

Nairobi.
DEPUTY HIGH COMMISSIONS (Resident)
1. Pakistan
in

Dacca

High Commissioner resident
Karachi.

2. Malaysia

Singapore

High Commissioner

resident

in Kuala Lumpur.
TRADE COMMISSIONS & OFFICES (Resident)
1. Australia
in

Sydney

High Commissioner resident
Canberra.

2. Canada
in

Vancouver

High Commissioner resident
Ottawa.

3. Bahrein

Bahrein

In-charge of a Trade Agent.

4. Dubai

Dubai

In-charge of a Trade Agent.

VISA OFFICE (Resident)
1. Ceylon
in

Kandy

High Commissioner resident

Colombo.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

-----

<pg165>

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------Country
Location
Remarks
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------SPECIAL MISSIONS (a) Resident
1.

Political Office, Sikkim

Gangtok

Political Officer.

2.

Permanent Mission of
India to the United Nations.

New York

Permanent Representative.

SPECIAL MISSIONS (b) Non-resident
1. Political Office, Bhutan
in

Political Officer resident

Gangtok.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

INDIA
AFGHANISTAN ALGERIA ARGENTINA AUSTRIA USA BELGIUM BRAZIL BOLIVIA
BURMA CAMBODIA CHILE PERU CHINA CONGO CUBA MEXICO CZECH REPUBLIC
NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK ETHIOPIA FINLAND SWEDEN FRANCE GERMANY HUNGARY
ITALY INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ IRELAND UNITED KINGDOM JAPAN KUWAIT LEBANON
LAOS JORDAN PANAMA MOROCCO TUNISIA NEPAL PHILIPPINES POLAND ROMANIA
SAUDI ARABIA SENEGAL MALI SOMALIA SPAIN SUDAN SWITZERLAND SYRIA
THAILAND TURKEY EGYPT LIBYA RUSSIA MONGOLIA YUGOSLAVIA GREECE BULGARIA
CAMEROON GHANA GUINEA LIBERIA PARAGUAY VENEZUELA AUSTRALIA CANADA SRI
LANKA SIERRA LEONE KENYA BURUNDI RWANDA MALAWI MALAYSIA NEW ZEALAND
NIGER NIGERIA PAKISTAN TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO JAMAICA DOMINICA GRENADA
MONTSERRAT UGANDA TANZANIA CYPRUS FIJI HONG KONG MAURITIUS ALBANIA
URUGUAY YEMEN OMAN VIETNAM SAN MARINO DJIBOUTI REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE
BHUTAN
Dec 31, 1964


