1960-61

Contents
Jan 01, 1960
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART-I
PAGE
Administration:(i:)
(ii)

Headquarters
Reorganisation of the methods of
work and connected matters
(iii) Indian Foreign Service
(iv) Missions Abroad
(v)
Inspectorate
(vi)
Expenditure
(vii) Tribal Areas-the North
East Frontier Agency
(viii) The Naga Hills-Tuensang Area

1
2
3
5
6
6
11
12

PART-II
A.-States in Special Treaty Relations with India
(i) Bhutan
(ii) Sikkim

13
13

B.--Foreign Enclaves in India
(i) Goa, Daman and Diu
(ii) Pondicherry, Karaikal,
Mahe
C.-India's neighbours
(i)
Afghanistan
(ii) Burma
(iii) Ceylon
(iv) China (see under East
(v)
Nepal
(vi) Pakistan
D.-South East Asia, Australia and New
E.-East Asia

Yanam and

Asia)

Zealand

14
15
16
17
18
18
18
19
26
27

F.-West Asia

30

G.-Africa

32

H.-Europe

38

143 B.A.-1.

(i)
(ii)

PAGE

I.-The Americas
(i) North America

43

(ii) Central America

46

(iii) South America

46

J.-External Publicity.

47

K.-Miscellaneous :(i)
(ii)

Central Passport and
ganisation

Emigration

Or-

53

Haj

55

(iii) Legal and Treaties Division

55

(iv) Consular Division

55

(v)

Diplomatic and Consular Missions in
India

59

(vi) Distinguished visitors from abroad

59

PART-III
A.-United Nations

61

B.-International Conferences

65

APPENDICES

INDIA
BHUTAN

(i) Indian Missions abroad

67

(ii) Indian Information Units abroad

72

(iii) Foreign Missions in India

74

(iv) Treaties, Conventions and Agreements
concluded or renewed by India with other
countries during 1960

79

(v) International Organisations of
India is a member

80

AFGHANISTAN

BURMA

CHINA

NEPAL

which

PAKISTAN

AUSTRALIA

USA

Jan 01, 1960

Administration
PART I
ADMINISTRATION
Organisation of the Ministry
(i) Headquarters.-The Ministry of External Affairs is responsible
for the conduct of India's relations with foreign countries. The Ministry
is also responsible for the country's representation in the United Nations
and advises other Ministries and State Governments when the latter have
dealings with foreign governments or institutions. In the domestic. sphere
it is responsible for the Administration of the North East Frontier Agency
and the Naga Hills and Tuensang Area and for matters of policy relating
to the former French possessions in India. The administration of the
Indian Emigration Act of 1923, the Reciprocity Act of 1943, the Port Haj
Committee Act of 1932, the Indian Merchant Shipping Act in so far as it
relates to pilgrim ships, the Indian Pilgrim Shipping Rules of 1933, the
Protection of Pilgrims Act of 1887 (Bombay) and the Protection of the
Mohammedan Pilgrims Act of 1896 (Bengal) are also the special responsibility of the Ministry of External Affairs.
The Ministry is in charge of a Minister of Cabinet rank. At present
the Prime Minister is also the Minister of Foreign Affairs. A Deputy
Minister and two Parliamentary Secretaries assist the Foreign Minister in
his work.
The Secretary General is the principal official adviser to the Foreign
Minister on matters relating to foreign policy and is responsible for the
supervision and coordination of the Ministry as a whole. The Foreign
Secretary is in charge of relating to all territories excepting those
dealt with by the Commonwealth Secretary. The Commonwealth Secretary looks after the work pertaining to all the countries of the Commonwealth except Canada, South East Asia and Africa south of Sahara. The
Special Secretary is in general charge of the administration of the Ministry
and the Indian Missions abroad. In matters involving policy the Special
Secretary works in close collaboration with the Foreign Secretary and the
Commonwealth Secretary.
The three Secretaries together with the Secretary, Ministry of Commerce and Industry, constitute the Foreign Service Board which is responsible for all diplomatic, commercial and consular postings and transfers, promotions and confirmation of Foreign Service officers of Branch

A of the Indian Foreign Service and Grade I of the Indian Foreign SerVice (B).
<pg1>
<pg2>
For purposes of Administration the Ministry is divided into 14 main
Divisions. Seven of these are Territorial Divisions which deal exclusively
with India's relations with foreign countries, each Division dealing with
a number of countries grouped on a geographical or a 'territorial' basis.
There are five 'specialist' Divisions, which deal respectively with Protocol
and Consular matters, Passports and Emigration, External Publicity, Historical Research, Legal matters and Treaties. These Divisions serve the
Ministry as a whole. The Conference Division deals with all matters
concerning the United Nations, and the Administration Division deals
with all matters pertaining to administration, personnel and services and
supplies.
(ii) Re-organisation of the methods of work and connected matters.During the year under review, a continuous watch was kept on the
methods of work introduced in the Ministry's Territorial Divisions after
these Divisions were reorganised in 1958 with a view to achieving optimum efficiency and effecting economy.
By employing the techniques of analytical estimation and case studies..
a detailed work-study of the Passport and Visa Division, the Cash Branch
and the Regional Passport Office, Calcutta, was undertaken to evolve
Ways to minimise procedural tangles, increase the overall output and to
assess staff strength. In all, the working of twelve Sections in the Ministry and two Regional Passport Offices was investigated with a view to
simplifying methods of work and fixing their staff strength. In addition,
fresh items of work were allotted to existing sections/units, and their
staff strength was augmented by internal adjustment, wherever necessary.
Efforts to simplify procedures were also continued.
The work study of the remaining three Regional Passport Offices is
expected to be completed in the near future.
48 Quarterly and Annual inspections of Sections were instituted during
the year, and the defects noticed were brought to the attention of the
Sections concerned for rectification.
During the year the Special Secretary convened two special meetings
of all the Officers in the Administration Division. At these meetings
specific problems relating to administration, such as the preparation of
running summaries of complicated issues and the rationalisation of subjects under which files are opened, were discussed. The Special Secretary
also suggested that an extra effort should be made by Sections to modify
the existing practice in respect of the opening of new files, index slips
and the statement of issues outstanding for over a month in so far as
it was at variance with the procedure laid down in the Manual of Office
Procedure.
<pg3>

Besides this, seven meetings were convened by the joint Secretaries
in charge of the Territorial Divisions. Steps were also taken to reduce the
arrears in the disposal of primary receipts by keeping a watch over, Sections with heavy arrears and bringing them to the notice of their Directors.
During the year progress was made in the weeding of the old records
of the Ministry. Records for the years 1941 to 1945 have been weeded.
The weeding of the files for 1946 is in hand.
Assistance is also being given to other Sections in the Ministry in
clearing arrears of recording and indexing and other work. In addition,
the old records received from the defunct Deputy High Commission of
India at Lahore and the Branch Secretariat at Calcutta were sorted out
and recorded.
There was no change in the staff strength and functions of the Vigilance Unit. During the year the Unit dealt with 76 complaints, 17 disciplinary cases, and reviewed 3 cases. Of these 51 complaints, 3 disciplinary cases and 2 reviews were finally settled.
In order to promote efficiency and economy in the administration, the
Economy Board, constituted in April 1958, continued to consider all proposals for the creation of posts, the continuance of temporary posts, and
determining the rentals of residences of officials in Missions abroad. The
Special Secretary is the Chairman of the Board which consists of two
joint Secretaries and the Deputy Financial Adviser as Members with a
Deputy Secretary in the Administration Division as its Member/Secretary.
The Board held 29 meetings till the 31 December 1960 and considered
265 proposals.
Staff Welfare.-During the period the Ministry decided, in consultation
with the Ministry of Works, Housing and Supply, to construct a Hostel
consisting of 100 two-roomed and one-roomed flats to provide accommodation to officers and staff of this Ministry posted back to Headquarters
on transfer from abroad.
The site at present occupied by the Constitution Club has been selected for this purpose.
(iii) Indian Foreign Service.-At present the permanent strength of
the Indian Foreign Service is 211. In addition, there are 10 supernumerary posts and 95 temporary posts in various grades.
Excluding the 25 posts of Heads of Missions and Posts abroad which are
filled by non-officials, the net permanent strength of the Indian Foreign
Service for purposes of recruitment is 186 plus 10 supernumerary posts.
Apart from a 10% reservation for promotion of officers of Grade I of the
<pg4>
Indian Foreign, Service (B) and of the Information Service, recruitment
is made in the junior Scale of the Service, exclusively through an annual
open competitive examination held by the Union Public Service Com-

mission. Nine candidates were recruited in 1960 on the basis of the results
of the examination held in 1959. Ten more candidates will be recruited
in a similar manner in 1961.
INDIAN FOREIGN SERVICE`B'
The initial constitution of all grades of the Indian Foreign Service
(B) has been completed.
Pending the promulgation of the Maintenance, Recruitment and
Training Rules of the service, 53 Assistants were recruited through the
Union Public Service Commission; 9 stenographers were similarly appointed from amongst those declared successful at the Union Public Service
Commission tests and 43 clerks were appointed through the Union Public
Service Commission and the Directorate General Resettlement and Employment during the year.
Transfers, postings, confirmations, promotions, extension of service
etc. of the officers of the Indian Foreign Service, of Grade I of Indian
Foreign Service (B) and of the Information Service of India are made by
a Foreign Service Board consisting of the Foreign Secretary, the Commonwealth Secretary, the Special Secretary and the Secretary, Ministry
of Commerce and Industry, with the joint Secretary (Administration) acting as the Secretary of the Board. This Board also regulates the programme of training of Indian Foreign Service probationers. Transfers and
postings of Indian Foreign Service (B) Officers, other than Grade I, are
similarly decided by a Senior Establishment Board [consisting of the joint
Secretary (Administration), the Director, External Publicity, a Deputy
Secretary and an Under Secretary of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, and with the Deputy Secretary (Administration) of the Ministry of
External Affairs acting as Secretary of the Board]; and a junior Establishment Board [consisting of three Deputy Secretaries and an Under Secretary, with the Under Secretary (Foreign Service Personnel) acting as Secretary of the Board]. Confirmation, promotion and extension of service etc.
in the Indian Foreign Service (B) officers are considered by two Departmental Promotion Committees. The Senior Departmental Promotion
Committee consists of three joint Secretaries and a Deputy Secretary; and
the junior Departmental Promotion Committee of three Deputy Secretaries and two Under Secretaries.
The permanent strength of the Indian Foreign Service 'B' is 1695. In
addition there are 591 temporary posts in the various sub-cadres.
<pg5>
In pursuance of the Government's orders for the conversion of 80%
of the temporary posts required for work of a permanent nature into
permanent posts, subject to the condition that they have been in continuous existence for not less than three years, a review of the various
grades of Indian Foreign Service and Indian Foreign Service 'B' has been
made, and proposals have been referred to the Ministry of Finance.
The revised pay scales, 1960 as introduced by the Government of

India (Ministry of Finance) are not automatically applicable to officers
belonging to I.F.S. (A&B), IFAS and other miscellaneous staff borne on
the strength of this Ministry. The question of applying the revised scales
to these officers has since been examined in consultation with the Associated Finance and Establishment Divisions of that Ministry. Final orders
On the subject are likely to be issued very shortly.
(iv) Missions Abroad.-At the beginning of the year 1960, there were
111 Indian Missions and Posts abroad:
Embassies

High Commissions
Legations

Commissions
Trade Commissions
Consulates-General

Consulates

50
(Eight concurrently accredited
without separate establishments).
10
6
(Five concurrently accredited
without separate establishments).
10
2
17
(Two concurrently accredited
without separate establishments).
6

Vice Consulates

4

Special Missions

3

Agencies

3

In 1960, two separate Embassies were opened, one in the Congo and
one at Helsinki. The Consulate General of India at Tananarive was converted into an Embassy, the Commission in Nigeria into a High Commission, and the Legations in Cuba and Jordan into Embassies, with the
Indian Ambassadors at Washington and Baghdad respectively continuing
to be concurrently accredited to them. Three Honorary Consulates-at
Munich and Stuttgart in Germany and at Athens in Greece were also
set up under the overall control of the Ambassadors in Germany and
Yugoslavia respectively.
<pg6>
Much progress could not be made with the various construction programmes in Indian Missions abroad. In Accra (Ghana) when construction
was about to start, the Ghanian Government served notice for the resumption of the plot of land on which the Chancery Building was to be built.
The High Commissioner has taken up the matter with the Government
of Ghana. In Ankara (Turkey) all arrangements for the construction of
the Ambassador's residence had been completed when the Turkish Government gave notice to stop construction on the ground that part of the
site was in the security zone. The Ambassador has taken up the matter
with the Turkish Government.
The construction of the Agency building at Gyantse remained suspen-

ded pending the settlement of the terms of the lease of the land, while,
work on the Agency Building at Gartok has been held up due to a lack
of construction facilities.
In Tokyo the construction of the Chancery Building is expected to
begin shortly. A beginning may also be made with the construction of
a ten-bed hospital at Kathmandu. The Government of India have also
sanctioned the building of eight staff quarters there.
The Ambassador's residence at Vienna (Austria) was purchased during
the year. Two proposals for purchase of property, one for building the
residence of the High Commissioner at Lagos and the other for the Ambassador's residence in Vientiane are under consideration.
(v) Inspectorate.-In view of the shortage of suitable personnel and
also because of the need to conserve foreign exchange, it was decided that
the Foreign Service Inspectorate should be kept in abeyance for the
present.
(vi) Expenditure.-The Expenditure of the Ministry falls under five
Demand Heads; viz.
(i) The Tribal Areas (North East Frontier Agency),
(ii) The Naga Hills-Tuensang Area,
(iii) External Affairs,
(iv) Pondicherry and,
(v) Miscellaneous.
According to the Revised Estimates, expenditure on them in 1960-61
is expected to be Rs. 29.94 crores.
<pg7>
Some of the items included therein do not however relate to External
Relations proper. They are:In crores of rupees.
------------------------------1959-60
1960-61
(i) The Tribal Area, including the Assam
Rifles, and provision for development (Rs. 1.29 crores) and Community Development Projects
(Rs. 10.00, lakhs)
8.46
(ii) The Naga Hills-Tuensang Area
including provision for development (Rs. 83.66 lakhs) and Community Development Projects

10.11

(Rs 10.92 lakhs)

3.36

(iii) Expenditure on Pondicherry and
payments to neighbouring countries
3.90

5.15

(iv) Expenditure on the Demarcation
of Boundaries between India and
Pakistan
0.11
(v) The Central Passport and Emigration Organisation

3.26

0.14
0.25

0.26

(vi) Miscellaneous Expenditure e.g.,
on Pilgrimages, Refugees, including Tibetan Refugees (Rs. 57.82
lakhs) and evacuees, the repatriation of Indians, Loss by Exchange
etc.
0.59
0.63
-------------------------16.67
19.55
--------------------------In addition, due to India's commitments abroad, the following items
are met from the Ministry's budget :
(i) Expenditure on the. Delegation to
the United Nations Organisation
and the Delegation to the International Commission of Supervision
and Control in Indo-China
0.68

0.24

(ii) Reimbursement of the Expenditure
on the Indian contingents in Gaza
(United Nations Emergency
Force) and in Congo to the Ministry of Defence
1.03
1.38
-------------------------1.71
1.62
------------------------------------------------------------------------143 E.A.--2.
<pg8>
The actual expenditure on the Ministry of External Affairs and the
Embassies abroad amounts to Rs. 8.77 crores.
This includes:
(i) Rs. 2.46 crores representing "Charges in England" comprising
Rs. 0.78 crores on the High Commission in London, and

Rs. 1.68 crores on India's contribution to the United Nations
Organisation for the United Nations Emergency Force at
Gaza and United Nations forces in Congo.
(ii) Rs. 1.29 crores on Pay and Allowances of officers and staff and
other expenses at Headquarters,
(iii) Rs. 0.23 crores for the Hospitality Grant of the Government
of India, and
(iv) Rs. 0.18 crores on donations and relief measures in foreign
countries.
8. The expenditure on our Missions and Posts abroad amounts to
Rs. 4.63 crores, spread over 86 Missions. This works out to an average
of Rs. 5.38 lakhs per Mission. Of this, an average of Rs. 1.41 lakhs per
Mission is spent on the Pay and Allowances of officers, and Rs. 1.48 lakhs
on the Pay and Allowances of the staff, Rs. 0.94 lakhs on offices and
residential accommodation, and the balance on contingent and other expenditure.
The sanctioned Grant under 'Standing Charges', and the anticipated
requirements for 1960-61 are indicated 'below, along with the corresponding figures of the Revised Estimates for 1959-60:Figures in Lakhs
Revised
Original Revised
Estimates Grant
Requirefor
for
ments for
1959-60
1960-61
1960-61
------------------------------------------------------------------------Tribal Areas'
126.77
128.87
149.21
External Affairs
355.21
443.59
377.76
(Provision Of 74.29 lakhs transferred from India Circle to
Charges in England).
Miscellaneous Expenditure under the
Ministry of External Affairs
2.94
2.91
2.91
------- -----------TOTAL
484.92
575.37
529.88
(-45.49 from B. E. 60-61.
-44.96 over R.E. 1959.60).
------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg9>
A broad distribution of the figures is :(i) Assam Rifles

90.15

5
(ii) Political & Administrative Charges

90.81

110.8

in Tribal Areas

15.84

16.85

(iii) Economic Development in Tribal
Areas and Miscellaneous Expenditure
20.78
21.21
(iv) Ministry of External Affairs
(Headquarters)
73.12
(v) Missions & Posts Abroad

17.19

21.17

95.00

224.46

97.15
254.16

260.7

3
(vi) Emmigration & Passport Establishment
7.07
8.32

8.14

(vii) Special diplomatic expenditure

10.00

10.00

(viii) Other Miscellaneous expenditure
40.56

76.11

1.74

(ix) Miscellaneous 'Loss by Exchange'
& Expenditure on 'Pilgrimage beyond India'
2.94

2.91

10.00

2.91

The anticipated saving of Rs. 45.49 lakhs in the Revised Estimates
for 1960-61, as compared to the sanctioned Grant is mainly due to transfer
of the Contribution to United Nations Organisation from the India Circle
to 'Charges in England' shown in Part II of the budget pending the settlement of the London local cadre scheme; counterbalanced by an increase
in expenditure on the Assam Rifles, and on Administration in the North
East Frontier Agency.
The comparative figures of the Revised Estimates for 1959-60 and
1960-61 show that in the current year there will be an increase in expenditure of Rs. 44.96 lakhs. This excess is mainly due to:(i) An increase in expenditure on the Assam Rifles, on Administrative charges and development schemes in the North East
Frontier Agency,
(ii) An increase in expenditure at Headquarters due to the conversion of a large number of posts in External Publicity DiviSion from temporary to permanent and the consequent transfer of expenditure on them and on allied items from PartII to Part-I of the Budget Estimates, as well as provision
required for implementing the Pay Commissions recommendations, and

(iii) An increase in the expenditure in Missions due to the same
reason has for (ii) above.
<pg10>
The present strength of Officers and Establishment is as follows:Officers
Establishment
----------------------- ---------------------1959-60
Headquarters
Missions
Assam Rifles

1960-61

1959-60

184
196
214
252
(5 Battalions).

1960-61

1076
446

1080
449

North East Frontier Agency.
Administrative Wing
Development Wing II

33
11

33
11

333
699

444
793

After the Budget for 1961-62 was completed, the following temporary
posts were converted into Permanent posts. Its effect will be reflected in
future Standing Charges.
Officers
Headquarters
Missions

Establishment

1

158
105

4

North East Frontier Agency.
Administrative Wing
Development Wing

4
20

63
71

From 1 January 1960 to 30th September 1960 the Posts of 9 Section
Officers (Gr. II & Gr. III), 16 Assistants, 10 U.D.Cs', 8 L.D.Cs', and 6
Steno-typists were abolished or kept in abeyance at Headquarters. The
financial effect of this for the period is a saving of Rs. 30.990/-. The posts
of 9 Lower Division Assistants, Upper Division Assistants, Supply Inspector and Political Interpreter, 5 Lower Division Assistants and 4 Grade IV
staff, 1 Central Intelligence Officer Grade II 1 Civil Assistant Surgeon;
Grade I, 1 Mechanical Engineer, 1 Sub-Treasury Officer, 1 Stenographer,.
1 Driver, 5 Handymen, 1 Tractor Operator, 1 Agricultural Officer and 1
Assistant Agricultural Officer were kept in abeyance from Jan 01, 1960
to 31 March 1960 at the North East Frontier Agency. The financial effect
of this for this period is a saving of Rs. 16,114/-.
One post of Messenger was kept in abeyance from 4 January 1960 to
31 March 1960 in one of our Missions effecting a saving for this period
of Rs. 437/-. Two posts of Messengers were kept in abeyance for the
whole financial year 1960-61, the net saving of which will be Rs. 5,484

and 78 nP.
In addition to the above, an economy of Rs. 95,490/- was effected on
contingent expenditure for the period from 1 January 1960 to 30 September 1960.
<pg11>
(vii) Tribal Areas-the North East Frontier Agency.-The strength of
the Indian Frontier Administrative Service was increased from 64 to 69
to meet the additional requirements for the administration of border
areas. A Special Selection Board selected officers in January and February 1960. Of the existing 69 officers, 34 are serving in the North East
Frontier Agency, 15 in the Naga Hills-Tuensang Area, 6 in Manipur, 6
in Ladakh, 2 in Tripura, 2 in the Ministry of External Affairs and one
each in Tibet, Uttar Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and the Border Roads
Development Board.
The Assam Rifles is being strengthened and one more Battalion is
being raised.
The law and order situation in the North East Frontier Agency generally remained satisfactory.
After the closure of the transit camp for the Tibetan refugees at Missamari in Assam on 31 July, 1960, a new camp was opened at Bhalukpung in the Kameng Frontier Division of the North East Frontier Agency
to provide accommodation for about 2,000 refugees. A scheme for the
rehabilitation of Tibetan refugees as agriculturists in the same Division
of the North East Frontier Agency is being implemented., and other similar measures are being considered.
The Plan provision for 1960-61 is Rs. 164.94 lakhs.
Four more pre-extension National Extension Service Blocks were sanctioned. 483 acres of land were developed, and this is calculated to increase
food production by over 300 tons. 107 minor irrigation channels were
constructed on a subsidised basis. 2,185 improved agricultural tools and
implements were supplied to cultivators at subsidised rates. Two more
fish farms were started. The Veterinary staff treated 7,677 cases.
62 miles of roads, 25 miles of mule paths and 232 miles of porter tracks
were constructed and 31 miles of roads and 30 miles of porter tracks were
improved.
3,572 indoor and 1.84,760 outdoor patients were treated. 12,364 persons were inoculated and vaccinated. Eight more anti--malaria teams were
Constituted, raising the total to 44. Goitre and tuberculosis surveys were
carried out.
Three Lower Primary Schools were converted into Middle Standard
Schools, and one Middle Standard School was made into a High School.
There are now 5 High, 14 Middle and 129 Lower Primary Schools in the

Agency.
In the sphere of plantation and silviculture, preliminary work was
done on 280 crores and the whole work completed on 287 acres. 37,369
sleepers for Broad Gauge, 79,201 for Metre Gauge and 2,283 for Narrow
Gauge Railways were supplied. The forest revenue during the period
was Rs. 22,24,559 and the expenditure Rs. 14,22,586.
<pg12>
Two booklets on Tangsa and Dafla tribes were published.
Five more co-operative general stores were established.
A new volume of Statistical Outline of the North East Frontier Agency was published.
(viii) The Naga Hills-Tuensang Area.-The law and order situation,
continued to make progress.
A delegation of 15 Naga leaders came to Delhi on 24 July 1960, fordiscussions on the future administration of the Naga Hills. The Prime
Minister met the delegation on 26 and 30 July, 1960. As a result of thesediscussions, it was agreed to, constitute the Naga Hills-Tuensang Area as,
a separate State, to be called Nagaland, within the Indian Union. The
Governor of Assam will also be the Governor of Nagaland; and the
existing jurisdiction of the Assam High Court over the areas comprising,
the new State will continue. During the transitional period, an Interim
Body consisting of representatives of all the Naga tribes will be constituted to assist and advise the Governor in the administration of Nagaland.
The Governor will have a special responsibility for law and order during
the transitional period, and for so long as the law and order situation continues to remain disturbed due to hostile activities. He will also have
general responsibility for ensuring that the funds made available by the
Government of India are spent for the purposes for which they are approved.
A party of journalists, including foreign correspondents, visited the
Naga Hills-Tuensang Area for a week in December.
All Naga tribes have completed elections to the Interim Body. The
transitional arrangements are expected to come into force by the middle
of February.
The Plan provision for 1960-61 is Rs. 158.27 lakhs.
53 miles of new roads were constructed and 113 miles of existing roads
were widened and improved.
Generating sets were installed to provide electricity in four more
towns.
Two new Hospitals were opened and two dispensaries were converted
into Hospitals. 60 additional beds were provided in three of the existing

Hospitals. About 75% of the total population was covered under the andmalaria programme.
1400 acres of land were developed. 30 major and 172 minor irrigation
channels were constructed.
Four Agricultural, seven Veterinary, two Forestry, seven Engineering,
three Hindi and 435 general stipends for College students were awarded.
INDIA
INDONESIA CANADA USA CONGO FINLAND NIGER NIGERIA CUBA JORDAN IRAQ GERMANY
GREECE YUGOSLAVIA GHANA TURKEY JAPAN NEPAL AUSTRIA LAOS PAKISTAN CHINA
UNITED KINGDOM LATVIA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Jan 01, 1960

A. States In Special Treaty Relations With India
PART II
A. STATES IN SPECIAL TREATY RELATIONS WITH INDIA
(i) Bhutan.-Satisfactory progress is being made in the construction of
the Phuntsoling-Paro Road under the supervision and control of the Technical Coordinating Board for Bhutan. A sum of Rs. 60 lakhs is likely
to be spent during 1960-61.
Bhutan has undertaken other works which will develop her economy.
The Government of India have granted Rs. 7 lakhs to Bhutan as developmental subsidy.
A delegation of five members of the Indian Parliament visited Bhutan
in May 1960 for three weeks.
On the invitation of the Government of India, His Highness the
Maharaja of Bhutan accompanied by a party of 17 others visited India
during February 1961.
(ii) Sikkim.-Progress of the projects under the Seven Year Development Plan has been satisfactory. The current Plan will come to an end
on 31 March 1961. The Sikkim Darbar are preparing their Second Development Plan which will coincide with India's Third Five Year Plan.
The Sikkim Mining Corporation has been established with an authorised capital of Rs. 1 crore for the purpose of exploiting copper deposits in
the State. The Government of India and the Sikkim Darbar will share
the capital outlay in the ratio of 49% and 51% respectively. The

Government of India have also agreed to grant loans to the Sikkim Darbar
to meet the cost of their share of the capital.
In conformity with the Government of India's decision to improve
road communications in the border regions, the Border Road Development Board have taken up the construction of certain roads in Sikkim.
The project for the construction of a 12 1/2 mile aerial ropeway between
Gangtok and the Sikkim Tibet border is nearing completion. A loan of
Rs. 29 lakhs has so far been granted to Sikkim by the Government of
India for this project.
Ten new scholarships for high school studies and 8 new scholarships
for diploma and degree courses were granted to Sikkimese students for
education in India.
The Maharaj Kumar of Sikkim participated in the XXV International
Congress of Orientalists in Moscow in August 1960.
The Government of India have established a Printing Press at Gangtok
primarily for printing Tibetan and Nepali material. Adequate facilities
for this were previously not available in the area.
<pg13>
<pg14>
Arrangements were made for the supply of 73,000 lbs of skim milk
powder from UNICEF allotments for the benefit of about 5,000 Sikkimese
school children for twelve months beginning from August, 1960.
On the invitation of Government of India, His Highness the Maharaja
of Sikkim accompanied by a party of 30 others visited India during January/February 1961.
B. FOREIGN ENCLAVES IN INDIA
(i) Goa, Daman and Diu.-In accordance with the Government of
India's policy of not using force for the liberation of these possessions,
the Goan political parties are continuing their efforts to liberate these
territories by peaceful and non-violent means. The Government have
also reviewed their policy towards the Portuguese possessions in India
in order to ensure the early achievement of this objective.
Shri Mohan Laxman Ranade, the only Indian political worker who
is still imprisoned in Goa, is reported to have been deported to Portugal
sometime during September 1960. However, confirmation of this news
is still awaited.
The judgement in the 'Right of Passage Case' filed by Portugal against
India was delivered by the International Court of justice at The Hague
on Apr 12, 1960. The verdict of the Court was substantially in India's
favour. The Court has held that India acted correctly and in accordance

with her international obligations. A significant aspect of the Court's
decision is that there can be no question of India being obliged to permit
passage of any kind in the present circumstances. In other words, the
present position in Dadra and Nagar-Aveli has been stabilised and cannot
change without the permission of the Government of India. The Government are generally satisfied with the decision of the Court in this case.
In response to requests from the Varishta Panchayat and the Administrator of Nagar-Aveli, Dr. A. Furtado, who proposed to resign, the Government of India agreed to make available the services of a senior officer of
the Indian Administrative Service as the Administrator of those areas.
Shri K. G. Badlani took over as the new Administrator with effect from
17 October 1960. It is also proposed to elect a new Panchayat to replace
the present Panchayat which consists of nominees. This new Panchayat
would act as the Legislative Council of the liberated areas.
It is proposed to extend technical assistance. to the independent administration of Dadra and Nagar-Aveli for developmental and other
reconstruction activities and gradually to bring the administration of
these areas in line with the administrative pattern in the rest of the
country over a period of time.
The Pensions Disbursement Officer of the Government of India, Pension office, Margao, continued to visit Goa periodically for the disbursement of pensions. Most of the arrears of pensions have been cleared during the period under review. He was till now visited Goa seven times.
The eighth visit is due shortly.
<pg15>
Portuguese aircraft were reported again to have violated Indian air
space near Daman and Diu. There were also a few instances of border
violations by the Portuguese.
Trade with Goa continued to be restricted during the period under
review. A proposal to relax the existing restrictions is under study. A
unified control of the Indo-Goa border has been entrusted to the State
Reserve Police Forces (of Maharashtra & Gujrat) in order to check smuggling effectively. Baggage Rules for travellers proceeding to and coming
from Goa have been revised and great simplified with effect from 1
October 1960. Travel between India and Goa has been liberalised for
Indians as well as Goans. Besides Majali which was the only check-post
for entry and exit between India and Goa, two additional routes at
Lakkarkot and Anmode have been opened with effect from 1 October
1960. But though the Government of India declared these two additional
land routes open with effect from 1 October 1960, regular traffic has not
yet commenced via these routes as the Portugues authorities have not
yet provided corresponding facilities for passengers on their side of the
border.
(ii) Pondicherry, Karaikal, Yanam and Mahe.-The Government of
France have not as yet found it possible to ratify the Treaty of Cession
of the French Establishments of Pondicherry, Karaikal, Yanam and Mahe.
According to the Budget Estimates for 1960-61, the revenue was Rs. 163

lakhs. In the Revised Estimates for the current financial year, revenues
are estimated at about Rs. 193 lakhs, i.e., an increase of Rs. 30 lakhs.
The provision under the head of Expenditure in the Budget Estimates for
the current year was Rs. 343 lakhs including expenditure on Plan schemes
of the order of Rs. 146 lakhs. According to the Revised Estimates, the
overall expenditure is estimated at Rs. 331 lakhs and the estimated expenditure on Plan schemes is Rs. 126 lakhs. The estimated revenues for
the year 1961-62 is about Rs. 228 lakhs, and estimated expenditure is
Rs. 432 lakhs. The total expenditure for all development schemes, including the Medical College, during the Third Five Year Plan period is
estimated at about Rs. 10 crores.
Suitable measures are being taken to replace appeals to courts in Paris
by appeals to appropriate courts in India from courts in Pondicherry.
Steps are being taken in Pondicherry to implement the recommendations of the Central Wage Board for the Cotton Textile Industry.
A Commission has been appointed by the Chief Commissioner of
Pondicherry, to implement the decision regarding the conversion of 50%
of the temporary posts in Pondicherry Administration into permanent
ones. The posts will be chosen from those which have been in existence
for more than three years and are required on a long term basis.
143 E.A.-3.
<pg16>
Steps are being taken to implement the revised scales of pay in Pondicherry State with effect from 1 June 1960 on the analogy of scales adopted
by the Government of Madras on the recommendations of the Madras
Pay Commission.
Owing to unprecedented rainfall during November 1960, large areas
of Pondicherry and Karaikal were inundated and considerable damage
was caused to huts, dwellings and standing crops. The Government have
sanctioned a sum not exceeding Rs. 3 lakhs for relief measures in the
affected areas.
C. INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS
(i) Afghanistan.-During the year under review close and friendly
relations between India and Afghanistan continued to develop undisturbed. An Indian Trade Delegation led by Shri K. R. F. Khilnani, joint
Secretary in the Ministry of Commerce & Industry visited Afghanistan in
September-October 1960 and concluded a trade agreement with the Government of Afghanistan for the current year. A further increase in IndoAfghan trade to the mutual benefit of both the countries is envisaged.
The Afghan Purchase Mission, now known as the Directorate General of
Supplies of Afghanistan has been functioning in India for some time past.
The Mission is engaged in the purchase and despatch of goods required
in Afghanistan and Government have extended it necessary assistance.
As usual, India participated in Afghan Jashan Celebrations held at

Kabul in August 1960. The Government representative on the Indian
delegation was Shri Jamal Khwaja, M.P. The contingent included a
Services hockey team,. student tennis players, Kathak dancers, folk singers
and their accompanists.
The aeronautical and meteorological facilities provided by the Government of India at Kabul and Kandahar air ports continued during the
year. The Indian team of three members was in Afghanistan for the
major part of the year. The twenty Afghan cadets, who were under
training in the Flight Mechanic Airframe and Flight Mechanic Engine
courses in I.A.F. establishments in India, left for Afghanistan after completion of their courses in April 1960. Two vacancies were made available
to the Government of Afghanistan for training in. the Radio Technicians'
Course at the Civil Aviation Training Centre, Allahabad, but the Afghan
Government could send only one person, and he also had to return to
Afghanistan for reasons of health. Dr. Abdul Wahab Malikyar, President
of the Community Development Organisation in Afghanistan came to
India in September-October 1960 and visited various centres in Delhi
and Kashmir. General Mohamed Naim Waziri, Inspector General of the
Afghan Army, visited India in January 1960. The head of the Faculty
of Science of the Kabul University has been invited to visit the atomic
reactor at Bombay and discuss technical matters with Indian scientists.
<pg17>
The Government of India sent two instructors to Afghanistan for
about three months to train Afghans in the working and handling of
Ambar Charkhas presented to that Government in 1958. In addition to
the seven Indian teachers, who were already in Afghanistan teaching
English in various schools, six more teachers were selected during the
year under report. Of these six teachers, one has already joined service
in Afghanistan and arrangements to send the remaining teachers are in
hand. The contract of the Indian hockey coach has been renewed for
another period of two years. The Indian Brass Band Instructor, who
was on deputation to the Government of Afghanistan for two years,
returned to India during the year after completion of his period of contract. At the request of Kabul Radio, the services of a Programme Executive of the All India Radio were placed at the disposal of the Government of Afghanistan in April 1960 initially for a period of three months.
At the request of Afghan Government, the period of his deputation was
extended by another three 'months. Shri L. C. Gupta, an Industrial Cooperative Expert in Afghanistan has submitted a scheme for the development of Art Wood Industry in Afghanistan and this is being examined
in consultation with the Ministries of Works, Housing and Supply and
of Commerce & Industry. The Government of Afghanistan have approached the Government of India for the services of two masons to train
Afghans in cement flooring etc. Efforts are being made to send the masons.
The Government of India had earlier supplied fumigation equipment
to the Government of Afghanistan as a gift. A chamber is now proposed
to be installed by an Indian engineer deputed to Afghanistan for the
purpose. The Government of India supplied as a free gift 16 1/2 tons of
sugar-cane seed material for plantation purposes in Afghanistan and
two tons of bleaching powder to help the Afghan Government fight a

cholera epidemic.
Shri J. N. Dhamija, the new Ambassador to Kabul, presented his credentials to H.M. the King of Afghanistan on 3 August 1960. Shri S. Parkash replaced Shri A. K. Bakshi as Vice Consul at Kandahar in September
1960.
A draft agreement for establishing a direct Radio Telephone service
between India and Afghanistan has been finalised and the agreement will
be signed at Kabul in the near future.
(ii) Burma.-Relations with Burma continued to be close and cordial.
U Nu came to India in March 1960 on a pligrimage on the eve of
his election as Prime Minister.
He came again to New Delhi on 11 November 1960 on an official visit
and left India for Rangoon on 21 November 1960.
<pg18>
The Chief of Naval Staff, Admiral Katari, visited Rangoon in July 1960
on a goodwill mission.
As in previous years, a number of Burmese personnel received military and technical training in India.
The Burmese Government extended their hospitality to the Indian
and Chinese official teams, who were examining the material relating to,
the Boundary Question, for the third Session of their talks. The officals met at Rangoon in November-December 1960.
(iii) Ceylon.-Relations with Ceylon continued to be friendly and,
cordial.
Shri V. K. Krishna Menon, Defence Minister, visited Ceylon in September 1960 and addressed a meeting of the Ceylon Institute of World
Affairs.
Shrimati Lakshmi Menon, Deputy Minister of External Affairs, paid a
visit to Ceylon in September 1960 on an invitation from the Family
Planning Association of Ceylon.
The Government of India complied with a number of requests from
the Government of Ceylon for training of Ceylon nationals in the Armed
Services and in various fields of education.
The Hon'ble Sirimavo R. D. Bandaranaike, Prime Minister of Ceylon,
arrived at New Delhi on 29th December, 1960 on a visit at the invitation
of the Government of India.
(iv) China.- (See under East Asia).
(v) Nepal.-Relations with Nepal continued to remain close and

friendly. The most significant event of the year under review was the
signing of the Treaty of Trade and Transit with Nepal on 11th September 1960. This treaty which has replaced the Treaty of Trade & Commerce between the two countries of 31 July 1950 came into force on 1st
November 1960. It will be in force for five years, and continue in force
for a further period of five years thereafter, subject to such modification
as may be agreed upon, unless terminated by either party by giving notice
of not less than one year in writing. The Treaty has been widely acclaimed in Nepal.
Other important events were the visits to India of H.M. the King of
Nepal and the former Prime Minister, Shri B. P. Koirala in 1960. These
visits further strengthened the manifold ties of friendship and goodwill
between the two countries.
Under a cultural programme, eminent Indian musicians and poets
visited Kathmandu on the occasion of the Republic Day, Independence
<pg19>
Day and Gandhi jayanti. These visits stimulated interest in Indian
music in that country and made clear the affinity between arts and cultures of the two countries.
After discussions, the Government of India announced the grant of
additional economic aid of Rs. 18 crores to Nepal. Aid was continued
to the Government of Nepal in their economic development programme.
The notable fields in which assistance has been extended to Nepal during
the year, under agreements executed with the Government of Nepal,
were:
------------------------------------------------------------------------Amount
Date of
Name of the Scheme
provided
agreement
------------------------------------------------------------------------Rs.
1.
2.
3.
4.

Horticulture
Veterinary
Industrial Estates
Forests

25,00,000
25,00,000
18,00,000
15,00,000

31 August, 1960.

5 . Engineering School
8,50,000
6. National Archives
6,50,000
17 October, 1960
7. Tribhuvan University
20,00,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------The Prime Minister of India made a statement in the Lok Sabha that
India would regard any aggression on Nepal as aggression on India.
Shri Harishwar Dayal, presented his credentials as Ambassador of
India in Nepal on 1st February, 1960.
(vi) Pakistan.-

(a) Prime Minister's visit to Pakistan.-At the invitation of the President of Pakistan, the Prime Minister visited Pakistan from 19th to 23rd
September 1960. The Prime Minister signed, on behalf of India, the
Indus Waters Treaty in Karachi on 19th September 1960. In the course
of his stay in Pakistan, he visited Murree, Nathiagali, Rawalpindi and
Lahore. The two leaders discussed matters affecting Indo-Pakistan relations, and exchanged informally views on. current international questions. The two leaders expressed the conviction that the primary, need
of their countries was the rapid development of their resources and the
raising of the living standards of their people. They agreed that their
Governments and people should work for the promotion of friendly and
co-operative relations between the two countries and eliminate old emotional strains and tensions. Other matters agreed to between the two
leaders are dealt with under respective headings later in this report.
(b) The Indus Waters Treaty.-The 12 years old canal water dispute
came to an end with the signing of the Indus Waters Treaty, 1960, by the
<pg20>
Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan on 19th September
1960 at Karachi. The Treaty, as it finally emerged after the difficult and
protracted negotiations, through the good offices of the World Bank,
consists of 12 Articles and 8 Annexures. The salient features of the
Treaty are as follows:
(1) The waters of the Indus, Jhelum and Chenab, except for essential
uses in their own basins while they flow in India, are allotted to Pakistan; and the waters of the Ravi, Beas and Sutlej, except for a transition
period during which Pakistan will build works to replace the waters
received by it from these rivers, are allotted to India.
(2) India has guaranteed to let flow for all time to come the waters
of the Indus, Jhelum and Chenab to Pakistan, except for certain uses in
Indian territory to be made in accordance with detailed regulations
specified in the Treaty.
(3) India will continue to give water from the Sutlej, Beas and Ravi,
allotted to her under the Treaty, to Pakistan during the transition period
only and at a diminishing scale. The transition period will be 10 years.
This period may be extended for a further period of three years, at Pakistan's request, but the extension is subject to reduction in the Indian
contribution towards Pakistan's replacement works.
(4) Pakistan has undertaken on the Western rivers a comprehensive
system of replacement-cum-development works comprising storage reservoirs, barrages, link canals, tube-well drainage and hydroelectric installations. As the purposes of the part of this system of works is the replacement from the Western rivers of water supplies for irrigation canals in
Pakistan which were dependent on water supplies from the Eastern rivers,
India has agreed to make a fixed contribution of Rs. 83.3 crores towards
the cost of the replacement element of these works. The United States
of Amrica, Britain, Canada, West Germany, Australia, and New Zealand

and the World Bank are financing the remaining cost of this large plan
of works. This arrangement falls outside the Treaty. Their aid to
Pakistan will aggregate to Rs. 333.3 crores. The U.S. Government and
the Bank have agreed to lend India Rs. 26.7 crores for the construction
of the Beas Dam.
(5) The Treaty provides for a permanent Indus Commission to serve
as a regular channel of communication on all matters relating to the
implementation of the Treaty.
(6) The Treaty also provides for a neutral expert and a court of arbitration to settle disputes.
(7) The Treaty terminates the Indo-Pakistan Water Agreement of
1948, under which canal waters were regulated from India to Pakistan
uptill now.
<pg21>
(c) Indo-Pakistan Border Conferences.-(i) In pursuance of the decision reached at the Indo-Pakistan Eastern Border Conference of October
1959, a Conference at Minister's level was held at Lahore, Rawalpindi
and New Delhi from 4th to 11th January 1960. Sardar Swaran Singh,
Minister for Steel, Mines, and Fuel, represented India and LieutenantGeneral K. M. Sheikh, Minister of the Interior, represented Pakistan.
The Conference resulted in the following settlements of border disputes
on the Punjab-West Pakistan border:(1) Pakistan agreed that the boundary in the region of the Hussainiwala Headworks would be the district boundary between Ferozepore and Lahore districts.
(2) India agreed to an adjustment, in the region of Suleimanki
Headworks, of the district boundary between Ferozepore
district and Montgomery district.
(3) Pakistan dropped their claim to Chak Ladheke on the Amritsar-Lahore border.
(4) India dropped her claim to the three villages of Theh Sarja
Marja, Rakh Hardit Singh and Pathanke on the AmritsarLahore border.
(5) Formulation of detailed "Ground Rules" for the Indo-West
Pakistan border to ensure that local officials, civil and military, on both sides prevent, or when unavoidable control,
border incidents.
The Conference also decided to study further the relevant material
on the dispute in the Kutch-Sind region, and to hold discussions later for
a settlement of this dispute.
(2) During the discussions between the Prime Minister of India and
the President of Pakistan in September 1960, it was agreed that a Con-

ference at Minister's level between India and Pakistan should be held
to review the implementation of the border agreements already reached
and to resolve outstanding differences on border maters
(d) Border incidents.-The settlement of the border disputes on the
Indo-East Pakistan border and on the Punjab-West Pakistan border had
a salutary effect on incidents on these borders. There were no incidents
of firing across the border by Border Forces, which had been a frequent
occurrence in previous years. Such border incidents as took place were
mostly in the nature of dacoity, lifting of cattle, and forcible harvesting
of paddy from lands belonging to Indian nationals.
(e) implementation of the Indo-Pakistan Border Agreements of September 19589 October 1959 and January 1960.-The Supreme Court of
India gave its Advisory Opinion in March 1960 on the Reference made
<pg22>
by the President of India on the legal and constitutional measures necessary for the implementation of the settlement on the Berubari Union
No. 12 and the Cooch-Behar Enclaves envisaged in the Indo-Pakistan
Agreement of September 1958. Necessary legislation, in the light of this
opinion, to implement the Indo-Pakistan Agreements of September 1958,
October 1959, and January 1960, was completed in the winter session of
Parliament. The Constitution (Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960, provides
legislative cover for the transfer of certain areas to Pakistan: and the
Acquired Territories (Merger) Act, 1960, provides for the merger into
the respective States of India of areas that are to be transferred from
Pakistan.
(f) Demarcation of boundaries.-(I) Ground demarcation on the Punjab-West Pakistan sector (342 miles) was completed in 1960.
(2) Demarcation in the Rajasthan-West Pakistan sector (644 miles)
commenced in October 1959. By March 1960, ground demarcation was
completed for roughly one-sixth of this border. Work was resumed in
October 1960, and is in progress.
(3) On the Indo-East Pakistan border (2520 miles) ground demarcation was completed for roughly three-fifths of the border upto 30th June
1960. Further work is in progress.
(g) Kashmir.-During his visit to Pakistan in September 1960, the
Prime Minister had a frank and friendly exchange of views with the
President of Pakistan with regard to Kashmir. The talks were conducted in an atmosphere of cordiality. The two leaders came to the conclusion that this difficult question required careful consideration of all aspects. The President and the Prime Minister agreed to give further
thought to this question with a view to finding a solution. Some of the
aspects which require consideration are Pakistan aggression, the far- reaching changes which have taken place in that part of Kashmir which is
administered by its lawful Government in the Indian Union, viz. the two
general elections, the powers of a democratically elected Assembly, the
degree of stability and progress achieved which have a direct bearing on

the happiness and welfare of the people, the importance of avoiding
upheavels, lest there should be migration or other undesirable consequences, and the need for deeper friendliness and goodwill which would
put an end to suspicion and anger between the two countries, thus making it easier to bring about a permanent settlement of this problem.
On 29th February 1960, six Indian armed personnel who had inadvertently crossed the cease-fire line in Kashmir were exchanged with six
Pakistanis at Wagah. Subversion and sabotage, organised from Pakistan,
claimed four lives besides inflicting injuries on 12 persons. Three saboteurs from Pakistan-occupied Kashmir were arrested. The border police
intercepted 254 infiltrators from Pakistan/Pakistan occupied Kashmir.
The Pakistan armed forces also figured in several breaches of the ceasefire agreement.
<pg23>
(h) Financial matters.-Indo-Pakistan negotiations to settle various
outstanding financial issues, resumed in July-August 1959, continued during the current year at Ministers' as well as officials' level. The two
Finance Ministers met twice during the year in Rawalpindi in March and
in New Delhi in November. Efforts were made to evaluate the assets
and liabilities, of the undivided Central Government and divided Provinces and their allocation between the two Governments on the lines
settled at the time of partition. Some major items remained unresolved.
These included the valuation and allocation of certain Defence assets,
the determination of the amount of income tax arrears at the time of
partition, including the unassessed income on that date which might
have come in for subsequent assessment and the valuation of the pensionary liability. The two Finance Ministers have decided to meet again
in the near future to find an agreed answer to the outstanding problems.
(i) Trade.-The Indo-Pakistan Trade Agreement (1957-60) expired on
31 January 1960. A fresh Trade Agreement, together with two Protocols, was signed on 21 March 1960. The two Governments accepted the
principle that Indo-Pakistan trade should be expanded in the context of
the expanding economies of the two countries. Under the new Trade
Agreement the main items of exports from Pakistan are raw cotton, Rs. 1.5
Crores and jute cuttings, Rs. 1 Crore; main items of export from India
are cement Rs. 1.5 Crores, iron and steel Rs. 1 Crore and coal 1,30,000
tons, per month.
A conference to review the working of the Trade Agreement and in
particular the Special Payments Agreement connected with the same was
held in Karachi from 24 to 26 November 1960. It was agreed at the
review to add a few items to the export list on either side and to ensure
a strict implementation of the Agreement.
At the discussions between the Prime Minister and the President of
Pakistan in September, 1960, it was agreed that the two countries should
explore possibilities of increasing trade and economic exchanges and
examine the need for opening new offices to further this objective.
(j) Evacuee Property.-

(1) Movable.-The deadlock of previous years in the implementation
of the measures already agreed to by India and Pakistan for settling the
various items under the Movable Property Agreement of June 1950, continued during the year. Important items which have been left unresolved so far, relate to the transfer of lockers and safe deposits of evacuees
lying with banks, the assets of joint Stock Companies and the status of
displaced banks. It was agreed at the discussions between the Prime
Minister and the President of Pakistan in September 1960, that an early
meeting of the Implementation Committee under the Movable Property
Agreement, which was to ensure speedy implementation of the decisions
taken, should be held. Accordingly, a meeting of the Committee was
143 E.A.-4.
<pg24>
held in New Delhi on 29th and 30th November 1960. This meeting reviewed progress made in the implementation of the agreement since the
last meeting held in New Delhi, in April 1958. Both sides agreed that
settlement of outstanding matters should be expedited and every endeavour made to restore the movable assets of displaced persons. The next
meeting of the Committee is to be held in Rawalpindi on 17th and 18th
January 1961.
(2) Immovable.-No progress was made in the matter of an agreement on Immovable Property of evacuees. According to Indian estimates, Rs. 500 crores worth of evacuee urban property was left in Pakistan by refugees who migrated to India, and Rs. 100 crores worth of such
property in India by refugees who migrated to Pakistan.
The Government of East Pakistan have not yet paid compensation/
arrears of rent to Indian landlords whose immovable properties were
acquired or requisitioned by them although a recommendation that such
payment be given was made by the Land Revenue Commission as early
as 8 July 1959.
(k) Co-operation in the rivers in the Eastern Zone of India and
Pakistan.-Irrigation experts of India and Pakistan held two meetings
in New Delhi and Dacca in June-July and October, respectively, to
whatever data was available on projects of mutual interest to the two
countries on the rivers in the Eastern Zone. At these meetings the
Project Reports and river discharge data of the Indian Ganga Barrage
Project for the preservation of the port of Calcutta and Pakistan's
Ganga-Kobadak Project, including the Khulna multi-purpose scheme,
were exchanged. It was also agreed to exchange later more detailed
data on these and the Indian and Pakistan projects on the Tista.
The Government of India have already assured the Government of
Pakistan that they will raise no objection to Pakistan's Karnafuli Project
on consideration of the resulting submergence of some areas in India.
Negotiations on the claims of the Government of India regarding the loss
caused by the flooding of Indian Territory by this project in Pakistan
are to commence when survey of the area has been completed.

(1) Shrines and Holy Places.-No progress was made in the matter of
holding a meeting of the Indo-Pakistan joint Committee on Shrines
and Holy Places, as the Pakistan Government have yet to indicate their
willingness to hold this meeting.
During the year 1960, 16 officially sponsored pilgrim parties from
West Pakistan, comprising 1826 Muslim pilgrims, visited shrines in
<pg25>
India and 9 officially sponsored pilgrim parties from India, comprising
1,463 pilgrims, visited Shrines in West Pakistan.
(m) Minorities in Pakistan.-Despite certain fundamental rights
guaranteed to the minorities of both countries under the Inter-Dominion
Agreement of 1948 and the Pinme Ministers Agreement of 1950, the year
under review did not show any improvement in the well-being of the
Hindu Minority in Pakistan. As in previous years, a number of
offences against property and person of the members of the minority
community in East Pakistan came to notice.
Migration of Hindus from East Pakistan to India showed an upward
trend as compared with the previous year, the figures for 1960 up to
the end of November being 8,858 as against 6,438 for 1959.
(n) Passport and Visa Rules.-In pursuance of the decision taken
at the Indo-Pakistan Conference at Minister level held in October,
1959, the Indian High Commissioner at Karachi raised with the Pakistan Government the question of starting bilateral discussions for the
liberalisation of passport and visa rules for travel between India and
Pakistan. The Government of Pakistan, however, have not shown any
readiness to hold discussions on this question.
From October 1960, the Government of Pakistan have stopped permitting Pakistanis from visiting India ordinarily more than once a year.
This has had the effect of reducing the frequency of visitors from
Pakistan to India, and has also led to hardship among the Hindus, in
East Pakistan many of whom periodically visited their relations in
India. The Government of Pakistan also announced in October 1960,
that they had simplified the procedure for registration and reporting to
the Police for Indian visitors to Pakistan. These relaxations have,
however, not yet been put into effect.
(o) Relief Assistance to victims of Cyclone in East Pakistan.-A gift
of ready made clothing and of medicines of the value of Rs. 25,000 was
made to the East Pakistan authorities for relief of victims of cyclones
in East Pakistan.
The Government of India have also agreed, at the request of the
Pakistan authorities, for rehabilitation of the victims of the cyclones,
notwithstanding shortages in India, to export,
(1) 1,000 tons of galvanised corrugated sheets,

(2) Rs. 17 lakhs worth of bamboos from Tripura.
(3) 36,000 tons of slack coal for burning bricks.
The Indian Railways have also agreed to facilitate the quick movement of 10,000 cattle from West Pakistan to East Pakistan to make
<pg26>
good the severe damage done to the cattle, wealth of East Pakistan
by the cyclones.
D. SOUTH EAST ASIA, AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND
Relation between India and the countries in South East Asia,
Australia and New Zealand continued to be cordial and friendly.
(i) Indo-China States.-On the recommendations of the President,
after his visit to Indo-China, the Government of India decided, as a
token of goodwill, to make a gift of 366 rain gauges and 549 measuring
glasses for the development of the Mekong River Basin (for the joint
benefit of Thailand, Laos, Cambodia, and the Republic of Vietnam).
The supply of the instruments was completed in 1960.
Cambodia.-50 Cows and 8 bulls were presented to the Cambodian
Government in July, 1960. A consignment of agricultural implements
was presented to the Government of Cambodia in response to a request
from them.
Laos.-With a view to a return to peace and law and order in Laos,
where civil strife threatened to spread, the Prime Minister appealed to,
the Co-Chairmen of the Geneva Conference for a revival of the International Commission for Supervision & Control in Laos.
International Commission.-The International Commission for
Supervision and Control in Vietnam continued to exercise its responsibilities to maintain peace in the area during the period under review.
On the basis of the recommendations of the Co-Chairmen of the
Geneva Conference, it was decided to reduce substantially the strength
of the Commissions for Supervision and Control in Vietnam and
Cambodia.
(ii) Indonesia.-President Sukarno came to India in April 1960, on
an unofficial visit, en route to Iraq. Major General Gatot Subroto,
Deputy Chief of Army Staff of the Indonesian Army visited India in
April, 1960 on a goodwill mission.
Dr. Djuanda Kartawidjaja, First Minister of Indonesia, accompanied
by his wife, visited India in June, 1960.
The Chief of the Naval Staff, Admiral Katari, visited Indonesia in
July, 1960 on a goodwill mission.

An Army Agreement between the Governments of India and Indonesia was signed at Djakarta on 3 June, 1960. It provides for co-operation between the armies of the two countries for their mutual benefit.
General A. H. Nasution, Minister for National Security and Chief
of the Army Staff of Indonesia visited India officially arriving on 7th
January, 1961. He left India for Pakistan on 10th January, 1961.
<pg27>
(iii) Thailand.-The Chief of Naval Staff, admiral Katari, visited
Thailand in July, 1960 on a goodwill mission.
(iv) Malaya.-The Chief of the Naval Staff, Admiral Katari, visited
Malaya in June-July 1960 on a goodwill mission. The Chief of General
Staff, Lt. General L. P. Sen, visited Malaya in July-August 1960, on a
goodwill mission.
As in previous years a number of Malayan Military personnel were
trained in India and several Malayan Students were admitted to
Medical and other colleges in India.
(v) New Zealand.-The Hon'ble Mr. E. T. Tirkatene, Minister of
Forests, accompanied by his wife, visited India in February, 1960, to
attend the 5th Session of the Asian and Pacific Forestry Commission and
the 3rd Session of the Teak Sub-Commission in New Delhi.
(vi) Philippines.-H. E. Mr. Diosdado Macapagal, Vice-President,
accompanied by his wife, visited India in April-May, 1960 on a goodwill tour on his way back from Europe.
Mr. Fruetuose Cabahug, Under Secretary Foreign Affairs, visited
India in February 1960.
(vii) Singapore.-The Chief of Naval Staff, Admiral Katari, visited
Singapore in June-July, 1960 on a goodwill mission,
The Chief of General Staff, Lt. General L. P. Sen, visited Singapore
in July-August 1960 on a goodwill mission.
E. EAST ASIA
(i) China.-During the year under review boundary disputes between
India and China remained unresolved. China continued to remain in
occupation of large areas of Indian Territory and to bring forward
claims to other areas which had traditionally been part of India. The
Government of India remained steadfast on their position that the
frontiers of India, which are based on geographical features supported
by tradition and custom, had long been clear and required no further
definition. A series of meetings were held in Delhi between the Prime
Ministers of India and China from 10 to 25 April, 1960, to discuss
these differences. The two Prime Ministers agreed that the officials
of the two Governments should meet to examine the factual material

in the possession of the two Governments on which each side relied for
support of its stand. It was also agreed that for the duration of these
talks every effort should be made by the two parties to avoid friction
and clashes in the border areas.
<pg28>
In pursuance of this directive, teams of officials of the two Governments held meetings spread over three sessions in Peking, Delhi and
Rangoon, respectively during the period June-December 1960. The
report was signed by the officials of two governments on 12 December,
1960, and has since been submitted to the two Governments. The Government of India are now examining the report to consider further action,
on the question.
Notwithstanding the agreement reached at the conclusion of the
Prime Ministers meeting, a number of instances of violations of
Indian air and ground-space along the Sino-Indian boundary came to,
the attention of the Government of India. Prompt protests were made
to the Chinese Government against these violations. Necessary precautions were taken to strengthen the security of the border to prevent anywilful violations of the Indian frontier.
Difficulties encountered by Indian representatives and traders in
Tibet did not materially decrease and the provisions of the 1954 Agreement were not, fully observed. Indian traders continued to sufferdifficulties because of the lack of facilities to repatriate their legitimate
profits after the Indian and Tibetan currency were declared as illegal
tender. Instances of harassment of and discrimination against Indian,
nationals were also reported. In the early part of the year, the
Kashmiri Muslims residing in Lhasa and neighbouring regions were
subjected to severe hardship and intimidation but it was gratifying to,
note that they were eventually permitted to return to India. All these
difficulties were brought to the attention of the Chinese Government
through official notes and memoranda. Official correspondence
exchanged with the Chinese Government since March 1960 was published in White Paper No. IV and presented to Parliament on 14th
November 1960.
During the year under report the Government of India were obliged
to take action under the Foreigners Act against a number of Chinese
Nationals who were indulging in anti-Indian activities on Indian
soil.
Notwithstanding these unfortunate features the Government of
India remained firm in their belief that friendly relations between the
two countries are vital to the peace of Asia and the World India
continued to support the request for seating the representatives of the
People's Republic of China in the United Nations and continued to
entertain the hope that the relations between the two countries could
by persistent endeavours be restored to those of true understanding
and mutual respect for each other's sovereignty and non-interference in
each other's internal affairs.

<pg29>
Tibetan refugees continued to arrive during the year and their
total number rose to 25,000. About 17,000 refugees have been dispersed
from transit camps and temporarily provided with work. The Missamari camp has been closed down. A transit camp at Bhalukpung in
NEFA was started and 1,800 refugees accommodated there, The Buxa
camp now accommodates about 1,500 student lamas. An equal number
of old and infirm monks are accommodated at Dalhousie. A handicrafts training-cum-production centre was established at Dalhousie and
employs 600 skilled Tibetan. refugee craftsmen. A selfhelp centre
consisting of about 200 Tibetan refugees is functioning at Darjeeling.
100 Tibetan refugees have been sent for training in small scale industries to centres at various places in India.
A residential school which will eventually accommodate 500 Tibetan
refugee children has been opened at Mussoorie. Efforts are being made
to establish other similar institutions elsewhere.
A land settlement scheme expected to provide for 500 refugees has
been started at Bhalukpung in NEFA. The Mysore Government have
offered facilities for the settlement of 3,000 refugees on land in their
State. About 1,200 refugees are expected to be rehabilitated on land
in Ladakh.
(ii) Japan.-Indo-Japanese relations not only remained close and
friendly but were further strengthened by the visit to India of Japan's
Crown Prince and Crown Princess during December, 1960.
Shri Lalji Mehrotra, presented his credentials as Ambassador on
29th July, 1960.
A number of Japanese Commercial and Industrial Delegations visited
India. An Indo-Japanese Agreement was concluded under which Japan
would purchase 4 million tons of Indian Iron ore.
A fishery delegation from the Indian Ministry of Food and Agriculture
visited Japan in March 1960.
A team headed by the Union Minister for Law was amongst the 70
delegates from 19 countries who attended the 2-week UN Seminar on
Human Rights for the Asian Region, held at Tokyo in May.
The Union Food and Agriculture Minister, and the Deputy
Minister for Commerce, also visited Japan the same month.
India participated in the 32nd Session at Tokyo of the International
Statistical Institute.
The 49th Inter-Parliamentary Union Conference in Tokyo in
September-October was attended by a delegation from the Indian
Parliament headed by the Speaker, Shri Ananthasayanam Ayyangar.
<pg30>

An all women Japanese mountaineering team successfully climbed
the Deo Tibba peak in the Kulu Valley.
(iii) Mongolia.-An 11-member cultural delegation headed by Shri
A. S. Gonsalves, First Secretary, Indian Embassy, Moscow, visited Mongolia in July, 1960.
F. WEST ASIA
India's close and friendly relations with West Asian countries
happily developed further, and were again marked by close co-operation
in different political and economic matters. In the cultural field, three
troups of leading Indian dancers and musicians gave performances in
the different Arab States. Grants-in-aid were given to prominent institutions interested in promoting better cultural understanding between
India and the countries of West Asia. Books were presented to some
libraries and institutes in these countries, and the Government of India
also offered as in the past years, scholarships for students coming from
them. Private students who wished to join our educational institutions
or to undertake study tours to various agricultural and scientific centres,
were provided with all possible facilities.
(i) Iran.-Tea, blankets and textiles worth approximately Rs. 8,500
were sent for the relief of the victims of the earthquake in Lar in
South Iran.
The Government of India agreed at the request of the Government
of Iran to diver to Iran 70,000 tons of American wheat consigned to
India in order to help the Government of Iran face the acute shortage
of foodgrains caused by late rains in that country. An Air Agreement
between the Government of India and Iran was signed on 10th August,
1960.
Senior officials of the Planning Organisation of the Government of
Iran visited India during the month of March, 1960 and had discussions
with the Deputy Chairman and other officers of the Planning Commission of India. At the invitation of the Planning Organisation of the
Government of Iran Shri Tarlok Singh, Additional Secretary in the
Planning Commission visited Iran from 20 to 27 July, 1960.
Dr. Matine Daftary, Member of the Iranian Senate and former
Prime Minister of Iran, visited India on a goodwill mission in
September, 1960. Mr. Abdulla Entezzam, Chairman, National Iranian
oil Company visited India in October, 1960.
The term of deputation of Professor Indu Shekhar who is working
as a professor of Sanskrit and Indology at the University of Tehran has
been extended for one more year on the request of the Iranian
Government.
The Government of India continued to look after Iranian interests
in China through the Indian missions in that country.
Shri T. N. Kaul, Ambassador of India, relinquished charge of his

post on 16 October, 1960 consequent on his transfer as Deputy High
Commissioner in the High Commission of India in United Kingdom.
(ii) Iraq.-More technical, and educational personnel were recruitedin India for service under the Government of Iraq, and Iraqi officials
visited India for discussions on comparable schemes of internal development in which both Governments are interested.
An Indian trade delegation visited Baghdad to conduct trade talks
and a show room for displaying Indian manufactured and exportable
goods was opened in Baghdad.
In response to an invitation from the Government of Iraq, Shri
V. H. Coelho, Joint Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs was deputed
to Baghdad to attend the celebrations connected with the second
anniversary of 14th July Revolution. A cultural troupe consisting of
Indian dancers and musicians was also sent at the Iraq Government's
invitation to give performances on the occasion.
(iii) Jordan.-Shri I. S. Chopra presented credentials as Ambassador
of India in Jordan.
A Jordanian trade delegation visited India and negotiated a trade
agreement with the Government of India.
(iv) Lebanon.-The Prime Minister of India visited the Lebanon
2nd received a cordial welcome.
India sent a team of observers to participate in the Second Arab
Petroleum Congress held in Beirut.
(v) Palestine Refugees.-The Government of India again contributed to the relief of Palestine Refugees by donating goods to the
UNWRA.
(vi) Turkey.-At the invitation of the Prime Minister of Turkey the
Prime Minister of India paid a visit to Turkey from 20 to 24th May
1960.
(vii) Saudi Arabia.-H. R. H. Prince Sultan, Minister of Communications, Saudi Arabia, accompanied by his wife and senior officials of
the Ministry of Communications vicited India from 28 October to 2nd
November 1960, at the invitation of the Government of India.
An Indian Anti-locust team visited Saudi Arabia as usual early in
the year and carried out anti-locust operations in the Arabian Peninsula.
143 E.A.-5.
<pg32>
G. AFRICA

Relations between India and the independent countries in Africa
generally continued to be cordial during 1960. There was, however,
no improvement in India's relation with South Africa because of
the latter's vigorous pursuit of a policy of apartheid. A large
number of countries in West, Central and other parts of Africa attained
independence during this year. The vast continent of Africa is rapidly
achieving freedom from decades of colonial domination and its States
are at last rightly taking their place in the comity of nations.
(i) Algeria.-India joined a number of other Afro-Asian countries ill
proposing that the question of Algeria should be included in the agenda
of the 15th Session of the U.N. General Assembly. The Indian delegation also co-sponsored the Afro-Asian resolution which was moved at
the Assembly Session and accepted in part,
(ii) Morocco.-Shri P. S. Subramanian, Deputy Election Commissioner of India was deputed to Morocco at the request of the Government of Morocco to assist in organising local elections.
The Government of India sent medicines worth Rs. 50,000 for the
relief of the victims of the earthquake in Agadir.
An Indian delegation visited Morocco and negotiated a trade
agreement with the Government of Morocco.
A Moroccan Goodwill Delegation led by Mr. Allal el Fassi visited
India in November, 1960.
(iii) Sudan.-The two Governments co-operated further in matters
of technical training.
Shri S. S. Ansari has been appointed as Ambassador for India in the
Sudan to succeed Shri R. G. Rajwade.
(iv) United Arab Republic.-The bonds of friendship existing
between India and the United Arab Republic were further strengthened
by the visits of President Gamal Abdel Nasser to India and of the
Indian Prime Minister to the United Arab Republic. Among
the other distinguished leaders who exchanged visits were, on
the Indian side, Shri Morarji Desai, Minister for Finance, who was,
invited to the United Arab Republic, and from the U.A.R., the Minister
of Health, the Chairman of the Suez Canal Authority and the Deputy
Speaker of the National Assembly of the U.A.R.
The Government of India looked after the interests of the U.A.R.
in the United Kingdom and its territories for the greater part of the
year and continue to look after the interests of the U.A.R. in France and
its territories.
<pg33>
India maintained her contingent with the United Nations Emergency
Force in Gaza. The services of General P. S. Gyani of the Indian Army
were placed at the service of the United Nations and he was appointed

Commander of the United Nations Emergency Force in Gaza. The
Prime Minister of India paid a visit to Gaza and met members of the,
Force.
(v) The Congo.-Belgium handed over power on 30 June 1960 to the
Congolese Government headed by Mr. Joseph Kasavubu as President an
Mr. Patrice Lumumba as Prime Minister. The Government of India
recognised this Government. Since then there have been confusing developments in that country, including the seizure of power by a Military
officer, Col. Mobutu. At the request of the Congolese Government, U.N.
Forces were sent to the Congo to help restore law and order in the country. As a part of its contribution and at the request of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, India has sent army experts and medical
personnel to Congo to work with the U.N. Forces. Shri Rajeshwar Dayal
was appointed by the Secretary-General of, the United Nations as his
Special Representative in the Congo.
The U.N. General Assembly at its Special Session recommended in its
resolution of 20 September 1960 the appointment of a U.N. Good Offices
Mission for the Congo of Afro-Asian countries to assist the Congolese in
reconciling their internal differences. After much delay and vacillation
the Mission consisting of representatives of Afro-Asian countries, including
India, assembled in the Congo early in January 1961. Shri Rameshwar
Rao, M.P., is the Government of India's representative on the Mission.
The Government of India opened an Embassy in Leopoldville under
a Charge d' Affairs with the rank of Counsellor.
(vi) Malagasy.-The Proclamation of Madagascar's Independence was
made on 26 June 1960, declaring it an independent State within the French
Community. The independence celebrations were held from 29 to 31
July, 1960. On behalf of the Government of India, Shri I. J. Bahadur
Singh, Commissioner of India in Nairobi, and Shri J. A. Shah, Charge d
Affairs, Embassy of India, Tananarive, attended the celebrations.
(vii) Mauritius.-Mauritius suffered two cyclones in January-February
1960 which caused untold havoc ; several deaths, many injured, and widespread destruction and devastation of the sugar industry on which depends the main economy of the island. As a gesture of assistance to the
victims the Government of India sent relief supplies in the form of blankets, coir products, sarees, clothing, utensils., etc., worth about rupees two
lakhs.
(viii) West Africa-Ghana.-On 1 July 1960, the Constitution of Ghana,
came into operation and Ghana became a sovereign Republic within the
<pg34>
Commonwealth. Shri V. K. Krishna Menon, Defence Minister and Shri
Khub Chand, High Commissioner for India in Ghana, represented the
Government of India at the celebrations at Accra.
Nigeria.-Nigeria attained independence on 1 October 1960 and be-

came a member of the Commonwealth. Shri A. K. Sen, Law Minister,
Shri P. N. Haksar, High Commissioner-designate for India in Nigeria,
and Shri Rameshwar Rao, M.P. represented the Government of India
it the celebrations at Lagos.
The status of the Commission of India in Nigeria was raised to that
of High Commission with effect from 1 October 1960 and Shri P. N.
Haksar appointed High Commissioner.
Cameroons (French).-Cameroons (French) achieved independence on
1 January 1960 as the Cameroon Republic. Shri R. Goburdhan, India's
Ambassador in Morocco, represented Government of India at the Independence Celebrations.
Liberia.-The High Commissioner for India in Ghana has been concurrently accredited as Ambassador to Liberia.
Guinea.-The President of Guinea, Mr. Sekou Toure, visited India
in September 1960.
The High Commissioner for India in Ghana was concurrently accredited as Ambassador to Guinea.
Togoland.-The French administered U.N. Trust Territory of Togoland became independent on 27 April 1960 as the Republic of Togo.
On behalf of the Government of India, Shri R. G. Rajwade, Ambassador of India to the Sudan, attended the independence celebrations of
the Republic of Togo at Lome.
(ix) South Africa.-The South African Government continued the
policy of apartheid extending its application further into the realms of
sport and public health with the provision for separate blood-bank for
the different racial groups.
Further proclamations under the Group Areas-Act were issued to declare the magisterial districts of Estcourt (Natal), Warmbaths (Transvaal),
Bellville (Cape of Good Hope), Pietermaritzburg (Natal), Haarlem
(Uniondale), Suurbraak (Swellendam), Port Elizabeth, Breidbach in the
district of King Williams Town, the districts of Wolmaransstad, Richmond, Steynsburg, Prieska, Mossel Bay (Cape of Good Hope), Coligny
in the district of Lichtenburg, the borough of Newcastle, Newsel-Umdloti
Beach in the district of Inanda, Wolseley in the district of Tulbagh, Rustenburg, Greyville and Cato Manor areas of Durban as group areas for
different racial communities. From the Cato Manar area of Durban
<pg35>
some 40,000 Indians and 100,000 Africans are being evicted in spite of
severe protestations made to the Group Areas Board by the Indian Ratepayers' Association. From Rustendburg about 1,000 Indians are being
turned out.
In March 1960, the Pan-African Congress, which was formed over a

year ago as a splinter group of the African National Congress, sent a call
to the South African people to launch a peaceful campaign against the
Pass Laws imposed by the South African Government. On 21 March
1960 thousands of South Africans reported to the police without their
passes and sought arrest. Their object was to demonstrate the force of
organised non-violence, as a first step in the campaign to reverse apartheid. At Sharpeville, 36 miles from Johannesburg, when the Africans
were marching in a procession against the Pass Laws, the Police apparently without provocation opened fire on them killing 50 and wounding
150. On 22 March, a similar demonstration took place in the Langa
township pear Cape Town. The police again resorted to firing and killed
66 Africans and wounded about 200 persons. The South African Govern
ment followed these shootings with strict measures of reprisals. All
meetings of all races were banned in Johannesburg, Durban and Cape
Town from the 24th March. On 30 March 1960 a State of Emergency
was declared in 80 out of 300 magisterial districts of the Union. The
African National Congress, the Pan-African Congress and other organisations were banned under the Unlawful Organisations Act. A number of
people of all races including leading figures in the Liberal Party, Congress
of Democrats, Indian Congress, African National Congress and the PanAfrican Congress were arrested under the Emergency Laws. About 1,700
persons including 94 Whites, 24 Coloureds and 1,494 Africans, were reported to have been detained tinder the Emergency Regulations,
The Sharpeville and Langa shooting outrages evoked a world-wide
condemnation of the South African Government. A Commission of
Enquiry was appointed by the Government but though the Commission's
report has been submitted, the Government have, for reasons best known
to them, not made it public yet.
The Pass Laws, which were temporarily relaxed in the wake of Sharpeville and Langa shootings have been reinforced. Reference books for
native women have been made compulsory. From 1 December, the South
African Government has decreed, that no one may employ any African
woman of the apparent age of 16 or over till she was in possession of a
reference book.
While some leaders like Dr. Dadoo and Mr. Tambo, Vice-President of
the African National Congress, who could not be arrested under the
Emergency Regulations, escaped to London, others critical of apartheid
<pg36>
were either refused permission to enter South Africa or deported. The
Rt. Rev. Ambrose Reeves, the Anglican Bishop of Johannesburg, was deported on 12 September 1960 in the greatest secrecy. Recently he has
been permitted to return to South Africa.
In june-july 1960, the Government of India directed their representatives in Asia and Africa to present a note to the countries to which
they are accredited giving in brief the action taken by the Government
of India during the last 14 years to combat the evil of the racial policies
of South Africa. In this note, the countries in Africa and Asia were
informed that the Government of India would be glad to know what

measures they proposed to adopt to combat South Africa's racial policies
so that the policies could be co-ordinated with a view to bringing effective and combined pressure on the Government of South Africa.
During the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference in London
in May 1960, the Prime Ministers availed themselves of Mr. Louw's presence in London to have informal discussions with him about the racial
situation in South Africa. During these informal discussions, Mr. Louw
explained the Union's policies. The Prime Ministers emphasized that
the Commonwealth itself was a multi-racial association and expressed
the need to ensure good relations between all member States and the
peoples of the Commonwealth.
As is well known, the Government of India had imposed a ban in
1946 on. all imports from and exports to South Africa. This year, the
Governments of Ghana and Federation of Malaya also announced a
trade boycott of South Africa. The Government of Eastern Nigeria
has also issued instructions to its Government Departments not to buy
South African goods.
At its 14th Session. the UN General Assembly had renewed its appeal
to the Union of South Africa to enter into negotiations with the Governments of India and Pakistan with regard to the question of the treatment of people of Indian origin in the Union of South Africa. In pursuance of this resolution, the Government of India again addressed the
Government of South Africa through the South African High Commissioner in London and the South African Permanent Representative in
New York on 4 April 1960. In these communications, the Government
of India conveyed to the South African Government their willingness to
act in accordance with UN General Assembly's resolution and expressed
their desire and readiness to enter into and pursue negotiations with the
Government of the Union of South Africa. While the South African
High Commissinoner in London acknowledged receipt of the communication from the High Commissioner of India, the Government of the
Union of South Africa, did not take any step to implement the wishes of
the General Assembly. The Government of India have, therefore, again
raised this issue of the treatment of people of Indian origin in the Union
of South Africa at the current session of the General Assembly.
<pg37>
In October 1960 the South African Government held a referendum
on the proposal to make South Africa a Republic. The verdict given by,
the referendum is in favour of the Nationalist Party, which is in power
at the moment. The right of voting in the referendum was, however,
granted only to the Whites who total 1:6 million; the country's 12 million non-Whites were denied any say on this important issue. Although
the necessary legislation to implement the decision may not be passed
by the South African Parliament until some time next year, the question
of her continuing as a member of the Commonwealth after she assumes a
republic status is likely to engage the attention of the Commonwealth
Government.
(x) South-West Africa.-The Committee on South-West Africa ap-

pointed by the General Assembly had observed in its report submitted
to the General Assembly that "the mandatory Power bases its administration of the Territory on a "policy of apartheid" and "White supremacy" contrary to the Mandate System and to the Charter of the United
Nations, and its goal is the annexation of the Territory". In the note
presented to the African and Asian nations through Indian Diplomatic
Representatives in those countries, the Government of India stated that
they would be glad to co-ordinate with those Governments further action
in regard to South West Africa, both inside and outside the United
Nations to ensure that the mandatory authority carries out in full the
obligations undertaken by it to "promote to the utmost the moral and
material well-being and the social progress of the inhabitants of the Territory".
On 30th September 1960, Siberia has informed the UN General Assembly that, together with Ethiopia, it would file a 'contentious action'
against South Africa in the World Court in an effort to resolve the issue
of South-West Africa.
(xi) Ethiopia.-As in the past years, the Government of India continued to extend training facilities in Defence Establishments in India to
Defence personnel from Ethiopia.
In March 1960 the Imperial Ethiopian Government extended art invitation to the Government of India to send a special Military Mission
to attend the 25th Anniversary of the Haile Selassie I Military School at
Harar, which was scheduled to take place towards the end of April 1960.
The Government of India accepted this invitation and sent a delegation
to Ethiopia led by Maj.-Gen. M. S. Wadalia Deputy Chief of Army Staff,
with two other Army Officers as members. The Indian delegation reached Addis Ababa on 28th April 1960 and left Addis Ababa on 7th May
1960 after participating in the Silver jubilee celebrations.
In May/June 1960, a Selection Committee led by Mr. Ato Tedla
Tabeja, Head of the Inspection Department of the Ministry of Education and Fine Arts of the imperial Ethiopian Government and including
<pg38>
Mr. B. G. Lister, Programme Officer, visited India and interviewed a
number of candidates for appointment as teachers in Ethiopia. In all,
the Government of Ethiopia have so far recruited 46 Indian teachers
this year. On a request received from the Imperial Ethiopian Embassy
in New Delhi, passport facilities were granted by the Government of
India to the selected candidates.
In July 1956, the Government of India received a request from the
Imperial Ethiopian Government for the loan of India Army Officers to
organise a Military Academy for the Ethiopian Government. This request was accepted by the Government of India and the services of a
number of Army Officers were placed at the disposal of that Government for that purpose. In September 1960, the Government of Ethiopia
extended an invitation to the Government of India to send a delegation
to Ethiopia to participate in the first Graduation Ceremony of the First

Batch of Gentlemen Cadets to be held on 1st October 1960. In view
of the close association of India with the Military Academy, the Emperor
of Ethiopia had made a special request that the Indian delegation should
be led by the Chief of the Army Staff. The Government of India accepted the invitation and General K. S. Thimmayya was deputed to participate in the Graduation Ceremonies in Ethiopia. The celebration lasted from 1st to 3rd October 1960.
(xii) Somalia.-In response to an invitation extended by the Somali
Republic to its Independence Celebrations from 1st to 4th July 1960,
the Government of India sent a delegation to Mogadiscio with Smt.
Lakshmi N. Menon, Deputy Minister for External Affairs, as its leader
and Shri jagat Singh, Commissioner for India at Aden, as member.
H.EUROPE
Relations with European countries continued to be cordial and
friendly and were further strengthened by various cultural, trade and
economic exchanges.
The President of India, Dr. Rajendra Prasad, paid a State visit to the
U.S.S.R. from 20 June to 5 July 1960. The President was accompanied
by Shri Jagjiwan Ram, Minister of Railways, the Foreign Secretary, Shri
S. Dutt and the President's Secretary, Shri A. V. Pai.
Shri Morarji Desai, the Finance Minister, visited the Federal Republic
of Germany, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Poland and the U.S.S.R. He
was accompanied by Shri B. K. Nehru, Commissioner General of India.
and held important discussions with Finance Ministers and other important
personalities in these countries.
During the visit of the Finance Minister to the U.S.S.R., he held talks
with the leaders of the Soviet Government. The question of further
<pg39>
Sovit economic aid for the Third Five-Year Plan was discussed and the
Soviet Government later expressed their readiness to grant to India a
credit of 500 million Roubles to be utilized for the Third Five-Year Plan.
This sum is in addition to the credit of 1500 million Roubles for which
an agreement was signed between the two Governments on 12 September,
1959.
Diplomatic relations with Finland were raised to Embassy level in
February 1960 and a resident Charge d' Affairs a.i. has been sent to
Helsinki.
Certain special features relating to individual countries are detailed
below:(i) Austria.-India accepted the Austrian offer of 2 scholarships to
Indian nationals for higher studies.
(ii) Belgium.-Rajkumari Amrit Kaur visited Belgium and Holland on

behalf of WHO in June 1960.
(iii) Bulgaria.-A Trade and Payments Agreement was signed in March
1960 between Bulgaria and India to replace the Agreement which expired
the previous year.
(iv) Czechoslovakia.-An Indo-Czech Trade and Payments Agreement
was signed in Prague by Shri K. R. F. Khilnani, joint Secretary, Ministry
of Commerce and Industry.
An Air Transport Agreement was signed in Prague on 19 September
1960.
Pandit Ravi Shanker, the well-known Sitar player, performed in
Prague for the Czecholovak Spring Music Festival. The Czech authorities sent their State Circus and a group of musicians to India.
(v) Denmark.-India has accepted Denmark's offer of two scholarships,
to Indian students for 1960-61.
An Honorary Consul General has been appointed in Copenhagen to
assist the Ambassador of India, stationed at Stockholm, who is concurrently
accredited to Denmark.
(vi) France.-India has accepted the following scholarships offered by
France:1. 49 scholarships for specialised training (6 months' duration):
2. 13 scholarships for higher studies (9 months' duration):
3. 10 scholarships for post-graduates for higher scientific and
technical education (carried forward from 1959-60 to 196061),
143 M of E.A.-6.
<pg40>
(vii) Federal Republic of Germany.-Dr. Theodor Heuss, ex-President
of the Federal Republic of Germany, visited India.
The Instruments of Ratification of the Agreement for Avoidance of
Double Taxation of Income signed earlier between India and West
Germany, were exchanged during the, year under review.
(viii) Greece.-An Honorary Consul General has been appointed by
India in Athens. An Indian cultural troupe visited Greece in October
1960.
(ix) Hungary.-Negotiations are being conducted to utilise the
Hungarian offer of a credit of Rs. 8 crores for the purchase of capital goods
from Hungary.
(x) Italy.-The Chief of the Army Staff, General K. S. Thimayya,

accepted an invitation from the Italian Commander-in-Chief and spent a
few days in Italy.
India has accepted an Italian offer of 30 scholarships for post-graduate
or research studies. Italy has accepted the offer made by India of two
scholarships to Italian students under the Reciprocal Scholarship Scheme.
(xi) Netherlands.-The Hague Academy of International Law offered
two scholarships to Indian nationals which India has accepted. The
Institute of Social Studies in the Hague granted fellowships for a 2-year
course in Social Sciences to three Indian students, and a 7-month course
to seven Indian students in Social Welfare Policy.
The Royal Tropical Institute' Amsterdam has instituted a Chair
Extraordinary in the University of Amsterdam for modern Indian
languages and literature.
(xii) Norway.-India and Norway have ratified the Agreement for the
Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Instruments of Ratification have
been exchanged.
In response to an invitation from the Norwegian Government, the
Deputy Minister of Agriculture, Shri M. V. Krishnappa visited Norway
in May 1960.
India has accepted Norway's offer of a scholarship for higher studies/
advanced training in agriculture.
(xiii) Poland.-Mr. J. Cyrankiewicz, Prime Minister of Poland, paid a
visit to India for a week in September, 1960.
A credit Agreement was signed with Poland in May 1960 in New Delhi.
A delegation visited India and a treaty was signed in June 1960 between India and Poland providing for Cooperation in Maritime Transport.
<pg41>
(xiv) Rumania.-India's collaboration with Rumania in oil exploration
programme is proceeding to mutual advantage.
The scheme of scholarships to Rumania is being implement.
Rumanian Trade Delegation headed by their Commerce Minister,
Mr. Gogu Radulescu, visited India during December, 1960 to negotiate an
agreement for the export of iron ore from India to Rumania. A long
term agreement on export of iron ore to Rumania in return for import
of Rumanian petroleum products, oil drilling equipment, etc., was signed
on 22 December 1960.
(xv) Switzerland.-An agreement was signed between the two Governments for a Swiss credit to India of 100 million Swiss francs.

The Swiss Government's offer of 5 scholarships for post-graduate studies
was also accepted.
(xvi) Spain.-India has accepted Spain's offer of one scholarship to an
Indian student to study Spanish.
(xvii) Sweden.-India has accepted the offer of two scholarships from
Sweden.
(xviii) United Kingdom.-In May 1960 the Prime Minister attended
the 10th Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference held at London.
The conference reviwed major international problems, and, in particular,
the problem of disarmament. In its study of world economic problems
questions such as economic assistance to the less developed countries,
European trade developments and the impact of the Common Market on
countries outside Europe and the increasing necessity for closer co-operation among Commonwealth countries were discussed. The question of
the constitutional development of the Commonwealth with special reference to the future of the smaller dependent territories was also reviewed.
It was decided to, carry out a detailed study of this aspect and in pursut
ance of this decision a group of senior officials from Britain, Canada, New
Zealand, Australia, India And Ghana met in July 1960, to make an analysis
of the constitutional developments of the Commonwealth with special,
reference to the, future of dependent territories. India was represented
by, the Commonwealth Secretary. The report of the study group has
since, been. forwarded through the British Government to the Governments of the member countries for further consideration.
On an invitation from the Government of India, the Hon'ble Mr. B.
H. Benn, Minister of Natural Resources of British Guiana and Mr. G. E.
Luck, Secretary to the Government of British Guiana, visited India
during April 1960. The party visited various development projects in
the country and had discussions with the Prime Minister and Ministers
<pg42>
of the Union and State Governments. The delegation approached the
Government of India for assistance in the setting up of an Economic Planning Unit on the lines of the plannig Commission, and also for other
types of technical assistance which are under consideration.
At the invitation of the Commonwealth Relations Office four members of the Congress Party visited the United Kingdom as the guests of
the British Government from 8 November to 6 December. The object of
the visit was to study the working of the British Parliament and of thedifferent party organisations, and to see various aspects of British industrial, social and cultural life.
On the invitation of the Government of India, Her Majesty Queen
Elizabeth II and His Royal Highness the Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh accompanied by a party of 69 (including Press) others visited India
for three weeks during January/February 1961.

(xix) U.S.S.R.-The Soviet Minister for Foreign Trade, Mr. M. S.
Patolichev, visited India in October 1960 and a long-term Trade Agreement between India and the U.S.S.R. was concluded on 25 October 1960.
Indo-Soviet trade which is now regulated by the Trade Agreement
signed on 16 November, 1958, and current till the 31st December, 1963,
has been growing at a satisfactory rate. Our exports to the Soviet Union,
which stood at Rs. 252 lakhs in 1954, have now risen during JanuarySeptember, 1960 to Rs. 2189 lakhs. The figures for imports during the
same period show a rise from Rs. 113 lakhs to Rs. 1004 lakhs.
According to this Agreement, payments between the two countries
will be made in non-convertible Indian rupees.
The USSR exports to India consist mainly of non-ferrous metals, oil
products and machinery and equipment for various metallurgical, power
and construction projects. Indian exports to the USSR consist mainly'
of fabricated materials and agricultural products.
A Cultural Agreement between the two countries was signed earlierin February 1960.
Among those who came to India from the U.S.S.R. were the Soviet
Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Machtkevich, the Soviet Minister for Geology Mr. P. Antropov and the Soviet Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Pushkin.
From India, the Minister of Agriculture, Shri P. S. Deshmukh led a
delegation of Ministers of Agriculture from various States to the U.S.S.R.
for a fortnight.
A number of other delegations also went to the U.S.S.R.
The Minister for Mines and Oil, Shri K. D. Malavia, once again
visited the U.S.S.R. in June 1960 to explore how best the Soviet Unioncould aid us further in oil explorations.
<pg43>
(xx) Yugoslavia.-The Foreign Minister of Yugoslavia, Mr. Popovic,
visited India in April 1960. The Minister of Scientific Research and
Cultural Affairs, Prof. Humayun Kabir, went to Yugoslavia in June 1960.
An Agreement on Scientific and Technical Cooperation between India
and Yugoslavia was signed in January 1960.
Credit Agreement for the delivery of capital goods and equipment
was signed on 21 January 1960 according to which 40 million U.S. dollars
will be made available to India. A Trade and Payments Agreement was
also signed on the same day between the two countries. This agreement
seeks to increase the volume of trade to the maximum possible levels.
India and Yugoslavia have also signed a cultural agreement. It is
proposed to set up University Chairs for the propagation of Indian and

Slovak studies.
The Indian frigate, INS 'Talwar', went to Yugoslavia on a four-day
goodwill visit.
A mountaineering expedition came from Yugoslavia, and successfully
climbed Trishul.
I. THE AMERICAS
India's relations with American countries continued to develop favourably during the year.
NORTH AMERICA.
(i) Canada.-A fine example of the co-operation with Canada was the
installation of the Canada-India Reactor at Trombay. The Reactor
became critical in the month of July 1960. The Prime Minister formally
inaugurated it on 16th January 1961 before representatives from all over
the world. Although, less widely known, the second Power House of
the Kunda Project was also completed this year with Canadian aid. Mr.
Gordon Churchill, Minister for Veterans Affairs and Leader of the House
of Commons of Canada attended the opening ceremony of this second
Power House in January 1961.
A group of students from the National Defence College of Canada
paid a visit to India in April 1960 as part of their annual overseas tour.
A delegation led by Shri A. M. Thomas, Deputy Minister (Food),
visited Canada on the invitation of the Canadian Government in August
1960.
(ii) U.S.A.-There were many notable visits of dignitaries, students,
artists and naval ships on both sides, climaxed by the visit of President
<pg44>
Eisenhower to India and of the Prime Minister to the United Nations
in September/October 1960.
During the year, Ambassador Chagla held several Press Conferences.
and delivered many speeches to explain India's view-point on national
and international issues. Some of his speeches were broadcast and/or
televised. The Ambassador received hon. Degrees of Doctor of Law from
two important American Universities, viz. Temple and Boston.
A number of ships of the U.S. Navy, viz., USS "U.S.A." USS "Bonhomme", USS "Valcour", USS "Morton", USS "Hammer", USS "Canberra" and USS "Greenwich Bay", paid courtesy visits to various Indian
ports during the year. These ships and their crews received a friendly
welcome.
The Government of India and the United State Air Force agreed to
collaborate in a joint venture of scientific research study of atmospheric

circulations upto 100,000 feet both in India and in the U.S.A. The
study in India is expected to be carried out during the months of March/
April 1961. The results of this joint venture may well prove a significant landmark in Indo-US collaboration. The Government of India
have also decided to participate in the Indian Ocean Expedition which
is being organised by the International Council of Scientific Unions.
President Eisenhower on behalf of the Government of U.S.A. signed
a PL, 480 Agreement with Shri S. K. Patil, Union Minister for Food and
Agriculture on 4 May 1960 for the purchase of 17 million tons of Wheat
and Rice worth dollars 1,276 million. The Agreement provides that the
rupees equivalent of not more than dollars 538 million representing
about 42.1 per cent of the rupees accruing to the U.S. Government on
account of the purchases by India, will be given as loan to the Government of India for financing such projects to promote economic development as may be mutually agreed. The Agreement envisages a fouryear programme which would make a significant contribution to India's
Third Five-Year Plan.
An event of significance, was the winning of the celebrated Golden
Laural Trophy by the well-known Film Producer, Shri Satyajit. Ray for
his film "Aparajito", which was shown for the first time in the U.S.A.
this year. The premieres of "Aparajito", "Quest for Peace", "Radha
Krishna" and "Folk Dances of India" were well presented and well attended.
The following Indian dignitaries paid visits to the U.S.A.
(i) Dr. S. Radhakrishnan, Vice-President of India addressed Harvard
and Earlham Universities at their invitation.
(ii) Shri Morarji Desai, Minister of Finance, attended the meeting
of the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the International Finance Corporation. During his visit the Finance Minister
<pg45>
addrssed important American organisations and held discussions with
individual businessmen on Indo-U.S. collaboration in the commercial
and economic fields. India's development programmes and her need for
foreign investments during the Third Five-Year Plan were discussed with
specific reference to the possibility of long term loans at reasonable rates
of interest.
(iii) Shri S. K. Patil, Minister for Food and Agriculture visited the
U.S.A. to arrange for the import of foodgrains on a long term basis and
so to build up a buffer stock.
(iv) Prof. Humayun Kabir, Minister for Scientific Research and Cultural Affairs visited the U.S.A. to address the opening plenary session
of the Institute of International Education.
(v) Shri Raj Bahadur, Minister for Transport and Communications,
flew on the inaugural Boeing flight of Air India International Ltd. to

New York via London.
(vi) Shri Satish Chandra, Deputy Minister for Commerce and Industry visited the U.S.A. for detailed discussions on U.S. collaboration
in the development of the fertiliser industry in India during the Third
Plan.
(vii) Shri Hukam Shigh, Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha paid a visit to
the USA under the American Leadership Exchange Programme.
(viii) Shrimati Indira Gandhi was the guest of the U.S. Government in
November 1960. She witnesed the final stages of the Presidential Elections, and visited social and child welfare centres.
(ix) Shri Sham Nath, Mayor of Delhi attended the International
Mayors Conference held in Chicago, Illinois from 11th to 14th May
1960.
(x) The U.S. Government extended an invitation to the Indian
National Congress to send an observer to witness the Presidential Elections. The All India Congress Committee accepted the invitation and
sent Shri G. Rajagopalan, M.P., General Secretary of the Indian National
Congress to the U.S.A.
(xi) An Indian Badminton Team visited the U.S.A.
The following agreements were signed between the Government of
India and the U.S.A. during the year under report:(1) Supply of Food grains to India.
(2) DLF Loan Agreement.
(3) Amendment to the Agreement between the Government of
India and the Government of the United States of America
for the avoidance of double taxation with respect to taxes on
income.
<pg46>
(4) Amendment of the Agreement between the United States of
America and India of 1950 to promote further mutual
understanding between the peoples of the United States,
and India by a wider exchange of knowledge and professional talents through educational contacts.
A sample of polished black granite stone which is to be used for the
Mahatma Gandhi's Samadhi at Rajghat was sent in response to a request
from our Mission in New York for use in a "Peace Shrine and Garden"
proposed to be set up at Christmas, Florida.
In October inter-Governmental consultations were held in New Delhi
between the U.S.A. and India about revising the present Air Agreement.
These talks proved inconclusive.

CENTRAL AMERICA.
(i) Cuba.-Shri M. C. Chagla, Ambassador of India in the U.S.A.,
paid his first visit to Cuba and presented his credentials as Minister on
12th January 1960. It has since been decided between the Governments
of India and Cuba to raise their diplomatic representation to the level
of Embassies.
(ii) Mexico.-Shri M. C. Chagla, Ambassador of India in the U.S.A.
and concurrently accredited as Ambassador to Mexico, accompanied by
Shri P. L. Bhandari, Charge d' Affaires in Mexico, participated in the
150th anniversary of Mexican Independence, the 100th anniversary of
the Triumph of Reform and the 50th anniversary of the Mexican Revolution. The celebrations were held from 12th to 17th September 1960.
Shrimati Indira Gandhi paid goodwill visit to Mexico from 24th
October 1960 to 4th November 1960 at the invitation of the Mexican
Government. She was received by the President of Mexico and by Senora
Mateos.
(iii) Panama.-Mr. Miguel Jomoreno, Minister of Foreign Relations
of Panama, accompanied by five members of his party visited India as
State guest in March 1960.
SOUTH AMERICA.
(i) Argentina.-The Indian Ballet 'Ranga Sri' visited Argentina in
August 1960 and gave two performances in that country. The performances were greatly appreciated and the Ballet received very favourable
notices in the local Press.
(ii) Brazil.-The Government of India contributed towards the aid
of victims of the floods caused by the rupture of the Oros Dam in Brazil.
Shri M. K. Kirpalani, Ambassador of India, Rio de Janeiro, represented India at the inauguration of Brazilia, the new capital of Brazil,
on 21st April 1960. The President of India sent a message of greetings,
to the President of Brazil on the occasion.
<pg47>
The Government of India, agreed to the opening of the Brazilian
Consulate in Madras during the year.
(iii) Chile.-The Indo-Chilean Trade Agreement which expired on
31st December 1959 has since been renewed.
Shri R. S. Mani, Ambassador of India signed the new Agreement at
Santiago on 10th March 1960.
The Government or India has sent relief supplies worth about Rs.
one lakh and five thousand, consisting of jute bags, tea and ready-to-wear
garments for the victims of the earthquake in Chile.

The President and the Prime Minister sent messages of sympathy to
the President of Chile on the occasion.
(iv) Ecuador.-Shri M. K. Kirpalani, the Ambassador of India to
Brazil, represented India at the inauguration of the, new President of
Ecuador at Quito on 1st September 1960.
J. EXTERNAL PUBLICITY
(i) Generat.-The reorganisation of the External Publicity Division
and its personnel was carried a step further during the period under
review. While no major expansion projects could be taken in hand on
account of financial stringency, by readjustment of existing resources and
a judicious exploitation of various publicity media the Headquarters
and overseas Information Posts attempted to meet the challenge of the
increasing interest in, and growing awareness of, India abroad.
(ii) Changes in cadre.-In implementation of the decisions taken in
1959 relating to the reorganisation of the cadre of the Information Service of India, tile grade of Information Assistants was abolished. Out of
ten information Assistants on 10 July, 1959, two were promoted as
Assistant Information Officers while the remaining eight were absorbed
as Grade III officers of the IFS(B) as a result of their opting for that
cadre. A temporary post of Assistant Information Officer at Headquarters was not continued during the current financial year, thus bringing
the number of such posts from 11 to 10. This step was taken to facilitate the gradual reduction of the ten Assistant Information Officers' posts
to eight posts in the junior Scale of the IFS. It may be mentioned that
six posts of Assistant Information Officers at Headquarters have already
been converted to posts in the junior Scale of the IFS. One Assistant
Press Attache's post at Washington was held in abeyance and a post of
IFS probationer was created instead. An IFS probationer was appointed
to this post. In accordance with the decision to fill up 50 per cent of
<pg48>
the vacancies in the grade of Information Officers from the Senior Scale
of IFS, it was decided to carry over the post of Press Attache in Tokyo
to the Senior Scale of IFS and appoint an IFS officer to that post. The
year under review saw the completion of the work connected with the
grant of contracts upto the age of superannuation to the Publicity Officers against six permanent posts of Public Relations Officers, 29 permanent posts of Information Officers and 14 permanent posts of Assistant
Information Officers. The draft contract form which gives full security
of tenure, as in the case of a permanent Government servant, was finalised in consultation with the Ministries of Finance and Law, and will be
issued to the officers concerned before the end of the year.
(iii) Organisation and staff.-A total staff of 546 is employed in the
External Publicity Division Headquarters and the Information Posts
abroad. This includes 9 Public Relations Officers, one Deputy Director,
Information Service, 37 Information Officers, 6 Attaches (Information),
18 Assistant Information Officers, 138 India-based Assistants and clerks

etc. and 337 locally recruited personnel in the various Missions.
Although an Assistant Press Attache was sanctioned for Prague in the
last financial year, the filling up of the post was held tip during the
period under review because of formalities connected with the relaxation
of the ban on the creation of new posts. Similarly, proposals for the
establishment of new Information units at Mexico, Santiago, Madrid,
Rabat, Addis Ababa, Kampala, Beirut and Trinidad had to be deferred
on account of the ban on creation of posts. The Information Post at
Washington was strengthened by the posting of an Assistant Press Attache
to look after the increased publicity work of the office of the Commissioner General for Economic Affairs.
(iv) Budget and Expenditure.-The total budgetary provision for the
External Publicity Division including all Information Units abroad for
the year 1960-61 amounted to Rs. 107.15 lakhs. Of this, 24-99 lakhs
represent expenditure at Headquarters, while Rs. 82:16 lakhs was to be
spent on the Information Posts abroad. This expenditure includes
salaries and allowances of officers and staff (India-based and local), cost
of passages, rents and taxes for premises, cost of furniture and other
equipment, postage, wireless transmissions, production and distribution
of publicity material, audiovisual publicity, exhibitions abroad and
expenditure on foreign press delegations visiting India at the Government of India's invitation. Until more funds become available for
external publicity, the proportion of total resources that can be deployed
for actual information and publicity work after meeting the basic needs,
will continue to be small. The External Publicity Division maintains
on the present budget 42 separate Information Units and provides
information facilities to 94 Indian Posts abroad.
<pg49>
(v) Press and Information Media.-The External Publicity Division is
responsible for the formulation of publicity policy and planning of publicity programmes for the projection of India abroad through various
media like the press, radio, films, pamphlets books etc. It is also respossible for the internal publicity of the Ministry of External Affairs
since July, 1958. The Division continued to provide the following main
overseas services:
(a) Material for the press, both written and pictorial.
(b) Reference material on all aspects of India.
(c) Supply of newspapers, periodicals and prestige publicity material for reading rooms of overseas Information Offices and
for free distribution.
(d) Pamphlets and books on India.
(e) Display material including posters, photographs, maps.
(f) Exhibition material.

(g) Gramophone records, discs and tape-recorded material for use
by the local radio.
(h) Films, for non-commercial exhibition and for television.
In selection and supply of publicity material for various categories,
more emphasis continued to be laid on the regional approach and the
special requirements of different overseas posts. Authentic news and
background to news about India was supplied to our Posts through
Wireless Transmissions broadcast three times a day. These transmissions are at present received by 37 posts and arrangements are in hand
to extend the service to a few more posts. This was supplemented by
ad hoc news cables service for some of our posts not picking up our daily
morse transmissions.
In addition, out Posts abroad were regularly supplied by airmail
with series of feature articles, background notes and special write-ups on
various aspects of life and progress in India'. Since January, 1960, over
125 specially prepared feature articles and 25 photo features were distributed to 94 Indian Posts abroad.
For special publicity campaigns on important occasions, such as
Republic Day, Independence Day, Children's Day, Mahatma Gandhi's
Birthday and VIP's visits abroad, selected material was supplied to ourPosts.
During the period the libraries attached to our Missions abroad were
continuously expanded and a large number of books on various subjects
(including books in Hindi, Urdu, Panjabi etc.) were supplied at an
<pg50>
approximate cost of Rs. 1,25,000. Our Missions abroad were supplied
with collections of Indian newspapers and periodicals (at an approximate cost of Rs. 1,15,000) for selective distribution in their areas. They
were also supplied with a number of Government publications produced
by Central and State Governments at an estimated cost of Rs. 5,46,000
for free distribution in foreign countries.
Based on material supplied from Headquarters our Information Posts
abroad continued to bring out daily, periodical and special bulletins in
English and in many cases in local languages, for free distribution to
leaders of public opinion, individuals and institutions in their respective
areas.
The mailing lists were rationalised and enlarged, whenever possible,
during the year. Besides these regular bulletins, special handouts were
also brought out by our Missions on important issues of world importance giving the Indian point of view.
Our major Posts also brought out quarterly, half-yearly or annual
reviews and special Republic Day brochures for distribution. Important
publications were translated and issued by the Posts in local languages
as these have proved useful and popular among foreign readers interest-

ed in India.
The Overseas Information Posts kept the Division regularly informed
of the trends of public opinion abroad by cable and airmail. From the
material thus received the Division continued to issue a daily review
called the "World Press Review" circulated to about 600 recipients.
The Division continued to publish a monthly magazine called "Foreign
Affairs Record", containing documents and texts for distribution to our
Missions, abroad and to a number of individuals and institutions in India.
During the year, fifteen pamphlets on various subjects were also brought
out by this Division for publicity abroad.
Over 500 requests for information of various kinds from our Missions abroad were met by the Research and Reference Section of the
Division which scrutinised, classified and indexed, during this period,
over 55,000 foreign clippings and 9,000 Indian newspaper clippings, in
addition to a vast collection of material for providing background
information.
Our Information Posts have arranged special numbers on India to
be brought out by foreign newspapers of standing and influence. A
latest example is that of the Wisdom Magazine of the USA. A Special
Number of this is devoted to India and the Prime Minister; and the
Division supplied a good deal of material including articles, texts, background material, books and Publications and nearly 300 select photographs. Besides, the Information Posts in Washington and San Francisco
<pg51>
were instructed to provide textual and pictorial material available with
them and to assist the editors in the production. The result was a
publication of extraordinary quality, and ten thousand copies of this
Special Number were purchased for wide distribution through Indian
Missions in English speaking areas.
(vi) Audio-Visual Publicity.-A variety of audio-visual media were
utilised in order to step up India's publicity and cultural work abroad.
Films photographs, gramophone records, tapes and discs supplied from
Headquarters were widely used by our Missions abroad on the radio..
television, screen, the press and platform with effective results. There
is considerable scope for expansion in this field of publicity which reaches
millions of people abroad at little expense in proportion to the results
achieved.
Their continuing popularity make Indian films an effective media
of publicity for India. During the period under review, a large number
of Indian documentaries, children's films and feature films were exhibited
abroad non-commercially by our Missions and also entered for competitive
and non-competitive film festivals. A large number of documentary
films and news reviews were shown on the screen and television circuits
abroad. 78 Missions are now being supplied regularly with Indian
documentary films while 30 Missions receive Indian News Reviews. An
effort is being made to supply films with commentaries in the languages
of the countries in which our Missions function. As a method of special

publicity and as a measure designed to promote international good-will,
we have also been sending compilation films on the visits to India of
leaders of other countries. Films relating to the visits abroad of the
President and the Prime Minister as well as the visit to India of Premier
Khrushchev, President Nasser and others were sent to the Missions during the period under review. An attempt was also made to widen the
scope of selection of Indian films to include other languages of India
besides Hindi, and it is hoped that this process would enable us in securing wider and better. choice of feature films for exhibition abroad by
our Posts. As usual, we assisted in India's participation in 36 competitive and non-competitive international film festivals in different countries. Exclusive film festivals of Indian films were also organised in
some countries in order to promote the commercial export of films and
to augment our publicity and cultural work abroad. The commercial
exhibition of Government of India's documentaries in some select foreign
countries has also been assisted.
About 65,000 photographs on all aspects of Indian life were supplied
to the Missions abroad for publication in newspapers and display at
exhibitions and, for meeting ad-hoc requests. This represents twice the
number of pictures distributed during the previous year. On a pattern
similar to the one in the case of film coverage special photographic
<pg52>
coverage was furnished to Indian Posts abroad during the Visits to,
foreign countries of Indian leaders and visits to India of leaders of othercountries. Because of lack of funds and other facilities, it was not possible to meet adequately the growing demand for colour photographsand transparencies. A large number of photographs on subjects and
events of Indian interest received from Indian Missions abroad were
released to the Indian Press.
A good selection of gramophone records and tape recordings of
Indian music-classical and popular-were supplied to Indian Missions.
during this period. These were made use of by foreign radio networks
and at functions organised by the Missions and by other foreign cultural
institutions. Tape recorders, radiograms, record-players and radio sets
were also supplied to Missions on request. Close liaison was maintained
with the External Services of the All India Radio in connection with
the supply of recorded music and other exchange broadcast programmes..
The increased publicity on the audio-visual front may be gauged from
the fact that the budget on this account has now doubled from Rs.
lakhs to approximately Rs. 4 lakhs.
(vii) Cultural activities.-During the year, the Division assisted Indian
Missions abroad to participate in and organise over 50 exhibitions.
Among the most successful were those held in Washington, Paris,
Warsaw, Sydney, Tokyo, Nairobi. Cairo. Tunis, Alexandria, Rabat,
Istanbul and Bhutan. Mobile exhibitions showing current trends of
progress in India were designed at Headquarters-and circulated to some
of our Posts abroad. Apart from 500 tape recordings on various subjects supplied to our Missions in about 50 countries. sets of Indian musi-

cal instruments were made available to some of our Missions for presentation to important cultural institutions in their regions. A special
feature of the period under review was the cultural publicity centred
round the observance of important days like Gandhi Jayanti, Kalidas
Jayanti and Tagore Jayanti. Paintings, musical items. costumes, toys etc.
were supplied to Missions in this connection. A great deal of preparatory work was also taken in hand by the Division in collaboration with
the Ministry of SR & CA in connection with the forthcoming Tagore
Centenary Celebrations in May, 1961. A number of personal requests,
for assistance from scholars abroad was also met by the Division.
(viii) Press Relations.-The Press Relations Section of the Ministry of
External Affairs which came into existence in July, 1958 was kept fully
occupied during the period under review. As in the previous year, the
developments connected with the Sino-Indian Border dispute climaxing
with. the visit of the Chinese Premier Chou En-lai to India in March,
1960 and the State Visits of a number of foreign dignitaries including
President Voroshilov, Premier Khrushchev, the Prime Minister of Finland,
President Nassar, Prime Minister Koirala of Nepal and the Polish Prime
<pg53>
Minister brought a very large number of foreign correspondents, photographers, radio and television units to India. In addition, there were
a number of other journalists who visited India on their own, and were
interested in seeing Indian development projects. The Press Relations
Sections assisted all these journalists and maintained close liaison with
other Ministries and Departments concerned in order to ensure that the
visiting journalists were given all possible assistance in matters relating
to expeditious clearance of personal effects, photographic film and film
equipment, granting temporary accreditation and facilities for speedy
despatch of their press material. In the case of the visits of foreign
dignitaries, necessary liaison was maintained with Directors of Publicity,
in various States. The issue of material to foreign pressmen in India,
especially the White Papers on Sino-Indian Relations, the Prime Minister's statements in Parliament on matters of foreign policy and the maps
of India's northern frontier are worthy of mention. About 500 press
releases were issued by the Press Relations Section during the period
under review covering among others Banquet Speeches of visiting dignitaries, joint Communiques and Statements, the Canal Waters Treaty- between India and Pakistan, the Indo-Nepal Trade Agreement and the
speeches and interviews granted by the Prime Minister during his visit
to the United Nations.
Three Press Delegations from Spain, U.A.R., and Saudi Arabia werelooked after by the Division and their tours round India was conducted
by the officers of the Division. As usual, a very large number of interviews with the President, Vice-President, Prime Minister and other Union
Ministers and other senior officials in the Ministry of External Affairs
etc. were arranged for important visiting journalists.
K. MISCELLANEOUS.
(i) General Passport and Emigration Organisation.-Amalgamation of

the Central Passport Organisation and the Emigration Organisation has
since been completed. Gradation of the personnel and fixation of their
seniority in the amalgamated establishment have been finalised on an
all India basis.
The Regional Passport Officers in Madras, Calcutta and Delhi, who
Were holding these posts for the last few years, have been replaced during
the year 1960. The Regional Passport Officer, Bombay, who was also
holding the post for the last few years will be replaced by another officer
very shortly.
Passport.-The 2nd conference of the Regional Passport Officers was
held at New Delhi on 6, 7 and 8 September, 1960. One of the main
items that was considered by the conference was a review of the working
of the existing procedure for dealing with passport applications at
different stages and to find out way and means to cut down further delays
<pg54>
caused in the issue of passports. A number of important decisions were
taken at the conference to simplify the procedures with a view to issuing
passports expeditiously to applicants. Necessary executive instructions
with regard to the decisions taken are being issued to passport issuing
authorities in India and abroad.
Passports are issued to officials proceeding abroad to man posts in
Indian Missions or to participate as delegates of the Government of India
in International Conferences etc. The visas to foreigners coming to take
up assignments with foreign Missions in India are also granted by this
Section. During January to 31st December, 1960, 401 Diplomatic Passports, 2898 International Passports and 517 Indo-Pakistan Passports have
been issued while the respective figures for 1959 were 237, 2779 and 369.
The necessary visas are also obtained from the various foreign Missions
and Posts in India and roughly speaking four visa notes have to be prepared for every passport.
During January to 31 December, 1960, 2204 visas have been granted
to foreigners while the total number of visas granted for the year 1959,
1958 and 1957 were 2045, 1708 and 1441 respectively.
During January, to November, 1960, 42,992 international passport
were issued by the 5 Regional Passport Offices in India. There has
been an increase in all the Offices in the number of applications received
and international passports issued. In 1958 the number of international
passports issued were 33,216 and rose to 37,179 in 1959. The trend
during the current year shows a further increase. The Regional Passport Offices are coping with the increased volume of work without any
addition to the staff by simplifying the procedure and by steady improvement in the methods of work.
Every passport applicant whose case is rejected by a Regional Passport Officer is advised to appeal to the Chief Passport Officer within three
months of such rejection if he is dissatisfied with the Regional Passport
Officer's decision and his case is reviewed by the Chief Passport Officer on

its merits.
After the strict measures taken last year to eliminate the possibility of
persons travelling abroad on forged passports, there has been no such case
during this year. Check-post authorities have, however, had to prevent
a few small parties of persons from proceeding abroad on forged passports. In suitable cases, these persons are being prosecuted by State
Governments.
Emigration.-Departure of unskilled workers to Burma, Ceylon, Malaya and Singapore continued to be banned but general exceptions were
made in the case of wives and minor children of unskilled workers settled
in Ceylon, Malaya and Singapore.
<pg55>
There has been no appreciable improvement in the menace of illicit
emigration to Ceylon. As an additional preventive measure the Customs
officials patrolling the Gulf of Mannar in the recently acquired launches,
have been instructed to be on the look out for country boats carrying,
illicit emigrants to Ceylon and to exercise the powers vested in them by
section 29 of Indian Emigration Act, 1952. This is being done under the
guidance of the Protectors of Emigrants in Madras State.
(ii) Haj.-Next to U.A.R. and Yemen, India sent the largest number
of pilgrims-20,695-for the Haj in 1960. Arrangements for medical assistance to the pilgrims were made at Mecca, Medina and jedda. A special
medical Contingent of 3 doctors and 2 compounders, equipped with necessary medicines, was also sent to Saudi Arabia. This contingent was inaddition to a Haj Seasonal Dispensary established at jedda and a permanent dispensary at Mecca.
An unofficial delegation of two Members of Parliament visited Saudi
Arabia in May, 1960, to make an on-the-spot study of the facilities etc.,
extended to Indian pilgrims, and to see what improvements would bemade. They have submitted a report on their visit.
The term of the Central Haj Committee, originally constituted in
1948 to advise the Central Government on matters relating to the Haj, was
extended by another year. The Committee held three meetings at Bombay and rendered valuable advice to the Government of India in respect
of Haj matters.
The rules under the Haj Committee Act 1959, are under consideration.
The Act of 1932, and the rules thereunder remain in force until the rules.
under the Act of 1959, are finalised.
(iii) Legal and Treaties Division.-The Division is concerned with international legal problems arising in the Ministry and those relating to
the international organisations in which India may be interested, such as,
the International Court of justice, the sixth Committee of the General'
Assembly and its subsidiary organs, the Administrative Tribunal of the
United Nations, International Conferences for codification and progressive-

development of international law and the law. of treaties etc. Ratification.
of treaties and agreements to which India is a party and their publication
are also the concern of this Division.
The editing work on the Treaty-Volume for the year 1957, has been
completed and it is being sent to the press for printing. The editing)
work on the 1947-48, and 1958, volumes is now in hand.
Publication of Geneva Conventions 1949, in Hindi has also been taken,
up and the publication is under print.
(iv) Consular Division.-The question of revision of Consular feeswhich was under consideration for some time past was finalised during the<pg56>
period under review and a revised schedule of fees was incorporated in
the Diplomatic and Consular Officers (Fees) Rules; 1949.
98 documents consisting of Letters of Request, Commission and other
processes were received for transmission from foreign countries to Indian
courts and vice versa.
The cases relating to revision of existing arrangements for service of
summons in civil cases under section 29 (c) of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 with Nepal, France, Spain, Belgium, the U.S.S.R., Kenya, U.A.R.,
and Japan have not yet been finalised.
Negotiations for making the above arrangements with Canada, U.S.A.,
Argentina and Brazil were initiated this year. Similar negotiations with
West Germany, Burma, Switzerland, Thailand, Hong Kong, North Borneo,
Sarwak, Brunei, Indonesia, Australia and New Zealand have not yet been
finalised. After ascertaining laws obtaining in North Borneo, Sarwak
Brunei, Indonesia, Australia and U.S.A., it has been decided to abandon
the Proposal of making arrangements with these countries for want of
reciprocity. The negotiations with the remaining countries are in progress.
The question of making reciprocal arrangements under Section 44A
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, for execution of decrees passed by
the Indian courts in Colony of Tobago and Trinidad, Japan and Australia was taken up with these countries. Their final replies are awaited.
In view of the difficulties experienced for examinations of witnesses in
criminal cases residing in Nepal, West Germany, Ghana and Nigeria, the
question of making reciprocal arrangements under section 504(3) and
508A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, has been taken up with
those countries.
210 judicial documents such as powers of attorney, affidavits and
certificates for use in foreign countries were attested during the period
under review.

The cases relating to reciprocal arrangements under section 14 of the
Notaries Act, 1952, for recognition of Notarial performed by Notaries
with the remaining countries which could not be finalised last year were
pursued further but so far only United Kingdom, Isle of Man and Channel Islands have agreed to make such arrangements. It has been decided
to abandon the proposal for making such arrangements. with China, Thailand, Iraq, Iran, Cambodia, Norway, Turkey, Malaya, Mexico, Indonesia
and West Germany for want of reciprocity.
58 Cases relating to the disposal of estates of deceased Indians abroad
were handled during the year.
The cases regarding revision of the reciprocal arrangements under
section 57 of the Administrator General's Act, 1913, in regard to the
<pg57>
Administration of estates of deceased Indian nationals intestate abroad by
the Indian Diplomatic and Consular Officer, with Poland, Iraq, Argentina, Costa Rica, Netherlands, Sweden and Thailand which could not be
finalised last year were pursued further. The examination of Polish
laws revealed that sufficient reciprocity was afforded in the matter and it
was decided to continue the existing arrangement with that country.
Such arrangements with Sweden are proposed to be terminated for want
of reciprocity. The remaining cases are still under correspondence.
During the period under review 93 Indian citizens (59 major and
34 minor persons) were repatriated as against 63 last year. A sum of
Rs. 32,781 and 92 nP. was advanced under the suspense head 'SectionS-D-Deposits and Advances Part III-Advances not bearing interestsAdvances repayable-Special Advances'. A sum of Rs, 4,924 and 05 nP.
was recovered as against the advances given during the previous years. A,
sum of Rs. 22,385 and 88 nP. has been written off as irrecoverable
advances. This also includes the amount written off during the period
1 January 1960 to 31 March 1960 which relates to last financial year. The
Government of India continues to see to it not to subject the repatriates
to undue hardship.
The Government of India have also under consideration the question
of the grant of financial assistance to Indian citizens stranded abroad
due to temporary difficulties.
The Division dealt with 50 cases relating to extradition of offenders
from or to India during the period under review. 82 cases regarding
deportation of Indian citizens from abroad were also handled during the
same period.
The Home Ministry are mainly concerned with work relating to
Indian citizenship, but they referred 1418 cases to this Ministry for
comment. In addition, 48 cases which were not of a routine nature were
also handled by the Division.
Several enquiries received from Indian Missions abroad in regard to

the interpretation of Indian laws especially the marriage and inheritance
laws, were handled in consultation with the Ministry of Law and other
Ministries.
Ninety-two cases of deaths of foreigners in India were intimated to the
foreign missions concerned. In 69 cases' death reports were made direct
to the appropriate foreign missions by the State Governments.
13 Requests for remittance facilities from abroad were dealt with in
the Division. About a hundred miscellaneous enquiries regarding welfare and whereabouts of Indians were also disposed of.
<pg58>
The task of recovery of advances made to the evacuees from War
Zones has been entrusted to the respective State Governments except West
Bengal on agency basis. All the State Governments, except Madras and
Uttar Pradesh are allowed to retain 50% of the amount thus recovered.
The Governments of Madras and U.P. are allowed to retain 80% of the
recoveries to meet expenditure on staff etc. In West Bengal, however,
this work is being handled by the Burma Loan Recovery Section. consisting of one Superintendent, one Upper Division Clerk, one Lower Division
Clerk and one Stenotypist. This staff is working under the control of
the Regional Passport Officer, Calcutta. Our missions in Burma. Malaya
and Singapore are effecting recoveries from such evacuees who have
returned to those countries.
On the whole it can be said that recovery of advances from the
evacuees is not encouraging. To expedite disposal of these long pending
cases, the process of recovery has been rationalised. In bad cases or in
case of such evacuees who are too poor to repay their loans, the amounts.
are being written off. Only such cases are being retained where the
amounts are considerable and the evacuees are in sound financial condition to liquidate their debts. Two officers of the Ministry including the
Deputy Financial Adviser and Under Secretary (Cons) have been visiting various State Governments in order to examine the possibilities of
quick disposal of the cases, involving more than Rs. 1,000/-, which are
pending with the State Governments. They have so far visited Bombay,
Punjab, U.P., Bihar, Hyderabad, Madras and West Bengal and will shortly
be visiting Kerala.
In accordance with an old agreement the Government of Burma have
to reimburse to the Government of India the expenditure incurred by
the latter during 1942-47 on certain categories of wartime evacuees such
as Burmans, Anglo-Burmans, Anglo-Indians etc. During the year under
review, efforts were intensified in this regard and the Government of
Burma periodically reminded to accept Indian claims on this account.
As a result, it is gratifying to note, that on the request from the Accountant General, Burma, Accountant General West Bengal has actually
raised the debit to the tune of Rs. 2,55,075 and 59 nP. only on account
of expenditure incurred on the Arakanese refugee Camp at Dignapur,
West Bengal.
The Embassy in Burma has recently informed this Division that the

Government of Burma will accept the debit of Rs. 6,25,433 and 82 nP.
during the next financial year. The Embassy has promised to let us
know when the debit would be actually accepted by the Government of
Burma. This claim is on account of expenditure incurred by the erstwhile Burma Refugee Organisation, Assam, on the reception etc. of the
civilian Gorkha evacuees of Burmese domicile. It is also reported that
the Government of Burma are considering favourably our other claims.
<pg59>
There has been a proportionate decrease in the number of evacuee
orphans getting financial assistance under the scheme for their long
term maintenance, care and education on account of their attaining
majority, getting married, securing employment etc. The expenditure
incurred in this regard is shared equally between the State Governments
concerned and the Government of India.
Over and above the work previously mentioned the Division handled
a number of cases of miscellaneous nature such as claims of Burma Government pensioners in India, and the welfare of Indian seamen in foreign
ports.
(iv) Diplomatic and Consular Missions in India.-At the end of the
period under review there were 45 Embassies, 8 High Commissions and
4 Legations, including the Apostolic Internunciature. During the year
the status of the Legations of Cuba, and Finland were raised to Embassies
A list of diplomatic missions in India and a list of sub-offices of High
Commissions of Commonwealth countries are given at Appendix III.
The total number of foreign Consular Posts at the end of the year was
101. The Consulate of Colombia at Madras was closed down during
the year. The Consulate General of Turkey and the Consulate of Brazil,
both at Madras, were opened and the Consulate General of Czechoslovakia at Calcutta, which was closed down during the year 1940 due
to World War II, was also re-opened during the year. The status of the
Consulates (Honorary) of Turkey and Philippines at Calcutta and Bombay
respectively was raised to that of Consulates General (Honorary). The
Trade Representations of Poland at Bombay and Calcutta were converted
into Consulates during the year. The Assistant Commissioner for Malaya
at Madras was re-designated as Assistant High Commissioner for Malaya.
A list of Foreign Consular Posts is given in Appendix III(a).
(v) Distinguished Visitors from Abroad.-Among the distinguished
visitors to India since last year's report were The Earl of Selkirk, British
Commissioner for Singapore and Commissioner General for South East
Asia accompanied by Countess of Selkrik (3 to 5 January 1960); Mr.
Alfred Krupp from West Germany (3 to 5 January 1960); Pakistan Delegation for border talks led by Lt.-General K. M. Shaikh. Minister of
Interior (7 to 11 January 1960); Dr. Pittermann, Vice-Chancellor of
Austria (10 to 20 January 1960); Mr. B. P. Koirala, former Prime Minister
of Nepal (17 to 31 January 1960, 9 to 11 August 1960, 25 to 26 August
1960, 28 October to 1 November 1960); H. E. Mr. Kliment Efremovich
Voroshilov, President of the U.S.S.R. accompanied by H. E. Mr. F. R.
Kozlov, First Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers, U.S.S.R. and

Madame Ye. A Furtseva, Deputy of the Supreme Soviet, U.S.S.R. (20
January to 6 February 1960); Sir Andrew Cohen from Britain (22 to 25
January 1960); Communication Minister and Assistant Minister of
Finance of the Government of Nepal (16 to 17 January 1960); H. E. Mr.
<pg60>
Nilola Mincev, Finance Minister, Yugoslav (3 to 9 February 1960); Lord
and Lady Evershed of Britain (9 to 13 February 1960); H. E. Mr. N. S.
Khrushchev, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the U.S.S.R. (11
to 16 February and from 1 March to 2 March 1960); H. E. Dr. V. J.
Sukselainen, Prime Minister of Finland (13 to 24 February 1960); Mr.
Fruotuoso Cabahug, Under Secretary, Foreign Affairs, Philippines (14 to
17 February 1960); H. E. Mr. V. V. Machtkevich, Minister for Agriculture of the U.S.S.R. (23 February to 2 March 1960); Mr. Paul Hoffman,
Managing Director of U.N. Special Fund (26 February to 1 March 1960);
U. Nu, Prime Minister of Burma (5 to 12 March 1960); H. E. Mr. M. J.
Moreno, Minister of Foreign Relations, Panama (6 to 9 March 1960);
Ex-King II of Belgium accompanied by his wife (11 March to 6 April
1960); H. E. Mr. P. Ya Antropov, Minister for Geology and Mineral
Resources U.S.S.R. (29 to 12 April 1960); H. E. Mr. Gamel Abdel-Nassar,
President of the U.A.R. (29 to 10 April 1960); President Soekarno of
Indonesia on 1 April 1960, in transit, en route to Iraq; The Hon'ble Mr.
B. H. Benn, Minister for Natural Resources, British Guiana (6 to 20 April
1960); Mr. Chou En-lai Prime Minister of China (19 to 26 April 1960);
The Foreign Minister of Yugoslavia (26 April to 1 May 1960); The
Vice-President of Philippines (27 April to 8 May 1960); Surinam Delegation from Dutch Guiana led by Dr. F. E. Essed, Minister of Development
and including Dr. J. Sedney, Minister of Finance (2 to 8 June 1960); Dr.
Djuanda Kartawidjaja, First Minister of Indonesia accompanied by his
wife (27 to 28 June 1960 on way to Moscow); Lord & Lady Casey (19 to
22 August 1960); Dr. Matine Daftary, Member of the Iranian Senate (18
to 23 September 1960); Mrs. E. Emmet, M.P. from Britain (18 to 24
September 1960); Prime Minister of Poland (20 to 27 September 1960);
President of Guinea (23 to 24 September 1960); Hon'ble Mrs. E. Emmet
from Britain (10 to 30 October 1960); and H. R. H. Prince Sultan, Minister of Communications (28 October to 2 November 1960); Hon'ble
Maitripala Senanayake, Minister for Industries, Home and Culture, Government of Ceylon (1 to 13 November 1960); Prof. Theodor Heuss.
former President of the Federal Republic of Germany (2 to 23 November
1960); H. E. Mr. Mahmoud Younes, Chairman and Managing Director.
Suez Canal Authority accompanied by his wife (10 to 15 November 1960);
H. E. U Nu, Prime Minister of Burma (10 to 21 November 1960);
Moroccan Goodwill Delegation headed by H. E. Mr. Allal-El Fassi (18
to 20 November 1960); Eastern Nigerian Recruiting Commission headed
by H. E. Mr. G. E. Okeke (26 to 29 November 1960); Maharajkumar of
Sikkim (26 November to 5 December 1960); T.I.H. The Crown Prince
and Princess of Japan (27 November to 6 December 1960); Hon'ble Prime
Minister of Ceylon, Sirimavo R. D. Bandaranaike (29 December 1960 to
1 January 1961); The Rt. Hon'ble Duncan' Sandys, Secretary of State for
Commonwealth Relations, British Government (30 December 1960 to 12
January 1961).

INDIA
BHUTAN RUSSIA USA NEPAL PORTUGAL FRANCE AFGHANISTAN MALI BURMA CHINA
PAKISTAN LATVIA AUSTRALIA CANADA GERMANY NEW ZEALAND CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC CAMBODIA LAOS THAILAND VIETNAM SWITZERLAND INDONESIA UNITED
KINGDOM IRAQ PHILIPPINES REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE JAPAN MONGOLIA IRAN JORDAN
LEBANON TURKEY SAUDI ARABIA SOUTH AFRICA ALGERIA MOROCCO SUDAN BELGIUM
CONGO MADAGASCAR KENYA MAURITIUS GHANA NIGER NIGERIA CAMEROON LIBERIA
GUINEA TOTO OMAN ETHIOPIA SOMALIA NORWAY POLAND SLOVAKIA YUGOSLAVIA
FINLAND AUSTRIA BULGARIA CZECH REPUBLIC DENMARK SWEDEN GREECE HUNGARY
ITALY THE NETHERLANDS SPAIN PERU CUBA MEXICO PANAMA ARGENTINA BRAZIL CHILE
ECUADOR UGANDA EGYPT TUNISIA YEMEN HONG KONG BRUNEI COSTA!!COLOMBIA
Apr 12, 1960

A. United Nations
PART III
A. UNITED NATIONS
(i) Fifteenth Assembly.-The first part of the 15th session of the
General Assembly was held in New York, from Sep 20, 1960 to 20th
December, 1960. It was the largest and most representative diplomatic
gathering in recent history, attended by several Heads of State and
Government, including the Prime Minister of India. Shri V. K. Krishna
Menon, Minister of Defence, was the Chairman of the Indian Delegation.
(ii) General International Situation.-A feature of the session was the
submission jointly before the Assembly of a resolution, by the Presidents
of Ghana, Indonesia, the United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia. and the
Prime Minister of India. It sought a renewal of the recently-interrupted contacts between the President of the United States and the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
as a step towards the easing of international tension. This resolution
was ultimately withdrawn by the Indian Prime Minister when certain
essential parts of it were voted on separately, and were ruled not to have
been carried.
In its place, India initiated another resolution, expressing concern
over the international situation, and calling on all nations to refrain
from any acts that might increase international tension. This resolution, which was unanimously adopted, also reaffirmed the conviction
that the strength of the United Nations rested on the co-operation of its
member states, and urged that immediate and constructive steps be taken
in regard to the problems concerning the peace of the world and the
advancement of its peoples.

(iii) Disarmament.-The General Assembly at its fourteenth session
in 1959 had accepted the goal of complete and general disarmament
under effective international control and a 10-nation Committee was
entrusted with the task of working out detailed measures towards this
goal. The Committee met in Geneva in the spring of 1960 and the
respective proposals of the Western Allies and those of the Soviet Union
were discussed. A wide gap existed between the positions of these two
groups and no agreement could be reached. The problem again came
for consideration before the fifteenth session of the General Assembly.
There thirteen resolutions were moved in the Political Committee by
various States on different aspects of the problem. In order to provide
<pg62>
a common ground for further negotiations, India along with other states
co-sponsored a resolution setting out the principles which should govern
general and complete disarmament. This has remained pending before
the Assembly, and will be taken up by it on its resumption in March,
1961.
The tripartite conference between Britain, the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R.
on the discontinuance of nuclear weapons tests continued its deliberations in Geneva. Some articles of the proposed treaty were agreed upon
but differences on others still continued. India again submitted the
question of the suspension of nuclear and thermonuclear tests for the
consideration of the General Assembly, and co-sponsored two resolutions.
The latter were adopted without any dissenting vote. They urged the
States participating in the Geneva conference to make every effort to
reach early agreement and to continue their present voluntary ban on
nuclear tests. One contained a specific request to all other states to
refrain from undertaking nuclear weapons tests.
The Prime Minister of India in his speech in the Assembly earnestly
pleaded for agreement on general and complete disarmament without
further delay. He expressed the hope that more efforts would be made
by the powers concerned to reach agreement on the discontinuance of
nuclear weapons tests and the reduction of tensions in the world which
produced fears of surprise attack.
(iv) Admission of New Members.-Sixteen newly-independent African
States and Cyprus were admitted to the United Nations during the 15th
session. This brought the total U.N. membership to 99, and was one
of the major developments of the session.
(v) Among other important decisions taken by the Assembly were the
following:(a) Representation of China.-The Assembly again rejected the proposal, which was made this year by the U.S.S.R., that the question of the
representation of China be discussed at the current session, As in previous years, it adopted a U.S.-initiated motion. "not to consider, at its
fifteenth regular session, any proposals to exclude the representatives of
the Government of the Republic of China or to seat representatives of

the Central People's Government of the People's Republic of China".
India supported the request for inscription of the question.
(b) Algeria.-The Assembly, for the first time, adopted a positive
recommendation on the right of the Algerian people to self-determination and the responsibility of the U.N. in the matter. However, a key
paragraph in the resolution, which would have the U.N. to organise,
<pg63>
control, and supervise a referendum in Algeria, was rejected as it failed
to obtain the two-third majority. India was one of the sponsors of the
resolution.
(c) The Congo.-The Assembly failed to take any substantive decision on the situation in the Congo, apart from seating the representatives nominated by President Kasavubu. Its financial decisions included
an authorisation to the Secretary-General to spend up to $ 24m., for the
U.N.'s Congo operations in the first three months of 1961. The Assembly also adopted a resolution apportioning Congo expenses between
members on the basis of their contribution to the regular budget (with
certain rebates accruing from voluntary contributions) and recognising
that such assessments created a binding legal Obligation of payment.
against member States. Finally, the Assembly decided to retain the item,
"the Situation in the Congo", on its agenda for the resumed session,
following the failure to. carry both the Afro-Asian and the Anglo-American
resolutions on the basic aspects of the problem. Meanwhile, the U.N.'s
mandate in the Congo rested upon the resolutions of the Security Council and of the Assembly's fourth emergency special session.
(d) Security Council Elections.-The Assembly denied the West
European Group's nominee, Portugal, a seat on the Security Council
that had so far, by convention, gone to that group. The reason was
Portugal's extreme unpopularity among large sections of the Assembly,
particularly the Afro-Asian Group, because of its colonial policies. Following Portugal's withdrawal, a compromise settlement was reached
under which Liberia was elected for 1961. and would resign in favour
of Ireland for the second year of its term. Chile and the United Arab,
Republic were however elected for a full two-year term.
(e) Colonialism.-The General Assembly at its fifteenth session vigorously discussed the question of colonialism. India along with 41
African-Asian States and Cyprus moved a resolution which was adopted
by the Assembly without opposition. It declared that immediate steps,
should be taken in Trust and Non-self-governing Territories and all
other territories which had not yet attained independence to transfer
all powers to the peoples of those territories.
(f) Trust territories.-The Assembly took major steps in associating
the United Nations with the final stage of political evolution in two of
the remaining trust territories-Ruanda Urundi and Western Samoa-prior
to their independence. It set up a three-man Commission to supervise
the forthcoming elections in the Belgian-administered East African territory of Ruanda-Urundi, and to act as political observers and advisers in

order to promote peace and harmony in the territory. It also appointed a Commissioner to hold, under United Nations supervision, a plebiscite in the New Zealand administered territory of Western Samoa which
<pg64>
would ascertain the wishes of the inhabitants concerning their future.
India co-sponsored both recommendations.
(g) Non-self-governing Territories.-In order to set out the principles
which should guide members in determining whether a territory was
non-self-governing or not the Assembly at its fourteenth session appointed a six-member committee of which India was elected Chairman. The
Committee listed 12 principles that were later approved by the Assembly
at its fifteenth session. India also co-sponsored a resolution indicating
all the Portuguese overseas possessions, and declaring them as non-selfgoverning territories on which Portugal should be asked to submit information to the General Assembly under Article 73(e) of the Charter.
The resolution was adopted by the Assembly.
(h) South West Africa.-The Assembly adopted a number of important resolutions on this territory which is under a mandate administered
by the Union of South Africa. It commended the governments of Ethiopia and Liberia for taking action against the Union in the International
Court, and invited the Committee on South West Africa to go to the
territory, and ascertain which is required to be done for restoring a
climate of peace and security there. It also called upon the Union
Government to revoke or rescind immediately all laws and regulations
in the territory which were based on its theory of Apartheid.
(vi) Commission on Human Rights.-The Commission on Human
Rights met for its 16th Session in Geneva from 29th February to 18th
March, 1960. India was represented by Shri C. S. Jha, the permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations, New York. He was
assisted by Shri A. S. Mehta, Consul-General and Shri G. Raj, Vice-Consul
at Geneva. Shri Jha was elected as First Vice-Chairman of the Commission during this Session.
(vii) All India U.N. Day Committee.-The All India United Nations
Day Committee which was formed under a notification issued by the
Ministry of External Affairs and whose chairman at present is the Deputy
Minister for External Affairs, celebrated the United Nations Day on
24th October, 1960. The President of India was the Chief Guest at this
function.
(viii) Establishment of a United Nations capital development fund.A proposal co-sponsored by India aiming at the creation of a United
Nations capital development fund was adopted by the General Assembly's
economic and financial committee. It called on the General Assembly to
decide 'in principle' to establish such a Fund; and further resolved that a
committee of twenty-five representatives of Member States, to be designated by the President of the General Assembly on the basis of equitable
<pg65>

geographical distribution, shall consider all concrete preparatory measures, including draft legislation. The committee has been asked to
report to the Economic and Social Council and to the General Assembly
in 196 1.
(ix) Accelerated flow of capital & technical assistance to the developing countries.-A resolution advocating the accelerated flow of capital
and technical assistance to developing countries, commonly known as
the 1 per cent resolution, co-sponsored by India was adopted at the 15th'
session of the U.N. General Assembly. The resolution recommended
that all specialised agencies and member States economically advanced
as well as under-developed, shall take such measures as may be appropriate both to accelerate the flow of capital and technical assistance and
to ensure its effective utilisation. It expressed the hope that the flow of
international assistance and capital will be increased substantially so as
to reach as soon as possible approximately one percent of the combined
national incomes of the economically advanced countries.
B. INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES
India participated in a large number of conferences held abroad
under the aegis of the United Nations and Specialised Agencies. Brief
reports on Indian participation in the more important of these conferences will be found in the reports of the appropriate Ministries.
A list of the International Organisations of which India is a member
is also attached as an appendix.
USA
INDIA GHANA INDONESIA YUGOSLAVIA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC SWITZERLAND
CYPRUS CHINA ALGERIA CONGO PORTUGAL LIBERIA CHILE IRELAND WESTERN SAMOA
NEW ZEALAND SOUTH AFRICA PERU
Sep 20, 1960

Appendix I INDIAN MISSIONS ABROAD
Jan 01, 1960
APPENDIX I
INDIAN MISSIONS ABROAD
Embassies
1

Afghanistan

Location
(Kabul)

2
3
4

Argentina
Austria
Belgium

5

Bolivia

6

Brazil

7
8
9

Burma
Combodia,
Chile

(Buenos Aires)
(Vienna)
(Brussels)

(Rio-de-janeiro)
(Rangoon)
(Phnom-Penh)
(Santiago)

10

China

(Peking)

11

Columbia

12
13

Congo
Cuba

(Leopoldville)

14

Czechoslovakia

(Prague)

Concurrently accredited to
Luxemburg as Minister.
Ambassadorre sident in Santiago
(Chile)
Concurrently accredited to
Venuzuela as Minister.
Concurrently accredited to
Bolivia and Columbia as
Ambassador.
Concurrently accredited to
Mongolia as
Ambassador.
Ambassador resident in Santiago
(Chile)
Ambassador resident in Washington (USA).
Concurrently accredited to Rumania as Ambassador.
Ambassador resident in Stockholm (Sweden).
(Addis Ababa)

15 Denmark
16

Ethiopia

17

Finland

(Helsinki)

18

France

(Paris)

19

Germany

(Bonn)

20

Greece

21

Hungary

22

Guinea

23

Indonesia

(Djakarta)

24

Iran

(Tehran)

(Budapest)

<pg68>

Ambassador resident in Stockholm (Sweden).

Ambassador resident in Belgrade.
Ambassador resident in Moscow
(U.S.S.R.).
Ambassador resident in Accra
(Ghana).

<pg67>

25 Iraq

(Baghdad)

Concurrently accredited to the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan as Ambassador

26 Ireland

(Dublin)

Ambassador resident in London,
(UK)

27 Italy

(Rome)

28

Japan

(Tokyo)

Concurrently accredited to Albania as Minister

29

Jordan

Ambassador resident in Baghdad
(Iraq)

30

Laos

(Vientiane)

31

Liberia

32

Libya

33

Madagascar

(Tananarive)

34

Mexico

(Mexico City)

35

Mongolia

36

Morocco

(Rabat)

37 Nepal

(Kathmandu)

38

Netherlands

(The Hague)

39

Norway

(Oslo)

40 Philippines

(Manila)

41 Poland

(Warsaw)

42

Rumania

(Bucharest)

43

Saudi Arabia

(Jedda)

44

Spain

45

Sudan

(Khartoum)

46

Sweden

(Stockholm)

47

Switzerland

(Berne)

48

Thailand

(Bangkok)

49

Tunisia

50 Turkey
51 United Arab Republic

(Madrid)

54 Yugoslavia

(Belgrade)

sia as Ambassador

Ambassador resident in Moscow
(U.S.S.R.)
Ambassador resident in Prague
(Czechoslovakia)
Ambassador resident in London
(U.K.)
Concurrently accredited to Denmark & Finland as Ambassador
Concurrently accredited to the
Vatican as Minister

Concurrently accredited to Libya
as Ambassador and to the
Republic of Lebanon as
Minister
<pg69>

Concurrently accredited to Mexico and Cuba as Ambassador
Concurrently accredited to Poland and Hungary as Ambassador
Concurrently accredited to Greece
as Ambassador and to Bulgaria
as Minister

High Commissions
1 Australia

Ambassador resident in Washington
Ambassador resident in Peking
(China)
Concurrently accredited to Tuni-

Ambassador resident in Rabat
(Moracco)

(Ankara)
(Cairo)

52 United States of (Washington)
America
53 Union of Soviet (Moscow)
Socialist Republic

Ambassador resident in Accra
(Ghana)
Ambassador resident in Cairo
(UAR)

(Canberra)

Concurrently accredited to New

2 Canada

(Ottawa)

3 Ceylon

(Colombo)

4 Ghana

(Accra)

5 Malaya

Zealand

Concurrently accredited

(Kuala Lumpur)

to Gui-

nea & Liberia as AmbassadorConcurrently accredited to Singapore as Commissioner and also
to the British North Borneo,
territories of Burnei and Sarwak

6 New Zealand

(Wellington)

7 Nigeria

(Lagos)

8 Pakistani

(a) Karachi
(b) Dacca
(East Pakistan)
(c) Rajshahi
(East Pakistan)

9 United Kingdom

(London)

High Commissioner resident in
Canberra (Australia)

Deputy High Commissioner
Assistant High

Commissioner

Concurrently accredited to Ire
land and Spain as Ambassador

Legations
1 Albania

Minister resident in Rome
(Italy)
Minister resident in Belgrade
(Yugoslavia)
Minister resident in Brussels
(Belgium)
Minister resident in Ciaro,
(U.A.R.)
Minister resident in Berne
Minister resident in Rio-deJaneiro (Brazil)

2 Bulgaria
3 Luxembourg
4 Lebanon

(Beirut)

5 Vatican
6 Venezuela
Special Missions
1 Bhutan
Gang
2 Sikkim
3 United Nations

Political Officer resident in

(Gangtok)
(New York)

tok (Sikkim)
<pg70>

Commissions
1 Aden
2 Central

African

(Aden)
(Salisbury)

Federation (British)
3 East Africa (British) (Nairobi)

Commissioner resident in Nairobi
Accredited to Federation of
Rhodesia & Nyasaland as Commissioner and to Ruanda Urundi
as Consul General

4

Fiji

(Suva)

5 Hong Kong

(Hong Kong)

6

Mauritius

(Port Louis)

7

Singapore

(Singapore)

8

The West
& Guiana
Uganda

9

Indies

(Trinidad)
(Kampala)

Trade Commissions
1 Australia

(Sydney)

2 British East Africa

(Mombasa)

3 Canada

(Vancouver)

Accredited to Surinam as Consul
General
Commissioner resident in Nairobi

Consulates General
1 China

(Shanghai)

2

Denmark

3

Dutch Guiana

4

Finland

(Helsinki)

5

Germany

(a) (Berlin)
(b) (Hamburg)

6

Muscat

(Muscat)

7

Ruanda-Urundi

8

Switzerland

(Geneva)

9

Tibet

(Lhasa)

10

United Arab Republic

11 United States of
America

(Copenhagen)

Honorary Consul General
Consul General resident in Trinidad
Honorary Consul General

Consul General resident
Nairobi

(Damascus)
(a) (New York)
(b) (San Francisco)

12

Vietnam North

(Hanoi)

13

Vietnam South

(Saigon)

<pg71>

Consulates
1 Germany

(a) (Munich)
(b) (Stuttgart)

Honorary Consul
Honorary Consul

2

(Athens)

Honorary Consul

Greece

in

3

Iran

(Khorramshahr)

4

Indonesia

(Sourabaya)

5

Iraq

(Basra)

6

Japan

(Kobe)

Honorary Consul

Vice Consulates
1 Afghanistan

(a) (Jalalabad)
(b) (Kandahar)

2 Belgium

(Antwerp)

3 Burma

(Mandalay)

4. Indonesia

(Medan)

5 Iran

(Zahidan)

Trade Agencies
1 Tibet

(a) (Gyantse)
(b) (Gartok)
(c) (Yatung)

INDIA
AFGHANISTAN ARGENTINA AUSTRIA USA BELGIUM BOLIVIA CHILE BRAZIL BURMA
CHINA MONGOLIA CONGO CUBA CZECH REPUBLIC NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK
SWEDEN ETHIOPIA FINLAND FRANCE GERMANY GREECE RUSSIA HUNGARY GHANA
GUINEA INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ IRELAND UNITED KINGDOM ITALY JAPAN JORDAN
LAOS LIBERIA EGYPT LIBYA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC MADAGASCAR MEXICO
MOROCCO NEPAL PHILIPPINES POLAND ROMANIA SAUDI ARABIA SPAIN SUDAN
SWITZERLAND THAILAND TUNISIA TURKEY LEBANON YUGOSLAVIA BULGARIA
AUSTRALIA CANADA SRI LANKA MALAYSIA NEW ZEALAND NIGER NIGERIA PAKISTAN
BANGLADESH ALBANIA VENEZUELA BHUTAN KENYA FIJI HONG KONG MAURITIUS
REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE UGANDA OMAN SYRIA VIETNAM
Jan 01, 1960

Appendix II INFORMATION UNITS ABROAD

Jan 01, 1960
APPENDIX II
1.
2.
3.
4.

Accra.
Addis Ababa.
Baghdad.
Bangkok.

INDIAN INFORMATION UNITS ABROAD

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

Belgrade.
Berne.
Bonn.
Brussels.
Buenos Aires.
Cairo.
Colombo.
Dacca.
Damascus.
Djakarta.
Gangtok.
The Hague.
Istanbul.
Jeddah.
Kabul.
Karachi.
Kathmandu.
Khartoum.
Kuala Lumpur.
London.
Nairobi.
New York (U.N.).
New York (C.G.).
Ottawa.
Paris.
Peking.

31. Phnom Penh.

<pg72>
<pg73>

32. Prague.
33.

Rangoon.

34.

Rio de Janeiro.

35.

Rome.

36.

San Francisco.

37.

Salisbury.

38.

Stockholm.

39.

Sydney.

40.

Tehran.

41.

Tokyo.

42.

Washington.

INDIA
GHANA ETHIOPIA IRAQ YUGOSLAVIA SWITZERLAND GERMANY BELGIUM USA
ARGENTINA EGYPT SRI LANKA SYRIA INDONESIA TURKEY SAUDI ARABIA
AFGHANISTAN PAKISTAN NEPAL SUDAN MALAYSIA UNITED KINGDOM KENYA CANADA
FRANCE CAMBODIA CZECH REPUBLIC ITALY SWEDEN AUSTRALIA IRAN JAPAN

Jan 01, 1960

Appendix III FOREIGN MISSIONS IN INDIA

Jan 01, 1960

APPENDIX III
FOREIGN MISSIONS IN INDIA

(1) Embassies.
1.

Afghanistan.

2.

Argentina.

3. Austria.
4. Belgium.
5. Brazil.
6.

Burma.

7.

Cambodia.

8. Chile.
9.

China.

10.

Colombia.

11.

Cuba.

12.

Czechoslovakia.

13.

Denmark.

14.

Ethiopia.

15.

Finland.

16.

France.

17.

Germany.

18.

Greece.

19.

Hungary.

20.

Indonesia.

21.

Iran.

22.

Iraq.

23.

Italy.

24.

Japan.

25.

Laos.

26.

Mexico.

27.

Mongolia.

28.

Morocco.

29.

Nepal.

30.

Netherlands.

31.

Norway.

32.

Philippines.

33.

Poland.

34.

Rumania.

35.

Saudi Arabia.

36.

Spain.

37.

Sudan.

38.

Sweden.

39.

Switzerland.

40.

Thailand.

41.

Turkey.

42.

United Arab Republic.

43.

United States of America.

44.

Union of Soviet Socialist

45.

Yugoslavia.

(ii) High Commissions.
1.

Australia.

2.

Canada.

3. Ceylon.
4. Ghana.

<pg74>
<pg75>

Republic.

5.

Malava.

6.

New Zealand.

7.

Pakistan.

8.

United Kingdom.

(iii) Legations.
1. Albania (Stationed at Cairo).
2. Bulgaria.
3. Holy See.
4. Lebanon.
(iv) Sub-Offices of High Commissions.
1. Office of the Assistant High Commissioner for Ceylon at Madras.
2. Office of the Ceylon High Commissioner's Visa Office at
Tiruchirapalli.
3. Office of the Assistant High Commissioner for Malaya at Madras.
<pg76>
4. Office of the Deputy High Commissioner for Pakistan at Calcutta.
5.

Office of the Assistant High Commissioner for Pakistan at
Shillong.

6.

Office of the Deputy High Commissioner for U.K. at Bombay.

7.

Office of the Deputy High Commissioner for U.K. at Calcutta.

8.

Office of the Deputy High Commissioner for U.K. at Madras.

9.

Office of High Commissioner for U.K. at Patna.

(v) Foreign Consular Offices in India
------------------------------------------------------------------------Country
Location
Status
------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Afghanistan
Austria
Austria
Austria
Belgium
Belgium
Belgium
Bolivia

Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Madras
Calcutta
Calcutta

9
10

Brazil
Brazil

Bombay
Calcutta

Consulate General
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate (Vacant)
Hon. Consulate (Vacant)
Consulate General
Hon. Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate General (Vacant)
Consulate (Vacant)
Consulate

11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28

Burma
Burma
China
China
Colombia
Costa Rica
Costa Rica
Cuba
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Denmark
Denmark
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El. Salvador
Ethiopia

Calcutta
Consulate General
Madras
Vice-Consulate
Bombay
Consulate General
Calcutta
Consulate General
Calcutta
Hon. Consulate, (Vacant)
Madras
Hon. Consulate General
Bombay
Hon. Consulate General
Calcutta
Hon. Consular Agency
Bombay
Consulate General
Bombay
Hon. Consulate General
Calcutta
Hon. Consulate
Cochin
Hon. Consulate
Madras
Hon. Consulate
Bombay
Hon. Consulate General
Calcutta
Hon. Consulate
Calcutta
Hon. Consulate
Calcutta
Hon. Consulate
Bombay
Hon. Consulate
<pg77>
------------------------------------------------------------------------Country
Location
Status
------------------------------------------------------------------------29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50

Finland
Finland
France
France
France
France
Germany
Germany
Germany
Greece
Greece
Haiti
Haiti
Indonesia
Indonesia
Iran
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Italy
Italy
Italy

Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras

51
52
53
54
55
56
57

Japan
Japan
Japan
Liberia
Luxemburg
Monaco
Monaco

Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Calcutta
Bombay
New Delhi
Bombay

58
59
60
61

Nepal
Netherlands
Netherlands
Netherlands

Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin

62

Netherlands

Madras

Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate General
Hon. Consular Agency
Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate
Hon. Consulate General
Hon. Consulate General
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate General
Hon. Consular Agency
(Temporarily closed)
Consulate General
Consulate General
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Vice Consulate
Hon. Consulate General
Hon. Consulate (Vacant)
Consulate General
Consulate General
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate (Temporarily closed)
Hon. Consulate

63 Nicaragua
Bombay
Hon. Consulate
64 Nicaragua
Calcutta
Hon. Consulate
65 Norway
Bombay
Consulate General
------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg78>
------------------------------------------------------------------------Country
Location
Status
------------------------------------------------------------------------66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100

Norway
Norway
Norway
Panama
Panama
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Poland
Saudi Arabia

Spain
Spain
Spain
Sudan
Sweden
Sweden
Sweden
Switzerland
Switzerland
Switzerland
Switzerland
Thailand
Turkey
Turkey
Turkey
U.S.S.R.
U.S.S.R.
U.A.R.
U.A.R.
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
Uruguay
Yugoslavia
Democratic Republic of
Viet-Nam
101 Republic of Viet-Nam

Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Bombay
Madras
Calcutta
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
New Delhi
Bombay
New Delhi
New Delhi

Hon. Consulate General
Hon. Vice-Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Consulate General
Hon. Consulate (Vacant)
Consulate General
Hon. Consulate General
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate General (Temporarily closed)
Consulate General
Hon. Vice-Consulate
Hon. Vice-Consulate
Consulate General
Hon. Consulate General
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Consulate General
Hon. Consulate
Hon.. Consular Agency
Hon. Consular Agency
Consulate General
Hon. Consulate General
Hon. Consulate General
Hon. Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General

INDIA
AFGHANISTAN ARGENTINA AUSTRIA USA BELGIUM BRAZIL BURMA CAMBODIA CHILE
CHINA COLOMBIA CUBA NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK ETHIOPIA FINLAND FRANCE
GERMANY GREECE HUNGARY INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ ITALY JAPAN LAOS MEXICO
MONGOLIA MOROCCO NEPAL PHILIPPINES POLAND SAUDI ARABIA SPAIN SUDAN
SWEDEN SWITZERLAND THAILAND TURKEY YUGOSLAVIA AUSTRALIA CANADA GHANA
NEW ZEALAND PAKISTAN ALBANIA EGYPT BULGARIA LEBANON UNITED KINGDOM
BOLIVIA COSTA!!DOMINICA ECUADOR HAITI ISRAEL LIBERIA MONACO CENTRAL
AFRICAN REPUBLIC NICARAGUA PANAMA PERU URUGUAY

Jan 01, 1960

Appendix IV TREATIES, CONVENTIONS AND AGREEMENTS

APPENDIX IV
TREATIES, CONVENTIONS AND AGREEMENTS CONCLUDED OR
RENEWED BY INDIA WITH OTHER COUNTRIES DURING 1960.
1. Trade Agreement with Jordan signed on Jan 14, 1960, at
New Delhi.
2. Trade Agreement with Yugoslavia signed on 21 January, 1960,
New Delhi.
3. Trade Agreement with Bulgaria signed on 3 March, 1960 at
New Delhi.
4. Trade Agreement with Pakistan signed on 21 March, 1960, at
New Delhi.
5. Trade Agreement with Hungary signed on 25 June, 1960, at
New Delhi.
6. Trade Agreement with Nepal signed on 21 September, 1960, at
Kathmandu.
7. Trade Agreement with Tunisia signed on 5 October, 1960, at
Tunis.
8. Trade Agreement with Czechoslovakia signed on 3 November,
1960, at Prague.
9. Letters exchanged on 6 January, 1960, in Hanoi renewing the
Trade Agreement with North Vietnam.
10. Letters exchanged on 13 January, 1960, in Djakarta renewing
the Trade Agreement with Indonesia.
11. Letters exchanged on 2 March, 1960, in New Delhi, renewing the Trade Agreement with Greece.
12. Letters exchanged on 10 March, 1960, in Santiago renewing
the Trade Agreement with Chile.
13. Letters exchanged on 3 October, 1960, in Kabul renewing the
Trade Agreement with Afghanistan.
14. Trade Agreement with Italy. signed at Rome on 6 October,
1959, was valid upto 30 June, 1960, but was automatically
extended for one more year as under clause 13 it was agreed
that provided neither party to the Agreement had any

objection it will be extended, by one year i.e., it now expires
on 30 June, 1961.
15. PL. 480 Agreement regarding Surplus Agricultural commodities with the United States of America was signed on 4
May, 1960.
<pg79>
INDIA
JORDAN YUGOSLAVIA BULGARIA PAKISTAN HUNGARY NEPAL TUNISIA NORWAY
SLOVAKIA CZECH REPUBLIC VIETNAM INDONESIA GREECE CHILE AFGHANISTAN
ITALY USA
Jan 14, 1960

Appendix V. INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS OF WHICH INDIA IS A MEMBER

Jan 01, 1960
APPENDIX V.
INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS OF WHICH INDIA IS A,
MEMBER.
UNITED NATIONS
1. General Assembly.
2. Committees and Commissions of the General Assembly:(a) Advisory Committee on the

peaceful uses of Atomic Energy.

(b) Committee to consider the question of convening a general!
conference to review the U.N. Charter.
(c)

Committee on Information from non-self governing territories.

(d)

Scientific Committee on the effects of Atomic Radiation.

(e)

Peace Observation Commission.

(f)

Disarmament Commission.

(g)

International Law Commission.

(h) Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions.
3. Functional Commissions of the Economic and Social Council:(a) Human Rights Commission.

(b) Commission on International Commodity Trade (C.I.C.T.).
(c) Narcotic Drugs Commission.
(d) Statistical Commission.
4.

Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE).

5.

other Subsidiary Bodies of the Economic and Social Council:(a) United Nations Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF).
(b) Standing Committee for Industrial Development.
(c) Permanent Central Opium Board.
(d) International Development Association.

6.

Trusteeship Council.

7.

International Atomic

8.

Specialised Agencies.

Energy Agency.

(a) Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO).
(b) General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs (GATT).
<pg80>
<pg81>
(c) International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(IBRD).
(d) International Monetary Fund (IMF).
(e) International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO).
(f) International Labour Office (ILO).
(g)

International Telecommunications Union (ITU).

(h)

Universal Postal Union (UPU).

(i) United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO).
(j)

World Health Organisation (WHO).

(k)

World Meteorological Organisation (WMO).

(l)

International Finance Corporation (IFC).

(m) International Maritime Consultative Organisation (IMCO).
OTHER INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS
9. Asian Broadcasting Conference.
10.

Asian African Legal Consultative Committee.

11.

Commonwealth Agricultural Bureau (U.K..).

12.

Commonwealth Air Transport Council.

13.

Commonwealth Advisory Aeronautical Research Coommittee.

14.

Commonwealth Broadcasting Conference.

15.
Zurich.

International Association for Bridges and Structural Engineering,

16.

International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage, New Delhi.

17.

International Commission on Large Dams, Paris.

18.

International Committee of the Red Cross, Geneva.

19.

International, Conference of Social Works, Paris.

20.

International Cotton Advisory Committee, Washington.

21.

International Council

22. International Council
mentation, Paris.
23. International Council

of Archives, Paris.
of Building Research Studies and Docuof Scientific Unions, London.

24.

International Criminal Police Commission, Paris.

25.

International Customs

26.

International Electro-Technical Commission, Geneva.

27.

International Federation for Documentation, The Hague.

28.
Hague.

Tariff Bureau, Brussels.

International Federation for Housing and Town Planning. The
<pg82>

29. International Federation for University Women, London.
U.K.

30. International Hide & Allied Trades Improvement Society, Surrey,
31. International Hydrographic Bureau, Monte Carlo.
32.

International

Hospitals Federation, London,.

33.

International

Institute for Administrative Sciences, Brussels.

34.

International

Institute for the Unification of Private Law, Rome.

35.

International

Organisation for Standardisation, Geneva.

36.

International

Organisation of Legal Meteorology, Paris.

37.

International

Railway Congress Association, Brussels.

38.

International

Scientific Radio Union, Brussels.

39.

International

Tea Committee, London.

40.
Works.

International Union for the Protection of Literary and Artistic

41.

International

Union

of Biological Sciences, Paris.

42.

International

Union

of Crystallography, Cambridge.

43.

International

Union

of

Geodesy and Geophysics, Paris.

44.

International

Union

of

Geography, New York.

45.

International

Union of Official Travel Organisation, Geneva.

46.

International

Union

of

47.

International

Union

of Pure and Applied Physics, Paris,

48.

International

Union

of Theoratical and Applied Mechanics, Delft,

49.

Permanent International Association of Road Congress, Brussels,

50.

Union International Contre le Cancer, Paris.

51.

World Poultry Science Association, New York.

52.

World Veterans' Federation, Paris.

Pure and Applied Chemistry, Paris.

GMGIPND-NS-143 E.\. (JC 6484)-28 2-61-2400

INDIA
USA UNITED KINGDOM
REPUBLIC ITALY
Jan 01, 1960

SWITZERLAND

LATVIA

FRANCE

BELGIUM

CENTRAL AFRICAN


