Annual Report 1999-2000

1
India’s Neighbours

Section 1
Afghanistan

I

ndia remained deeply concerned with the situation in
Afghanistan, which directly impacts on our national interests,
including our security concerns. The ebb and flow of the civil
conflict between the Taliban which was supported and encouraged
by Pakistan and the Government of President Rabbani, which we
recognise as the legitimate government of Afghanistan was closely
monitored by us. The continuation of the civil war principally on
account of the intransigence of the Taliban and its foreign mentor,
Pakistan, continued to bring great suffering for a people with whom
we have historical ties of friendship and cooperation.
The Taliban launched three major campaigns against the forces
of the Government of Afghanistan, especially those of Commander
Ahmad Shah Masood. These campaigns sought to drive Masood
out of Afghanistan. However, Ahmad Shah Masood was able to hold
his ground in the Shumali plains as well as north of the Hindukush.
During these operations, the Taliban targetted the civilian population,
displacing women and children and destroying infrastructure. Such
activities can only be completely condemned.
The Taliban controlled areas in Afghanistan emerged as the
breeding ground for terrorists and extremist groups and the largest

source of opium production and illegal flow of narcotics in the world,
posing a serious threat to the peace and stability of the whole region.
For return to peace, normalcy and stable government in Afghanistan
which would also help in eliminating these negatives emanating from
Afghanistan, it was essential that foreign interference, principally from
Afghanistan’s southern borders must cease. India remained firm in
its belief that there can be no military solution to the Afghan problem
and that Afghanistan’s independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity must be preserved.
India kept in close touch with many countries that have influence
and interest in Afghan affairs. It supported the efforts of the UN to
bring peace to Afghanistan. However, it was our feeling that the 6+2
format relied upon by the UN as the principal mechanism to bring
peace to Afghanistan is inherently flawed on account of its narrow
and constricted base.
Notwithstanding our lack of recognition of the Taliban, our
strong reservations about its obscurantist ideologies and our
opposition to the manner in which it has permitted itself to be
manipulated by Pakistan, we established direct contact with the
Taliban during the hijacking of Indian Airlines flight IC-814. The
role played by the Taliban during this crisis was noted but we made it
clear that the fundamentals of our Afghan policy would not change.
1

India's Neighbours

As in previous years, India continued to send humanitarian
assistance to Afghanistan both bilaterally and through the UN. To
ameliorate the suffering of thousands of Afghan people displaced
from the Shumali plains and Takhar province, 1000 tents, 25,500
blankets, 140 tonnes of food items and 15 tonnes of medicines, medical
supplies and medical equipment were despatched by eight chartered
flights. More consignments of medicines, shelter material and food
items will be sent in the coming months.
Iran

India’s multifaceted relations with Iran continued to grow. As a
part of continuing high-level interaction between the two countries,
Minister of External Affairs had a fruitful meeting with Dr. Seyed
Kamal Kharrazi, Foreign Minister of the Islamic Republic of Iran at
New York on 23 September, 1999 during which all bilateral, regional
and international issues of mutual interest were discussed. Foreign
Secretary Shri K. Raghunath paid a visit to Tehran from 31 July-1
August, 1999 to review with his counterpart all bilateral, political,
commercial, economic, technical, cultural and consular cooperation.
He also exchanged views on regional matters and international issues
of common concern.
It was decided that for a more regular and structured consultations
between the Foreign Ministries of the two countries, four Working
Groups be formed for a more focussed attention on (i) Bilateral,
Political and Economic issues; (ii) International & Multilateral Issues;
(iii) Research & Sectoral Studies; and (iv) Cultural Cooperation.

2

Annual Report 1999-2000

was vacated. This was a fact that was well understood by the
international community.
The Indian armed forces began Operation Vijay on 26 May 1999
with the objective of completely evicting Pakistan’s armed intrusion
and aggression. While the Operation was on, the External Affairs
Minister also received the Foreign Minister of Pakistan for talks in
New Delhi (12 June ‘99). The Pakistan Foreign Minister was told
clearly that Pakistan’s armed intrusion and aggression was completely
unacceptable, that it constituted a blatant violation of the Line of
Control and the Simla Agreement and that there was no question of
any talks on this issue without Pakistan first addressing itself to
vacating its aggression against India and restoring status quo ante on
the LOC. India’s outrage at the inhuman and barbaric treatment meted
out to our soldiers in Pakistani custody was also conveyed to him. We
demanded that those guilty of these atrocities be brought to justice.
The Pakistan Foreign Minister was also told that Pakistan’s aggression
was a grave breach of trust and while its territorial aggression against
India would be evicted, it would be extremely difficult to restore the
trust and confidence that had been damaged by Pakistan’s betrayal.

approbation. It also needs to be emphasised that the importance of
the inviolability and sanctity of the LOC for maintaining peace and
tranquillity was totally accepted by the international community.
Pakistan was held as having violated this line and its efforts at terming
it as imprecise also failed. The international community also concurred
with our assertion that Kargil was a manifestation of the medieval
malevolence spilling over from Afghanistan and that there was a need
to confront and defeat such impulses, in the interest of not only our
region but also of the larger global community.
Throughout its military operations, India acted with unparalleled
restraint and scrupulously observed the sanctity of the LOC. In doing
so, our armed forces took unusually high casualties, which are a tribute
to their discipline and valour. In view of the relentless progress of
Indian forces on the ground, Pakistan had no option but to come to
an arrangement for withdrawing its troops to its own side of the
LOC. In exactly two months’ time from the day it had started,
Operation Vijay marked one of the great successes in the Indian
military history.
Violation of Indian Airspace by Pakistani Aircraft

The international community, while appreciating India’s position,
also pointed to the irresponsibility of Pakistan’s military action and
called for the immediate restoration of the LOC. India too emphasised
that the LOC was an essential confidence building measure and
indispensable for peace and security. Attempts by Pakistan to create
doubts about its clarity and validity were not only mischievous, but
also extremely dangerous and totally unacceptable to us. We also
pointed out that in the 27 years since the LOC had been demarcated
and marked on authenticated maps signed by senior military
commanders of both India and Pakistan, there had not been single
instance of its having been called into question.

During the year, Pakistan maintained its pattern of brazen
violations of the 1991 Agreement between India and Pakistan on
Prevention of Airspace Violations. On 10 August 1999, a Pakistan
Navy maritime surveillance-cum-combat Atlantique aircraft intruded
repeatedly and deep into Indian territory in the Rann of Kutch area
and was shot down by the Indian Air Force fighters when it failed to
heed to their signals to land. Part of the wreckage of the aircraft was
found inside Indian territory. Pakistan also used missiles on 11 August
1999 to target three Indian helicopters that were ferrying journalists
to the crash site. All of these actions are in keeping with Pakistan’s
wilful violation of confidence building measures.

The international community was kept continuously briefed of
India’s position during Operation Vijay. It was a measure of the
justness of India’s cause that our position found virtually universal

IC-814 Hijacking

An Indian Airlines aircraft was hijacked to Kandahar by five
persons on 24 December, 1999. Government secured the safe release
3

India's Neighbours

of passengers, crew and the aircraft in exchange for three terrorists,
including a Pakistani national. The hijacking was an example of
international terrorism at its worst. There is firm evidence that it was
engineered by Pakistan and fundamentalist groups that are based in
Pakistan and outside under its command and control. The Indian
authorities have also been able to identify the hijackers who are all
Pakistanis. Further, the majority of the terrorists whose release was
earlier sought by the hijackers were also Pakistanis. The destination
of the hijackers as well as of the three released terrorists was Pakistan.
Outlook for Future Relations

It was India that had initiated the composite dialogue process.
The Prime Minister’s visit to Lahore was a path-breaking attempt to
reach out to Pakistan and permanently transform our relations. It
was also a manifestation of our desire to take them in a positive and
constructive direction. Pakistan embarked on a venture that
constituted betrayal of trust and revealed abiding hostility. It would,
therefore, be idle to pretend that this experience has not set back
India-Pakistan relations. The damage this action has done to mutual
relations is compounded by Pakistan’s continuing sponsorship of
terrorism against India as a matter of state policy.
Pakistan is now effectively under what amounts to martial law
following the military coup of 12 October 1999. The coup has
implications for our security interests and we have to take this into
account. Pakistan needs to restore mutual trust and confidence
through concrete and tangible action including the cessation of crossborder terrorism and hostile propaganda against India. The
sponsorship and instigation of cross-border terrorism by Pakistan in
Jammu & Kashmir and elsewhere in India constitutes a violation not
only of the LOC but also of the Simla Agreement. It is incumbent
upon Pakistan to abjure this brazen encouragement and abetment of
terrorism and dismantle the entire network that is set up in Pakistani
territory for this purpose. Continuous calls for “jehad” against India
can hardly be interpreted as messages for dialogue and peace. The

4

high-pitched propaganda against India, instances of which are rife in
the daily life of Pakistan, do not inspire confidence in Pakistan’s interest
in dialogue.
These are not preconditions but the very ingredients to foster
proper environment for a meaningful interaction between the two
countries.
The international community also recognises that all outstanding
issues between India and Pakistan should be settled bilaterally in a
peaceful manner. There is no place whatsoever for any third-party
mediation in this process.
Section2
Relations with our Eastern and Southern neighbours continued
to remain warm and friendly. The thrust of our policy towards this
region was to encourage mutually beneficial economic cooperation
and contacts at people’s level. Several new initiatives were launched
to achieve these objectives. Regular contacts were maintained at the
political level with a view to strengthening cooperative relations with
these countries and to sensitising them on the threat posed to the
democratic and social fabric of the region by forces of terrorism and
religious extremism.
Bangladesh

India continued to pursue a policy of further expanding and
deepening its traditionally close and friendly ties with Bangladesh.
There was a regular exchange of high level visits which contributed
to the promotion of mutual understanding and goodwill, with an
emphasis on economic cooperation.
The Prime Minister, Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee, accompanied by a
delegation which included the External Affairs Minister, Minister for
Railways and Surface Transport and Chief Minister of West Bengal
visited Dhaka on 19 and 20 June, 1999 on the occasion of the inaugural
run of the bus service from Calcutta to Dhaka. The bus service has

Annual Report 1999-2000

been welcomed by the people of the two countries with great joy. It
heralds a new dimension in bilateral relations and represents a
significant step in facilitating people-to-people interaction between
the two countries.
During the visit, Prime Minister held wide ranging discussions
with the President and Prime Minister of Bangladesh; the discussions
covered bilateral, regional and international issues. An Agreement to
extend a credit line of Rs.200 crore to Bangladesh, spread over three
years was signed. With a view to further enhancing trade, India has
agreed in principle to the Bangladeshi request for non-reciprocal dutyfree access for select items of export interest to Bangladesh. Both
sides also agreed upon the restoration of multi-modal communication
links between the two countries which should go a long way in
providing the infrastructure necessary to enable economic interaction
between India and Bangladesh attain its true potential. Both sides
also focussed on the need to provide a framework for border trade.
A proposal for the transshipment of Indian goods across Bangladesh
by Bangladesh carriers is under the active consideration of the
Government of Bangladesh. These issues will be examined by a Joint
Group of Experts.
The two Prime Ministers met again on 13 November 1999 on
the sidelines of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting
in Durban.
The Bangladesh Minister for Water Resources, Mr Abdur Razzak,
visited India in April 1999 in connection with the 33rd Session of the
Joint Rivers Commission. The Joint Committee of Experts on Sharing
of Waters of Common Rivers met twice during the year when
discussions were held on sharing of Teesta Waters. The Minister for
Commerce and Industries of Bangladesh , Mr Tofail Ahmed visited
India for bilateral talks on trade issues from 19-24 May 1999. The
Speaker of the Bangladesh Parliament, Mr Humayun Rasheed
Choudhury, visited India from 9-15 August 1999.

Minister of State for External Affairs, Mr. Ajit Kumar Panja,
visited Dhaka from 20-22 January 2000, when he called on the Prime
Minister of Bangladesh and held fruitful discussions with the Ministers
of Foreign Affairs, Finance and Agriculture. His talks with the Minister
of State for Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh covered the entire range
of bilateral interactions, with a view to identifying areas for focussed
attention in the coming months. An MOU on Agriculture was signed
during the visit. An important outcome of the discussions was the
decision to start a bus service between Agartala and Dhaka.
Interaction between the armed forces of India and Bangladesh
continued with the exchange of a number of high level delegations
between the two countries. The Bangladesh Defence Secretary, Mr
Mohammed Idris Ali visited India from 12-16 October 1999 along
with the Director General (Artillery ) of the Bangladesh Army and
Assistant Chief of Naval Staff on the occasion of Defexpo-99. The
Bangladesh Navy participated in the multilateral exercise MILAN-99
held at Port Blair from 30 March - 4 April 1999. Three Indian Navy
ships commanded by Rear Admiral V Bharatan made a goodwill visit
to Chittagong from 1-4 November 1999 and carried out a joint exercise
for the first time with three Bangladesh Navy ships on 4 November,
1999. As in previous years, a number of armed forces personnel of
Bangladesh also received training in India.
As part of the institutional dialogue on various issues relating to
border management, the Director General level meeting between the
Border Security Force and the Bangladesh Rifles took place in Dhaka
from 24-28 October 1999. The Joint Working Group from the
respective Home Ministries also met in Dhaka in January 2000.
Secretary level talks on renewal of the India-Bangladesh Protocol
on Inland Transit & Trade was held in Dhaka from 26-28 October
1999. The Protocol was renewed upto 3 October 2001. The new
Protocol puts in place a framework which will facilitate movement of
cargo to the north eastern states. Under the new Protocol, Calcutta,
5

India's Neighbours

Haldia, Pandu and Karimganj on the Indian side and Narayanganj,
Sirajganj, Khulana and Mongla on the Bangladesh side have been
designated as Ports of Call. The Protocol also provides for steps to
ensure equal sharing of inter-country and transit cargo by the ships
of the two countries to and from ports of call/customs stations
including extended places of loading and unloading.
Maintaining the tradition of close and active interaction in the
field of education, India provided training facilities and scholarships
to Bangladeshi candidates under various schemes. A series of cultural
programmes by Indian artistes were also organized in Bangladesh. A
number of cultural programmes including film shows, art-exhibitions,
music concerts etc. were also organised by the Indian High
Commission in Dhaka with the participation of local artistes from
Bangladesh.
Sri Lanka

India’s relations with Sri Lanka continued to be cordial and
friendly. India expressed its consistent support for a peaceful
settlement of the ethnic conflict within the framework of Sri Lanka’s
unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity. India views the ethnic issue
as complicated and best be resolved by Sri Lanka itself.
The Minister of State (EA), Shri A.K. Panja, led an Indian
delegation to Colombo in November 1999 to represent India at the
State sponsored funeral of late Mr. S. Thondaman, CWC Leader and
Minister of Livestock Development and Estate Infrastructure. Mr.
Thondaman was the leader of the Ceylon Workers Congress and was
held in high regard by the Indian Tamil Community in Sri Lanka.
As a follow up to the signing of India-Sri Lanka Free Trade
Agreement in December, 1998, an Indian delegation led by the
Commerce Secretary visited Colombo in May, 1999 and held
discussions with the Sri Lankan delegation led by Secretary to the
Treasury. The talks were inconclusive. After a further round of talks
in New Delhi in February 2000, letters were exchanged by which all

6

pending matters were resolved. The operationalisation of the FTA
will take place on March 1, 2000.
The Sri Lankan Defence Secretary visited India in August, 1999
and had detailed discussions with the Defence Secretary and the
Foreign Secretary. The discussions were focussed on security related
matters including training of Sri Lankan defence personnel in India
and the problems faced by Indian fishermen in the Palk Straits area.
Lt. Gen. Chandra Sekhar, PVSM, AVSM, ADC, Vice Chief of
Army Staff, represented India at the Golden Jubilee celebrations of
the Sri Lankan Army held in Colombo from 9-12 October, 1999.
The India-Sri Lanka Foundation was inaugurated by the Sri
Lankan Foreign Minister Mr. Lakshman Kadirgamar in Colombo on
19 November 1999, in pursuance of the MOU establishing the IndiaSri Lanka Foundation signed during the visit of the Sri Lankan
President to India in December, 1998. The Foundation would focus
on promotion of cultural and educational ties between the two
countries.
Maldives

India-Maldives relations have been close and friendly. India
attaches the highest importance to its relations with the Maldives and
is committed to cooperate with the Maldives in its developmental
efforts especially in the human resource development and health
sectors. During the year 1999, a number of visits were exchanged
between the two countries to strengthen cooperation in various areas
including medicine, meteorology and customs cooperation.
A Tripartite Agreement between India, Maldives and Indira
Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) was signed on
22.12.1999, under which IGNOU will launch Distance Education
programmes in the Maldives. Another Tripartite Agreement between
India, Maldives and the Educational Consultants India Limited has
been signed to facilitate tailor-made courses in India for Maldivian
students.

Annual Report 1999-2000

A two-member delegation from the Indian Meteorological
Department visited Male from 22 - 30 June 1999 in connection with
the upgradation of the Meteorological Data Reception Centre at Male.
The Centre was commissioned by Hon’ble Abdulla Majeed, Deputy
Minister for Home Affairs, Housing and Environment of the
Government of Maldives from June 28, 1999.
The Fourth Joint Indo-Maldives Coast Guard Exercises under
the Dosti series was conducted from October 4-8, 1999.
Mr. Ahmed Abdullah, Minister of Health of Maldives visited India
from 22-24 April 1999. During his stay in India, he was called on by
the Health Secretary and Foreign Secretary, when ongoing bilateral
cooperation in the health sector was discussed.
Myanmar

India continued to pursue a policy of constructive engagement
with Myanmar with a view to strengthening the existing ties and broadbasing and diversifying areas of contact and cooperation. General
Maunge Aye, Vice Chairman, State Peace and Development Council,
Deputy Commander-in-Chief of Myanmar Defence Forces and
Commander-in-Chief of Myanmar Army, visited Shillong from 7-8
January 2000, at the invitation of our Chief of Army Staff, who visited
Myanmar from 6-7 January 2000. He led a high level delegation
comprising of Ministers and senior officials. The visit provided an
opportunity to discuss a wide range of bilateral issues including control
of cross border insurgency, threat posed by religious fundamentalism,
trade and economic relations, travel linkages, tourism and cross border
projects in areas such as power, mining, etc. The Indian delegation
for the talks with General Maunge Aye was led by the Minister of
Commerce and Industry, Mr. Murasoli Maran and included the
Minister for Power, Shri R. Kumaramangalam. The two sides have
agreed upon specific steps to strengthen economic and security
cooperation.
Following a series of exchanges between the scientific

communities of the two countries, an Agreement on Cooperation in
the fields of Science & Technology was concluded during the visit of
the Myanmar Minister for Science and Technology to India in June
1999. The Heads of Survey Departments of India and Myanmar met
in Yangon (10-13 November), when, besides issues pertaining to
maintenance of boundary pillars along the 1643 Km international
border between India and Myanmar, the possibilities of cooperation
in the field of cartography were also discussed. The first ever visit to
India by a Naval Chief from Myanmar (14-20 November) laid the
foundation for closer interaction between the Navies of the two
countries.
India continued to cooperate with the Government of Myanmar
in its developmental efforts, including human resource development.
Technical teams from India visited Myanmar to assess the potential
for cooperation in areas such as power and to determine road and
riverine linkages between the North East and Myanmar. A sustained
dialogue on issues relating to border management was maintained
between senior civilian and army officials through established
institutional mechanisms. The 6th India-Myanmar National Level
Meeting, at the level of Home Secretaries was held in New Delhi
(July 28-30), and the 9th India-Myanmar Sectoral Level Meeting, at
the level of Joint Secretaries, was held in Kohima (11-13, November).
These meetings addressed issues such as border management,
promotion of trade and travel through land route, etc.
Section 3
India’s traditional friendship and cooperation with its northern
neighbours, Bhutan and Nepal, has continued to grow over the years.
Bhutan and Nepal are our closest neighbours, and this closeness is
evident in our common social values, traditions, extensive people to
people contacts, and wide ranging economic linkages. Our focus over
the year has been on mutually beneficial economic development, which
would help to improve the living conditions of people in the three
7

India's Neighbours

countries, and particularly of the people living on both sides of the
open India-Nepal and India-Bhutan border.
Nepal

Several initiatives were taken to further strengthen our interaction
with Nepal, and to consolidate the close and multifaceted cooperation
between the two countries.
The Foreign Minister of Nepal, Dr. Ram Sharan Mahat, paid an
official visit to India from 17-19 August 1999. During the visit, Dr.
Mahat called on the President and Prime Minister of India, besides
meeting his counterpart, the External Affairs Minister of India.
Although the visit was primarily for consultations on matters relating
to SAARC, it also provided an opportunity for exchange of views on
bilateral issues of mutual interest.
At the invitation of the Foreign Minister of Nepal, the External
Affairs Minister, Shri Jaswant Singh paid an official visit to Nepal
from 8-11 September 1999. The Foreign Ministers reaffirmed the
commitment of their respective governments not to allow their
respective territories to be used for activities prejudicial to the security
of the other. They directed their Survey Officials to complete the
demarcation of the Boundary in a time bound manner. The visit
provided an opportunity to review the entire gamut of bilateral
relations between Nepal and India. A Joint Press Statement was issued
at the conclusion of the visit, announcing the various decisions taken
to further strengthen cooperation between the two countries. A
decision was taken to revive the India-Nepal Joint Commission and
expand cooperation in development of infrastructure, including
transportation and communications in the adjoining border districts
of Nepal and India, exchange information and experience in the field
of socioeconomic development between the Planning Commissions
of the two countries, and set up a Joint Task Force on Flood Control
and Flood Forecasting.
Two prestigious Government of India-assisted projects in the

8

health sector in Nepal, the B. P. Koirala Institute of Health Sciences
(BPKIHS) at Dharan and the Maternity & Neo-natal Intensive Care
Units at Paropkar Hospital in Kathmandu were inaugurated and
formally handed over to the Nepalese authorities.
Other high level visits during the period under review include,
the visit of a 6-member Nepalese delegation led by, Mr. Bishwa Man
Shrestha, the Election Commissioner of Nepal, from September 29
to October 7, 1999, to observe the last phase of the 13th Lok Sabha
elections and meet the Chief Election Commissioner and other senior
officials in the Election Commission of India.
The Nepalese Minister of State for Science & Technology of
Nepal, Mr. Surendra Prasad Chowdhury visited India from 17-21
November 1999 to attend the 2nd Ministerial Meeting on Space
Application for Sustainable Development in Asia and the Pacific held
in New Delhi. His visit, and meetings with our Minister for Human
Resource Development and Science & Technology and Minister of
State for Science & Technology of India, has paved the way for bilateral
cooperation in the field of Science and Technology.
The Nepalese Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Chakra Prasad Bastola
visited New Delhi from 22-24 November, 1999. The visit provided
an opportunity to discuss possibilities of mutual cooperation in the
field of Agriculture in pursuance of the Bilateral MOU on Cooperation
in the field of Agriculture.
The 12th Meeting of the Joint Group of Experts on the
Pancheshwar Multi-Purpose Project was held in New Delhi from 35 August 1999 to finalise the modalities for setting up of a Joint Project
Office (JPO) in Kathmandu and other field offices and preparation
of the Detailed Project Report (DPR) within a timeframe of two
years from the date of opening of the JPO. Both Governments have
approved the modalities worked out and the Joint Project Office and
field offices are expected to commence work shortly.

Annual Report 1999-2000

The 10th Meeting of the Standing Committee on Inundation
Problems between Nepal and India was held in Kathmandu from 15 November 1999. The two sides discussed measures to expedite
solutions to the recurring problems of inundation along the IndiaNepal border. Both sides agreed to expedite the construction of
embankments on Lalbakeya, Bagmati, Kamia and Khando rivers and
cooperate on preparation of a “Master Plan for Basin- Wise
Management of Flood and Inundation Problems” in respect of Kosi
and other river basins in Eastern Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, which
originate in Nepal.
The 22nd Meeting of the Joint Technical Level India-Nepal
Boundary Committee (JTC) was held in Kathmandu from 2-4
November 1998. At the Meeting, the two sides reviewed the progress
in the implementation of the decisions taken at the 21st JTC Meeting
and finalised the work plan for expeditious completion of reidentification of the India - Nepal Boundary, in a time bound manner,
by 2002. Final preparation of strip-maps and finalization of modalities
for periodic inspection and maintenance of the India Nepal Boundary
would be completed by 2003.
The 4th Director General level talks on Customs Cooperation
were held in New Delhi from December 1-3, 1999. The two sides
reviewed the implementation of decisions taken at the 3rd DG level
meeting and agreed to further enhance the ongoing bilateral
cooperation to monitor and effectively combat unauthorised trade
across the open India-Nepal Border.
A Joint India Nepal Coordination meeting was held, in
Kathmandu from December 9-10, 1999, to finalise the technical
modalities for energising the 132 KV Tanakpur-Mahendranagar line
to supply 70 million units of energy per annum, free of cost, to Nepal,
in accordance with India’s commitment under the Mahakali Treaty.
It was agreed to commence the power supply with effect from
January 1, 2000.

The Commerce Secretary Level Inter-Governmental Committee
Meeting, to review the implementation of the India-Nepal Treaty of
Trade, and India -Nepal Treaty of Transit was held from December
9-11, 1999 in New Delhi. The meeting enabled both sides to review
the entire gamut of bilateral trade relations and take appropriate
measures to ensure smooth implementation of the two Treaties.
India attaches high priority to the development of economic and
commercial ties with Nepal. Engagement in Nepal’s economic
development in diverse areas has increased over the years. Major
projects being funded by the Government of India in Nepal include
the construction of 22 bridges on the Kohalpur-Mahakali sector of
the East-West Highway, construction of an Emergency and Trauma
Centre at Bir Hospital in Kathmandu, construction of Raxaul-Sirsiya
Rail Link, construction of Tanakpur-Mahendranagar Link Road and
several other projects that form part of lndia’s commitment under
the Mahakali Treaty. A High Level Tasks Force (HLTF) monitors the
progress in bilateral relations and oversees Indian assisted projects in
Nepal.
Initiatives taken by the Government of India to liberalise the
trade and investment regime with Nepal have imparted considerable
momentum to bilateral economic exchanges in the recent years.
Nepal’s exports to India have tripled in the last three years, since the
conclusion of the renewed Treaty of Trade in 1996, and are expected
to touch the Rs. 1000 Crores per annum mark in the near future.
Indian investments account for over 40% of the total foreign
investments in Nepal. Bilateral trade during 1998-99 amounted to
Rs. 1225.56 Crores. During the period April-July 1999, the two-way
trade was Rs. 461.24 crores, while the figure for the corresponding
period in the previous year was Rs. 304.26 Crores.
A large number of Nepalese students continued to avail of
academic and training facilities in India. Several scholarship schemes,
such as the Silver Jubilee Scholarship, ITEC Scholarships and the
9

India's Neighbours

B P Koirala Foundation Scholarships supplemented normal
scholarships being provided under ‘Aid to Nepal’ and TCS of
Colombo Plan besides the self-financing opportunities for studies in
India offered by the Government of India to Nepalese students in
diverse fields, notably engineering, medicine and in the field of
advanced and modern technology. Specific professional training and
orientation programmes were also conducted for select candidates
from Nepal under the Nepal Aid Scheme. A large number of Nepalese
students were also admitted to schools and colleges in India as a
special concession.
An Indian Airlines flight IC-814 with 178 passengers and 11 crew
members on board, which took off from Kathmandu for Delhi on
24th December, was hijacked by 5 armed men at 17.10 hrs. while
over-flying Lucknow. All the hostages were released on 31st December
in exchange of three jailed militants. There was one casualty during
the hijacking. The two countries are in touch with each other to fully
investigate the hijacking.
The Third Meeting of the India-Nepal Joint Working Group on
Border Management (JWG) was held in Kathmandu from 1-3 Feb,
2000. The two sides reiterated their determination not to permit the
use of their respective territories for activities directed against the
other. They reviewed the developments since the last meeting of the
JWG and had an exchange of views on modalities for more effective
management and regulation of the India-Nepal border. They agreed
to strenghthen cooperation to control undesirable activities and the
movement of terrorists, criminals and other undesirable elements
accross the border. It was reiterated that the previlege of unimpeded
access accross the open border enjoyed by the nationals of the two
countries should not be allowed to be misused by anyone, including
third country nationals.
Bhutan

The relations between India and Bhutan are marked by mutual

10

understanding and respect and warm friendship. The mutually
beneficial economic cooperation between the two countries has been
steadily growing and continues to provide a firm basis to bilateral
relationship.
As part of our close bilateral cooperation, India has been
extending assistance to Bhutan’s Five-Year Plans since 1961. The VIII
Five-Year Plan (1997 - 2002) is under implementation. The
Government of India approved Rs. 900 Crores as lndia’s commitment
towards Bhutan’s VIII Plan. Of this total commitment, Rs.500 Crores
is for project-tied assistance and the remaining Rs. 400 Crores would
be provided as development subsidy to Bhutan. Separately, besides
the regular assistance under the Five-Year Plan, India is also funding
three Mega Projects i.e. the Tala Hydroelectric Project (THEP), the
Kurichu Hydroelectric Project (KHEP) and the Dungsum Cement
Project (DCP). The financing pattern for both the Tala and Kurichu
Projects is 60% as grant and 40% as loan.
The last round of bilateral cooperation talks was held in May
1999 in Thimpu. At the conclusion of the bilateral talks, an indicative
shelf of projects for disbursal of funds for the year 1999-2000 was
formulated. Out of the total Indian assistance of Rs.190 Crores under
the Non-Plan category for the year 1999-2000, an amount of Rs. 136
Crores had been released by the end of October.
During the year, various high level visits have marked the
continuing close interaction and friendship between India and Bhutan.

Annual Report 1999-2000

Army Staff visited Bhutan in September and met with his counterparts
in Bhutan. The 7th Joint Technical Level Meeting on the Bilateral
Survey Collaboration Project was held in Thimpu in June 1999. Shri
Opak Amang, Minister of State for Tourism visited Bhutan from
June 19-25, 1999. Bhutan's Minister of Trade and Industry visited
India from October 11-14, 1999 to attend the project authorities
meetings held in New Delhi. The Foreign Secretary of Bhutan, Dasho
Ugyen Tshering visited India from January 22-27, 2000 to attend an
international seminar. Thje Chief Justice of Bhutan, Lyonpo Sonam
Tobgye visited India from January 25-31, 2000 to participate in the
Golden Jubilee celebrations of Supreme Court of India. These regular
and high level interactions between the two countries continue to
reflect the special and friendly ties between the two countries.
A notable and important internal development during the period
under review was that at the instance of His Majesty, the King of
Bhutan, the Seventy Seventh Session of the National Assembly of
Bhutan re-empowered the King of Bhutan to take all necessary
measure to tackle the ULFA-BODO insurgency problem in South
Bhutan.

held, and a SAARC Joint Statement issued. The Terms of Reference
for a Treaty on the establishment of a South Asian Free Trade Area
(SAFTA) were finalised by the Committee of Experts set up at the
10th SAARC Summit at Colombo. This initiative was in addition to
the tariff concessions granted under the Third Round of the South
Asian Preferential Trading Arrangement (SAPTA), which covered
3456 tariff lines under concessional tariffs, with India offering more
than half the concessions. SAARC also began work on harmonizing
Quality and Measurement Standards, which will facilitate intra-regional
trade flows. India accords priority to the objectives and ideals of
SAARC – promoting and accelerating cooperation in social and
economic areas. The quickening of the pace of economic cooperation
constitutes a major advance for SAARC and is expected to contribute
to the operationalisation of the SAARC Free Trade Area.
India took initiative in offering Distance education scholarships
to students from the SAARC countries. NGOs were increasingly
involved in undertaking activities in diverse fields under the overall
SAARC umbrella, and were supported by the Ministry.

SAARC

However, events in the second half of the year cast a shadow
over the gathering momentum in regional cooperation. The military
coup in Pakistan on October 12, 1999 necessitated postponement of
the 11th SAARC Summit (scheduled for November 26-28, 1999 in
Kathmandu), as SAARC countries expressed their concern at the
prospect of holding the Summit after the overthrow of the
democratically elected Government of a Member State.

Overview

SAARC Foreign Ministers Meeting

The Indian community in Bhutan is estimated to be around 15000.
Many officials from both public and private sector are on deputation
to Bhutan and engaged in various development projects. India also
extends various facilities to Bhutan in the field of higher education,
survey, training and technical assistance.

Regional Cooperation, particularly economic cooperation under
the SAARC framework, gained momentum in the first half of the
year. Several initiatives, crucial for the success of any regional
organisation, were taken in regional economic cooperation. For the
first time, intensive consultations amongst the SAARC countries to
evolve a common strategy prior to the WTO Meeting in Seattle were

SAARC Foreign Ministers met on the margins of the 54th Session
of the UNGA in New York on September 28, 1999 and discussed
the Report of the Group of Eminent Persons (GEP), set up at the
Ninth SAARC Summit at Male, in May 1997 to review the functioning
of SAARC institutions and provide a Perspective Plan upto the year
2020. These were followed by Ministerial level dialogues with the
11

India's Neighbours

EU-Troika and ASEAN where areas for possible cooperation were
considered.
SAARC Conference on Intellectual Property Rights

A SAARC Conference on Intellectual Property Rights, held in
New Delhi from April 20-21, 1999, discussed regional cooperation
in promoting awareness among the SAARC countries of issues relating
to the protection of Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs). The
Conference agreed on setting up a Technological Information
Network to streamline and improve procedures for disposing of patent
applications, and called for the development of model regional IPR
regimes and traditional-knowledge databases, and for enhanced
protection for traditional knowledge. It also recommended developing

12

Annual Report 1999-2000

agriculture and food products, should be accorded priority in regional
harmonisation of standards. The Quality Council of India was
mandated to prepare a draft common format for a Mutual Recognition
Agreement for Conformity Assessment, for the consideration of
SAARC Member States. The National Physical Laboratory of India
would prepare a status report on the Testing, Measurement and
Calibration facilities in the region. A draft Regional Action Plan for
furthering cooperation was also adopted, to be considered at the next
meeting of the SAARC Commerce Secretaries.
Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement

The First SAARC Meeting on an Agreement on Avoidance of
Double Taxation was held in Islamabad from August 5-7, 1999. The
Meeting discussed tax laws of member countries, different variants
of Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements and possible areas for
regional cooperation.

South Asian Development Fund

The Fourth Meeting of the Governing Board of the South Asian
Development Fund (SADF) took place in Thimpu from May 18-19,
1999. India is the current Chairman of the Fund. The Fund consists
of 3 Windows for funding techno-economic feasibility studies, Human
Resources Development, and infrastructure sectors. The Meeting
discussed mobilisation of funds from regional and multilateral agencies
for augmenting the Fund’s core capital. The Meeting also established
a Technical Committee to examine the proposal for setting up a
permanent Secretariat for the SADF. The Fifth Governing Board
Meeting of the SADF, which met from September 8-9, 1999 approved
the report of the Technical Committee, which has recommended that
a Permanent Secretariat would be desirable. Both these proposals –
for augmenting the funds and for a permanent Secretariat would now
be considered by the higher bodies of SAARC.

Technical Committee Meetings

Communications
The Sixth Meeting of the SAARC Technical Committee on

Communications was held in Islamabad from 4-5 May, 1999, and
reviewed implementation of the Plan of Action on
Telecommunications adopted by the First Meeting of the SAARC
Communication Ministers in May, 1998. A Focus Group for
consideration of tariffs, accounting rates, traffic patterns, etc. was
constituted. The Meeting strongly recommended laying of optical
fiber lines for digitalisation and increased band-width. A regional
directory of training institutions, course outlines, experts and
consultants in the field of telecommunications is to be prepared. India
offered to organise a Regional Workshop on Induction of Technology
in Postal Services during the current year.
Health, Population Activities and Child Welfare
The 17th Meeting of the SAARC Technical Committee on Health,
Population Activities and Child Welfare, held in Colombo, Sri Lanka
from August 12-14, 1999, discussed a Draft Convention for Children.
The National Institute of Communicable Diseases in India would
collate and disseminate information about institutions dealing with
communicable and non-communicable diseases. India also offered
to circulate a list of our Institutes and the courses they offer in dealing
with Disaster Management.
SAARC Convention on Suppression of Terrorism

A meeting of Legal Officers on the SAARC Convention on
Suppression of Terrorism held in Kandy, Sri Lanka from June 17-18,
1999, reviewed the implementation of the Convention. Under its
provisions, Member States are committed to extradite or prosecute
alleged terrorists, thus preventing them from enjoying safe havens. It
was agreed that those Member States which have not yet done so
should enact legislation at an early date to give comprehensive effect
to the Convention. The Meeting also agreed on the Draft Guidelines
for the Annual Liaison Officers’ Meeting to review issues relating to
the Convention.
13

India's Neighbours

Workshop on Follow up Action on the Fourth World
Conference on Women

A Workshop on Follow up Action on the Fourth World
Conference on Women (Beijing Platform For Action) was held in
New Delhi from September 28-29, 1999. The Member countries
presented their country position on the areas identified by the Beijing
Platform for Action, discussed the situation of the Girl Child and
gender related inputs for the proposed SAARC Social Charter, and
adopted recommendations for regional cooperation.

Y2K Conference

A two-day Meeting of Senior Officials dealing with Y2K Issues
was held in Dhaka, Bangladesh from September 25-26, 1999. The
Meeting recommended that those members who were prepared for
the Y2K problem, especially in the critical area of Power, should offer
technical assistance for mitigation of the Y2K impact.

Meeting of the Heads of National TV & Radio Organisations

The First Meeting of the Heads of National TV & Radio
organisations of SAARC countries was held on October 14, 1999 in
New Delhi against the background of plummeting audience interest
in the SAARC Audio Visual Exchange Committee (SAVE)
Programmes. The Meeting recommended the introduction of ‘shorts’
on radio ( 90 second messages on radio ) and ‘spots’ (20 second
messages on TV) in addition to the existing SAVE format. India
offered to host a workshop on the issue. Environment, Social
Development, Women’s Empowerment, Health and Education have
been chosen as themes for the spots/shorts. It was also agreed to set
up a mechanism for daily exchange of news items for both Radio and
TV. India had informally offered to prepare a proposal for the
Mechanism.

Meeting of SAARC Audio Visual Exchange Committee

The 18th Meeting of the SAARC Audio Visual Exchange

14

Committee, held in New Delhi from October 15-16, 1999 selected
Radio and TV Programmes for SAVE broad/telecasts. The
Committee previewed the documentary on SAARC to be telecast
simultaneously in all countries on the eve of the 11th Summit prepared
by the External Publicity Division of the Ministry of External Affairs,
India, decided to hold a SAARC Radio Music Festival, and also decided
to intensify cooperation in the field of electronic media.
NGO Meetings

A Meeting of South Asian Countries on Tea Cooperation, held
in New Delhi from May 6-7, 1999, discussed marketing and production
issues, and decided to launch a generic regional tea promotion and to
form the Tea Association of South Asia (TASA). The Tea Board of
India will host the secretariat of TASA temporarily till permanent
arrangements are made.
Workshop on International Conventions on Land
Transport Facilitation

A Workshop on “International Conventions on Land Transport
Facilitation” was organised by the Asian Institute of Transport
Development from May 19 - 21, 1999 in New Delhi. The Workshop
deliberated on – the various international, regional and bilateral
conventions in the transport sector, the legal framework for transport
facilitation, and regional rail logistics. It also considered the various
non-physical barriers and issues in cross-border movement of goods
and passengers – like customs, visa formalities, regulation of
transshipment of goods and vehicles in transit. ESCAP had also
submitted a proposal for conducting studies in the Transportation
sector for SAARC, including the holding of workshops to sensitize
the SAARC member countries about the benefits of acceding to
International Conventions. India has acceded to two such conventions.
uu

Annual Report 1999-2000

2
South East Asia and the Pacific

I

ndia’s relations with the countries of South East Asia have
traditionally been close and warm as we share a common historical
and cultural legacy. After the end of the cold war and since the
introduction of economic reforms in India, there has been a renewed
vigour in our relationship with the countries of the South East Asian
region. India’s “Look East” policy and country’s potential as a major
market have contributed significantly towards expanding and
diversifying India’s relations with the ASEAN region. The closeness
of the relationship is reflected in regular exchanges of high level visits,
like the recent visit of the President of Vietnam (December 1-5 1999),
the visit of the PM of Singapore (January 2000), the President of
Indonesia (February 2000) and the PM of Cambodia (February 2000)
to India, Joint Commission meetings with Vietnam and Laos, and
Foreign Office Consultations with the Philippines, Indonesia and
Australia etc.
India became ASEAN’s Sectoral Dialogue Partner in 1992 and
Full Dialogue Partner as well as a member of the ASEAN Regional
Forum (ARF) in 1996. The growing ties with the ASEAN have further
developed in the recent years. The dialogue partnership with the
ASEAN has enabled India to significantly broaden and diversify its
relationship with the ASEAN member countries. The ASEAN
countries have recognised the positive role that India can play in
maintaining peace and stability in the region.

India has a fundamental interest in the regional security issues as
we share maritime boundaries with several ASEAN countries and
land and maritime boundary with Myanmar. India sought to promote
a wider and deeper contact with the ASEAN countries in the ASEAN
and ARF framework, to promote peace, development and security in
the region. Shri Jaswant Singh, External Affairs Minister led an Indian
delegation to the 32nd ASEAN Post Ministerial Conference (PMC)
and the 6th ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) meetings held in
Singapore in July 1999, and held bilateral meetings with his
counterparts from the ASEAN and the ARF member countries.
Currently, India is closely collaborating with the South East Asian
countries in various fields such as trade and investment, science and
technolog y, tourism, human resources and infrastructure
development. Such linkages are expected to intensify in the coming
years. Through the institution of dialogue partnership with ASEAN,
attempts are being made to identify areas for focussed interaction,
including formulation of concrete work programmes and action plans.
The total bilateral trade between India and the ASEAN countries
has increased from about US$ 2.5 billion in 1993-94 to US$ 5.98 bn.
in 1997-98 and $ 5.36 bn in 1998-99. With the regional economic
crisis having bottomed out, India hopes to increase trade both in
terms of quantity and value with the ASEAN countries and also
enhance mutual investments.
15

South East Asia and the Pacific

Malaysia
India-Malaysia relations were further strengthened with high level
political exchanges and initiatives in the defence, commercial economic
and cultural fields.
A delegation led by Shri M. Karunanidhi, Chief Minister of Tamil
Nadu visited Malaysia (7-10 January, 1999) and called on the Malaysian
Prime Minister. A delegation led by Shri Ananth Kumar, Minister of
Civil Aviation & Tourism visited Malysia from 8-10 February 1999.
Dr. (Mrs.) Najma Heptullah, Dy. Chairperson, Rajya Sabha, met the
Speaker of the Malaysian Parliament and Head of Senate during her
visit to Malaysia (August 4-5). The Speakers of West Bengal Legislative
Assembly and Punjab Legislative Assembly visited Malaysia from 810 August and 3-6 October 1999 respectively. Justice S.B. Majumdar,
Judge of Supreme Court and Shri Soli Sorabjee, Attorney General of
India participated in the 12th Commonwealth Law Conference (1316 September).
INS ‘Krishna’ and INS ‘Tir’ arrived at Penang Port (26-30 March)
on a goodwill visit to Malaysia. India participated in the Langkawi
International Maritime and Aerospace Exhibition held in the Island
of Langkawi from 30 November - 5 December, 1999.
The economic & commercial cooperation between the two
countries has been growing. Malaysia has emerged as India’s largest
trading partner (over US $ 1891 million two-way trade during 199899) among the ASEAN countries as well as a significant foreign direct
investor country in India (first among ASEAN countries and eighth
globally, in terms of approvals as on 31.12.1998- total approvals from
1991-98 Rs. 54444.74 millions).
An Indian company IRCON was awarded US $ 121 mn Rail
Link Project to Pelbuhan Tanjung Pelepas Johar in July, 99. Another
major development (June 1999) was an agreement for purchase by
16

India of 50,000 barrels per day of crude oil signed between the Indian
Oil Corporation and Malaysian company Petronas.
From the Malaysian side, Dato Seri Samy Vellu, Minister for works
visited India (19-21 April) at the invitation of the Govt. of Punjab
and again in December 1999 to participate in INFRANET 99. Dr.
Lim Keng Yaik, Malaysian Primary Industries Minister led an
economic and technical mission to India (April, 99)
Singapore
India’s existing close and friendly relations with Singapore were
further strengthened during the year. External Affairs Minister Shri
Jaswant Singh had a bilateral meeting with his counterpart Prof. S.
Jayakumar in Singapore in July when he led the Indian delegation to
the 6th ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) and Post Ministerial
Conference. Deputy Chairperson of Rajya Sabha, Dr. Najma
Heptullah visited Singapore in August and had meetings with
Singapore Parliament Speaker, Mr. Tan Soo Khoon and Senior
Parliamentary Secretary in the Ministry of Information and Arts, Mr.
Yatiman Yusof. Minister of Power, Shri PR Kumaramangalam
attended the World Economic Forum’s East Asia Summit held in
Singapore from 18-20 October, 1999. Singapore PM Goh Chok Tong
had a meeting with our PM on 15th November, 1999 at Durban,
South Africa on the margins of CHOGM.
Official level visits included that of Secretary (ER) Shri S.T. Devare
who visited Singapore in May to attend the 6th ARF Senior Officials
meeting, the visit of Shri Deepak Chatterjee, Secretary, Ministry of
Chemicals and Petrochemicals (May), to discuss with the Jurong Town
corporation the structure and operations of the petrochemical
complex set up by them on Jurong Island.
Visits from State Governments included that of the Minister for
Municipal Affairs of Manipur, Shri I. Hemochandra Singh (April) to
attend the World Conference of Model Cities, a business delegation

Annual Report 1999-2000

from Andhra Pradesh led by Shri P. Chandrasekhar, Minister of Major
Industries, Commerce & Export Promotion (April) and accompanied
by Shri GSS Sivaji, Minister for Tourism, Shri H.D. Revenna, Minister
for Housing, Government of Karnataka and Chairman, Karnataka
Milk Federation (June).
A Singapore-India Colloquium titled “the Management of
Globalisation” was organised in Singapore from August 19-20 by the
newly established South Asian Studies Programme of the National
University of Singapore in collaboration with India International
Centre, New Delhi.
From the Singapore side, the National Science and Technology
Board of Singapore sent a delegation to India in September 1999.
During their stay in India, the delegation members had useful meetings
with various colleges and universities regarding possibilities of longterm collaboration between the Singaporean and Indian companies
and institutions.
During the year 1998-99, India-Singapore bilateral trade amounted
to US$ 1884.42 million with a decline of 4.7% over the previous year.
Our exports at US $ 520 million during this period declined by about
33.3% while imports grew by 13.9%. Trends during April-August
(1999) indicate a growth of 40.29 per cent in our exports at US $
266.64 million whereas imports during this period amounted to US $
619.47 million with a marginal decline of 1.26%.
There were also some Defence related visits to Singapore which
included the visit of the Chief of Naval Staff, Admiral Sushil Kumar
(16-19 October, 1999), the Vice Chief of Naval Staff to participate in
the international Maritime Defence Expo (3-8 May, 99) and the ViceChief of Army Staff Lt. Gen. Chandra Shekhar to attend the first
Pacific Army Chiefs Conference co-hosted by Singapore and the US,
5-9 September, 1999).
Singapore Prime Minister Mr. Goh Chok Tong visited India from
Jan. 17-22, 2000. This was his third visit to India. He had meetings

with the President and the Prime Minister, and addressed a CII meeting
in New Delhi. He visited Hyderabad to see the Hitech city, inaugurated
the IT Park in Bangalore and also visited Chennai. During the meetings
of the Minister of Finance as well as the Minister of Information
Technology with PM GCT it was agreed to set up two Joint Task
Forces for Finance and IT sectors. Singapore PM’s visit to India after
five years underlined the renewed interest that Singapore attaches to
cooperation with India and it should provide the necessary impetus
to further expand India-Singapore relations.
Brunei
Bilateral relations with Brunei Darussalam continued to be cordial
and friendly.
Ongoing efforts were sustained for further upgradation of
bilateral relations and cooperation. Our External Affairs Minister held
a bilateral meeting with the Foreign Minister of Brunei during ARF/
ASEAN PMC meetings in Singapore in July 1999. Brunei’s Minister
for Education & Health, who is also the Chairperson of the Brunei
Investment Agency (BIA), visited India in July. A first ever high
technical level visit from the Royal Brunei Armed Forces to India, in
November 1999, may lead to initiating tangible bilateral cooperation
in the defence field, particularly training.
Bilateral trade remained low, but not insignificant, with US$ 3.31
million as Brunei’s imports from India during 1998-99. In areas like
software and IT, civil and electrical projects for construction, supply
and consultancy, and in the important petrochemicals sector reputed
Indian companies made some further progress towards forging
economic and commercial ties with Brunei.
Philippines
The relations between India and the Philippines continued to be
cordial and friendly.
17

South East Asia and the Pacific

The 4th round of the Indo-Philippines Foreign Office
consultations were held in New Delhi on 29th June 1999. The
Philippine delegation was led by Undersecretary Lauro L. Baja and
the Indian delegation was led by Shri S.T. Devare, Secretary (ER).
The consultations covered the whole range of bilateral relations
besides regional and international issues.
India participated in the CINEMAILA International Film Festival
held from July 3-10, 1999. Seven Indian films were screened during
the Festival. The Tamil Film “The terrorist” was awarded the grant
jury prize. Shri Adoor Gopalakrishnan, the noted film director from
India, was a guest of the Festival authorities.
The Defence Secretary (Minister) Mr. Orlando Mercado visited
India from October 11-13, 1999. He led the Philippine delegation to
DEFEXPO INDIA 1999.
India-Philippines trade continued to show a downward trend
during the year. India’s exports to the Philippines at US $ 76.61 million
from January to July, 1999 represented a decline of 15.01% in
comparison to exports during the same period last year. The decrease
is mainly attributed to effects of the regional financial crisis on the
Philippines economy.
The India Trade Promotion Organisation (ITPO) in conjunction
with the Embassy organised (October 15-November 15, 1999) a
promotion of Indian goods at the Rustan’s department store and
supermarket. A wide variety of Indian goods ranging from handicrafts
to processed food had been displayed.
On January 28, 2000 India and the Philippines signed in Manila,
a Bilateral Agreement on Promotion and Protection of Investments.
MOS (Finance/Revenue) signed the Agreement, on behalf of India.
The Agreement would help in promotion of bilateral investments in
the two countries.
18

Thailand
During the year, relations between India and Thailand were
marked by traditional warmth and friendliness. Bilateral cooperation
continued at a normal pace in all fields. Besides, relations developed
within the framework of India-ASEAN dialogue partnership, India’s
membership of the ASEAN Regional Forum as well as in the
framework of BIMST-EC.
The declining trend seen in the last two years in bilateral trade
seemed to have been arrested in 1999 as exports from India during
the period January to July already reached a figure of US $ 253 million
and imports from Thailand during the period were in order of US $
234 million.
Minister of State for External Affairs Smt. Vasundhara Raje paid
an official visit to Thailand from July 6-9, 1999. During her stay, the
MOS (VR) held discussions on bilateral as well as other matters of
mutual concern, with Dr. Sukhumbhand Paribatra, Deputy Minister
of Foreign Affairs. She also paid a courtesy call on PM Chuan Leekpai.
Deputy Chairperson of Rajya Sabha Dr.(Mrs.) Najma Heputullah
also visited Bangkok in July 1999 to seek Thai support for her
candidature as the President of the International Parliament Union
(IPU).
Vice President of India and his delegation was in transit for a day
in Bangkok on its way to Mongolia having arrived in Bangkok on
August 24, 1999. During his stay in Bangkok, the Vice-president had
a meeting with the Crown Prince of Thailand, at his Palace.
Dr. Gautam Arya, a member of the Election Commission of
Thailand visited India from September 1-6, 1999 to see the elections
and the work of the Election Commission of India.
HE Dr. Arthit Qurairat, Minister Science, Technology and
Environment of Thailand visited India from November 15-20, 1999

Annual Report 1999-2000

to participate in the second Ministerial conference on Space
Applications in New Delhi. During his stay, he also held bilateral
discussions with the Ministry of Science & Technology, Government
of India, for strengthening cooperation in this field.

President by the new Parliament in October and Megawati
Soekarnoputri was elected as the Vice-President.

A 9-member delegation including five Members of Parliament
led by Dr. GMC Balyogi, Hon’ble Speaker of Lok Sabha visited
Thailand from November 19-24, 1999 to attend the 7th General
Assembly of Asia Pacific Parliamentarians Conference on
Environment and Development (APPCED) at Chiangmai.

The people of East Timor in a popular consultation, held on 30
August, rejected the autonomy proposal of the Government of
Indonesia, thereby indicating their preference for independence. The
Indonesian Parliament in October repealed the law incorporating East
Timor in Indonesia, thereby initiating the process of its independence.
India donated 500 MT of rice to the Government of Indonesia for
the East Timorese people who had moved to West Timor in Indonesia.
On the East Timor issue, India’s principled position and assistance
has been appreciated in Indonesia.

Shri I.K. Gujral, former PM, visited Thailand (25-27 December
1999) in connection with launching of the Thailand Chapter of World
Punjabi Organisation and met the Thai Foreign Minister. Indian
participation has been organised in a number of cultural activities
held in Thailand during the year including Annual Heritage Festival
of Thailand in Buri Ram province in January 1999, First Asian Film
Festival in March 1999, Bangkok’s First International Festival of music
& Dance in August 1999, Second International Bangkok Film Festival
in September 1999, and the 44th Asia-Pacific Film Festival in
November 1999. The Embassy also organised an exhibition of Indian
dolls in Bangkok during November 1999 in cooperation with Office
of the National Culture Commission of Thailand.
India also provided training to Thai nationals under ITEC,
Colombo Plan, Cultural Exchange Programme and General Cultural
Scholarship schemes. India continued to maintain a Chair of a Sanskrit
Professor at the Sanskrit Study Centre, Silpakorn University.
Indonesia
This period saw major political developments in Indonesia. In
the general elections held in June, around 100 million Indonesians
exercised their franchise.
Abdurrahman Wahid, popularly known Gus Dur was elected

President Abdurrahman Wahid publicly expressed a desire to
forge closer relations with India.

Bilateral relations between India and Indonesia which have been
traditionally close and cordial continued to progress satisfactorily.
As part of the ongoing effort in that direction, the First meeting
of the India-Indonesia Joint Consultative Forum was held in New
Delhi from 12-13 November.
In September Dr. Najma Heptullah, Deputy Chairperson, Rajya
Sabha visited Indonesia for a workshop sponsored by the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) on Rules of Procedures
in the House of Representatives. The Rector of the University of
Udayana, Prof Ketut Sukardika visited India for strengthening
cooperation between Educational institutions of the two countries.
The Deputy Naval Chief of Indonesia visited India for the Defexpo 99.
Bilateral trade between the two countries during 1998-99
amounted to Rs. 5211/- crores as compared to Rs.4322/- crores
during 1997-98. With a view to strengthening trade relations with
Indonesia, various steps were taken. A trade delegation from
CHEMEXCIL visited Indonesia in April for increasing the exports
of chemical and pharmaceutical items to Indonesia. The Director19

South East Asia and the Pacific

General of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture, Government of
Indonesia visited India in October with a large business delegation.
As a part of promotion of bilateral cultural relations many cultural
programs were organised in Indonesia. In August an Indian Food
Festival was organised. In September, a Ramayana Ballet team visited
Indonesia.
Over 72 Indonesian candidates received training in India under
Colombo Plan, ITEC and other schemes. The Minister of State for
Research and Technology of Indonesia, Dr. A.S. Hikam visited India
to participate in the Conference on Space Applications for Sustainable
Development in Asia and the Pacific in New Delhi from 15-20
November.
Mr. Abdurrahman Wahid, Indonesian President visited India from
February 8-9, 2000 along with a delegation which included Indonesian
Ministers of Mines and Energy, Industry and Trade and Research
and Technology. The President held talks with our President, Vice
President, Prime Minister, Speaker of Lok Sabha, EAM, MOS for
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises.
After the delegation level talks, an MOU on Cooperation in the
Field of Tourism was signed. FICCI hosted a luncheon meeting where
the Indonesian businessmen (about 70) had interaction with the Indian
businessmen. Two Agreements were signed – (1) on Counter trade
between MMTC and KADIN (the Indonesian Chamber of
Commerce) and (2) on a Railway Project between IRCON
International (of India) and Mitra Jaya Group (of Indonesia).
At the bilateral talk between EAM and the Indonesian FM,
prospects of (a) establishing a Joint Commission, (b) joint exploitation
of gas in Indonesia and transporting it to India, (c) supply of electric
locomotives from India and (d) setting up of a vocational training
centre in Indonesia were discussed.
20

Laos
India and Laos continued to enjoy friendly and cordial relations.
Dr. Siene Saphantong, Lao Minister of Agriculture and Forestry, in
his capacity as the President of the Lao-India Friendship Association,
along with a four-member delegation visited India from 23-30 May,
1999. During the visit, the delegation met the Minister of Agriculture
of India Shri Som Pal. The delegation also visited the Indian
Agricultural Research Institute (IARI), National Dairy Institute and
private companies.
Mr. Soubhan Srithirath, Minister in President’s Office attended
the India-ASEAN Lecture Series from November 21 to 24, 1999.
In pursuance of a Credit Agreement signed in January, 1999 with
Lao PDR, for a soft credit of US $ 2 million to Laos, the State Bank
of India and the Bank of Lao PDR executed a Banking Agreement to
establish channels for utilisation of Indian credit.
The Lao-India Friendship Association in cooperation with the
Mission, organised a Lecture-Seminar on June 24 on the theme
“Prospects of growth in Lao-India Economic Cooperation particularly
in the field of Agriculture.” It was attended by over 200 people. The
keynote address was delivered by the Lao Minister for Agriculture
and Forestry, Dr. Siene Saphanthong.
For the period April-October 1999, 25 officials from the Lao
Government came to India under ITEC and Colombo Plan to attend
various training programmes. In addition, five Lao students were sent
to India-after a gap of many years, to pursue higher studies under the
GCSS of ICCR.
Dr. Ashok Kumar Srivastava, Senior Scientist, Indian Institute
of Sugarcane Research, Lucknow was deputed under the ITEC
programme for a period of one month to assist the Lao Ministry of
Agriculture and Forestry to draw up a framework and a plan to enlarge
sugarcane production in the country.

Annual Report 1999-2000

Dr. Ramanathan, an Indian expert in Animal Husbandry, would
be visiting Laos soon, on a three month deputation under the ITEC
programme. An Indian medical team is also likely to be deputed on a
three-month assignment to Laos.

tobacco, chemicals, cotton yarn, fabrics & made-ups, submersible
water pumps, farm implementation, silk, bicycles and parts, generator
sets, etc. India imported gems and precious stones, wood and wood
products and cashew nuts from Cambodia.

An Indian food festival was organised in Vientiane from May
25-28, 1999.

Vietnam

Cambodia
Cambodia consolidated its position at home and abroad with
donor countries pledging half a billion dollar in aid to Cambodia in
1999. The World Bank, IMF and other lending institutions, e.g., ADB
and bilateral donor countries, resumed loans and grants to Cambodia
to improve infrastructure, e.g., roads, power generation, port
development, etc. Review meetings were held with international donor
agencies to monitor aid and evaluate reforms. On April 30, 1999
Cambodia became a full member of ASEAN.
India continued to maintain friendly, warm and close relations
with Cambodia. Cambodia supported India’s candidatures to various
international bodies. Under the ITEC Programme, 30 seats allotted
to Cambodia were fully utilised by them. India also made available
the services of two legal experts for two weeks in November this
year to Cambodia, to advise on drafting laws to deal with cases of
genocide. Cambodia was represented by the Under Secretary of State,
Ministry of Telecommunications in the Space Applications
Conference held in New Delhi in November. Cambodian PM Hun
Sen is expected to pay an official visit to India from the 17th to the
19th of February, 2000. Two important agreements; one on setting
up of a Joint Commission on Trade and the second on Cultural
Exchange Programme are likely to be signed during the visit.
Our bilateral trade during 1998-99 amounted to US $ 8 million.
The major items of our Exports were drugs and pharmaceuticals,

The Indian Business Chamber in Vietnam (INCHAM) received
an Associate Membership Card from the Vietnam Chamber of
Commerce and Industry (VCCI), Ho Chi Minh City branch on July
23, 1999.
ONGC Videsh Ltd (OVL), the overseas exploration wing of Oil
and Natural Gas Corporation, on April 29, 1999 signed two
agreements marking the take off of the $ 1.5 billion Vietnam Gas
production project. Other partners in this projects are BP AMOCO
and Statoil. On September 29, 1999 an agreement was signed between
ONGC Videsh Ltd and PETROVIETNAM. As per the agreement
ONGC Videsh Ltd has assigned 10% of its participation interest to
PETROVIETNAM, for off shore gas discovered at Lan Tay and
Lan Do coast fields.
In May, medicines worth $ 12000/- were donated by us to the
Red Cross of Vietnam for disaster relief.
Formal presentation of the textile machinery (worth half a million
dollars) supplied by Lakshmi Machine Works Coimbatore to the
Textile Research Institute, Hanoi took place on 21st of August 1999,
under the ITEC programme.
APTECH of India and FPT of Vietnam embarked upon Joint
establishment of a series of education centres to train Vietnamese
software professionals. The FPT-APTECH Education Centres will
train a new generation of software programmers of international
standards, making them capable of leading Vietnam’s effort to leap
21

South East Asia and the Pacific

into the information age. Two centres, one each at Ho Chi Minh City
and Hanoi were inaugurated in October..
President of Vietnam, H.E. Mr. Tran Duc Luong paid a State
visit to India from 1st to 5th December. He was accompanied by Mr.
Pham Gia Khiem, Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Pham Van Tra,
Defence Minister, Mr. Do Nguyen Phuong, Health Minister and Vice
Ministers from the Departments of Commerce, Finance, Education,
Science & Technology, Environment and Foreign Affairs. During his
visit, he held talks with our President, Vice-President and Prime
Minister, Minister of Human Resource Development & Science &
Technology, Finance Minister and External Affairs Minister, Leader
of Opposition and other political leaders. In his discussions, India’s
consistent support for Vietnam in the past was acknowledged by
Vietnam’s President, with evident gratitude. In delegation talks with
PM, the two sides exchanged views on bilateral, regional and global
issues of cooperation in various fields, and agreed to enhance it further.
South-South cooperation was reiterated as a major plank of our foreign
policy. The Vietnamese reaffirmed support to India’s candidature as
a permanent member in an expanded Security Council and also offered
support for our membership of ASEM. Instruments of Ratification
of the Bilateral Investment Promotion and Protection Agreement
signed in 1997, were exchanged, an MOU on setting up Software
Human Resource Development Centres in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh
City and an Agreement on Cooperation between the Foreign Service
Institute of India and the Institute of Foreign Relations of Vietnam
were signed. A soft credit of US $ 15 million (Rs.600 million) was
extended to Vietnam.
Australia
There was less criticism of our nuclear tests, during the above
period, as compared to the harsh Australian reaction that followed
immediately after Pokhran II. FM Downer acknowledged that
22

Australia had made some strong statements and had taken some
measures, in response to the tests. There was, however, recognition
of the fact that it was not a convenient time for signing the CTBT as
the election campaign was going on but there was hope that India
would sign the CTBT in the not too distant future. There was also
appreciation of the current positive signals emanating from the Indian
leadership on the CTBT.
On Agni II, there was an expression of regret that India’s
development of a ballistic missile capability was disturbing to the
region and to the world and that this development would have negative
reverberations for the strategic environments in South Asia. Australia
once again urged India to comply with the conditions laid down in
the UN Security Council Resolution 1172 and to ratify the CTBT.
On the Kargil intrusion by Pakistan, Australia at first made no
statements. On 1st July, FM Downer said that India had demonstrated
admirable restraint in the face of considerable provocation and that
it looked to both India and Pakistan to resume the stalled bilateral
dialogue, in an effort to secure a resolution of the Kashmir problem,
as was agreed to in the Lahore Declaration.
On April 13, 1999 the Rajiv Gandhi Chair of South Asian
Economics in the Australia-South Asia Research Centre (ASARC)
within the Asia Pacific School of Economics and Management,
Australian National University, was inaugurated by the Australian
Deputy Prime Minister & Minister of Trade, Mr. Tim Fischer. The
Chair honoured Mr. Rajiv Gandhi’s contribution to India’s economic
reforms and his vision of the international role of South Asia and
links with Australia. The launching of the Chair was the most
important recent initiative undertaken in the field of South Asian
studies in Australia and will play a key role in strengthening Australia’s
linkages with the countries of South Asia. It will also act as a catalyst
for interactive discussions among academics, business people and
bureaucratic communities in Australia and the countries of South

Annual Report 1999-2000

Asia and will assist in the spread of awareness and knowledge of
South Asia amongst the wider Australian community.
The 1999 K. R. Narayanan Oration was delivered by Mr. P.
Chidambaram, Former Finance Minister, during his visit to Australia
from May 23 to June 2, 1999 under DFAT’s special visitor’s
programme. The Oration organised by Dr. Ric Shand, Director of
Australia-South Asia Research Centre (ASARC), ANU, was held on
1st June 1999 on the theme “Stronger Branches, Deeper Roots: The
Democratization of India’s Economic Reforms”. President K.R.
Narayanan also sent a message of felicitations on the occasion.
On 19 April 1999, a MOU was signed between the two
Governments on Exchange of Statistics. Another MOU to foster
ties between Universities in the areas of information sharing, staff
and student exchanges, mutual recognition of qualification, staff
development, research exchange programmes and University
Management was signed in June 1999.
A major conference, “Midnight to Millennium - Australia-India
Interconnections” was held from 1st to 3rd July 1999. The conference
was organised by the University of Canberra along with High
Commission of India and other sponsors. It was the most important
event of the year 1999 in the India-Australia bilateral relations and
was inaugurated by Foreign Minister Alexander Downer. More than
40 speakers, including ten from India, participated in the conference.
The deliberations were divided into sections to cover diverse topics
such as economic, social, political and cultural topics. One of the
most critical sessions was on the nuclear issue. The academics
displayed in-depth understanding of India’s security concerns and
were overwhelmingly critical of Australia’s official reaction to our
nuclear tests. Tremendous goodwill towards India was also displayed
at various sessions.
A bilateral meeting between EAM Shri Jaswant Singh and
Australian Foreign Minister Alexander Downer took place on July

27, 1999 on the sidelines of the ASEAN PMC meetings in Singapore.
They discussed India-Australia relations, the next official level talks
and the EAM also invited Mr. Downer to visit India.
The Chairperson and the Board Members of Australia - India
Council visited India from 15-20 November, 1999 and the Joint
Council Meeting between India-Australia Council was held on 15th
November 1999 in New Delhi. The council called for improving
bilateral relations.
Lok Sabha Speaker, Deputy Chairperson Rajya Sabha, Secretary
General Lok Sabha and Secretary General Rajya Sabha attended the
15th Conference of the Commonwealth Speakers and Presiding
Officers in Canberra in January 2000.
Mr. Brereton, MP, Labour Party’s Shadow Foreign Minister visited
India (8-10, Feb) and called on EAM and MOS(EA). Mr. Hendy
Cowan, Dy. Premier of Western Australia and Minister for Commerce,
Trade and Regional Development accompanied by a business
delegation of ten persons also visited India (8-12 Feb) to promote
trade with India.
India-Australia Senior Officials Meeting (SOM) was held from
22-23 Feb in New Delhi.
Papua New Guinea
India and Papua New Guinea continued to maintain close and
friendly relations. To give a further fillip to the relationship, the Prime
Minister of Papua New Guinea, Sir Mekere Morauta and Prime
Minister Shri Atal Behari Vajpayee met, during the retreat at the
CHOGM in Durban and discussed bilateral and international matters.
At the 32nd Asean Ministerial Meeting (AMM), at Singapore, on
23rd and 24th July, 1999, Papua New Guinea was given a Special
Observer Status. PNG continued to support India’s candidature to
23

South East Asia and the Pacific

various international organisations including the candidature of Smt.
Najma Heptulla, Deputy Chairperson, Rajya Sabha for the post of
the President of the International Parliamentary Union and Shri V.K.
Shunglu, comptroller and Auditor Government of India for external
auditorship of World Health Organisation.
India offered five slots under ITEC and six under Colombo Plan
for training of PNG nationals in Indian institutions of which all 11
slots have been utilised. Courses utilised related to the fields of
agriculture, small scale industries, Foreign Service training and
accounts.
The two way trade was to the tune of 12 million US dollars, over
half of which was routed through third countries.
About 225 Indian nationals, mostly professionals, continued to
be employed in Papua New Guinea.
Fiji
After a gap of nearly nine years, the Indian High Commission
was reopened in Suva on 2nd March, 1999. High Commissioner Prof.
I.S. Chauhan arrived in the country in the middle of May and presented
his credentials to the President Sir Ratu Kamisese Mara on 3rd June,
1999.
General elections were held in Fiji from 8 to 15 May. The previous
government led by Sitiveni Rabuka of Soqosoqo ni Vakavulewa ni
Taukei (SVT) lost the elections. A people’s coalition led by the Fiji
Labour Party (FLP) swept the polls. FLP by itself obtained a simple
majority in the House of Representative and its leader Mahendra Pal
Chaudhry was sworn in as the new Prime Minister. It is the first time
in the history of independent Fiji that the Prime Minister is of ethnic
Indian origin. His cabinet consists of members from other constituent
parties of the coalition.
24

The new Fiji Government announced its decision to open a
resident diplomatic mission in New Delhi and allocated funds for it
in the budget for the next year.
The Government of India is desirous of strengthening bilateral
relations between India and Fiji and is looking at a number of options
to extend areas of assistance to Fiji.
Prof. I.S. Chauhan, our High Commissioner to Fiji presented his
credentials for Tonga in February 2000.
New Zealand
Despite its small size and remote geographic location, a number
of significant events relating to New Zealand took place during the
year.
The Second Protocol to the Double Taxation Avoidance
Convention (DTAC) between India and New Zealand was signed in
New Delhi on 21st June, 1999. The 2nd Protocol seeks to provide a
fresh impetus to the mutual flow of investment, technology, trade
and services between the two countries.
The APEC Summit, which was attended among others by the
US President Bill Clinton and the Chinese President Jiang Jemin, was
successfully concluded in Auckland from September 9-12, 1999. The
declaration issued on the occasion called upon the world to match
the organization’s free trade commitment and adopted a unified
position to include industrial tariffs and agriculture in the next WTO
negotiations. To take into account the organization’s own slow pace
for realizing its trade liberalization objectives, the Summit confirmed
the shift in the forum’s approach to include trade facilitation measures.
New Zealand’s commitment of 800 troops to be part of the UN
peace keeping force in East Timor constituted its largest overseas
defence involvement since World War II. Furthermore, the election

Annual Report 1999-2000

of Mike Moore as WTO’s Director General, (as part of a powersharing compromise with the Thai candidate Dr. Supachai
Panitchpakdi), further raised the country’s international profile.
Bilateral relations were consolidated following New Zealand’s
strong reaction to Pokhran-II. The country’s reaction to the Pakistansponsored armed incursion in the Kargil sector demonstrated
understanding of India’s position in the matter. While New Zealand
did not issue any official statement on this subject, it acknowledged
in briefings that India had suffered armed incursion and called for
restoration of the sanctity of the Line of Control.
While a scheduled visit of NZ Foreign Minister Don McKinnon
to India was postponed due to elections in India, Shri H.D. Revanna,
Housing Minister of Karnataka Government visited New Zealand
from June 1-5, 1999 with a view to enhancing cooperation in the
dairy sector.
Rt. Hon. Helen Clark was sworn in as the new Prime Minister of
New Zealand on December 10, 1999 [In a coalition of Labour and

Alliance with 59 seats in the 120 member house]. The elections were
held on 27th November 1999.
South Pacific Countries
Bilateral relations with Pacific-Islands have been cordial and
friendly though there have been minimal contacts. India had cosponsored the General Assembly resolution admitting Tonga to the
membership of the United Nations. A resolution on the admission
of Kiribati to the UN was adopted unanimously on 25th June by the
UN Security Council. Kiribati became the 186th member and Nauru
the 187th member of the United Nations after the General Assembly
endorsed the Security Council recommendation. On the reopening
of our High Commission in Suva, Fiji, the Administration Division
reviewed and shifted the concurrent accreditation of the Cook Islands,
Tuvalu and the Kingdom of Tonga to our High Commission in Suva
from HCI, New Zealand, and the concurrent accreditation of
Solomon Islands and Vanuatu to our High Commission in Port
Moresby (Papua New Guinea) from our High Commission in
Canberra (Australia).
uu

25

3
East Asia

China

W

e seek friendly, cooperative, good-neighbourly and mutually
beneficial relations with China on the basis of the Five
Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, jointly enunciated by
India and China. We seek a long-term, stable relationship in which
both sides are responsive to each other’s concerns. We remain
committed to the process of dialogue to resolve outstanding
differences and to build a constructive cooperative relationship
oriented towards the 21st century.
The External Affairs Minister (EAM) visited China on June 1415, 1999 at the invitation of the Chinese Foreign Minister (FM), Tang
Jiaxuan. This was the first visit at the EAM level in eight years. The
EAM met Prime Minister Zhu Rongji and had constructive and useful
talks with FM Tang. He interacted with a cross-section of the Chinese
society. The two sides agreed to jointly celebrate the forthcoming
50th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations (April
1, 2000). There was agreement on promoting CBMs, commencing a
security dialogue and expanding economic and trade relations. The
two Foreign Minister subsequently met on July 25, 1999, during the
ASEAN Regional Forum - Post-Ministerial Conference (ARF-PMC)
in Singapore.
The Eleventh Meeting of the Joint Working Group on Boundary

26

Question was held in Beijing from April 26-27, 1999. Apart from
boundary-related issues, the two sides also reviewed bilateral relations
and exchanged views on regional and international developments of
mutual interest. The Seventh Meeting of the India-China Expert
Group of Diplomatic & Military Officials, a subgroup of the JWG,
was held in New Delhi on November 24, 1999. At these meetings,
both sides reiterated their commitment to the maintenance of peace
and tranquillity in accordance with the Agreement on the Maintenance
Peace & Tranquillity along the Line of Actual Control in the IndiaChina Border Areas (1993) and the Agreement on Confidence
Building Measures in the Military Field along the Line of Actual
Control in the India-China Border Areas (1996). Both sides noted,
during these meetings, that the India-China border areas have
remained generally peaceful.
Exchanges at the governmental, parliamentary, nongovernmental, people-to-people and other levels continued during
the year. Functional exchanges in trade & commerce, environment,
industries, power, iron & steel, science & technology, aeronautics,
medicine, media, culture and sports took place during the year.
High-level exchanges between the two sides in 1999-2000
include:
u Visit of Minister for Commerce and Industry to China for the

Annual Report 1999-2000

6th meeting of the Ministerial-level Joint Economic Group (JEG)
scheduled to be held from February 21-22, 2000;
u

Visit of Mme. He Luli, Vice Chairperson of the Standing
Committee of China’s National People’s Congress (NPC) to India
from November 18-22, 1999 at the invitation of the Indira Gandhi
Memorial Trust.

Functional exchanges between the two sides include:
u The fourth meeting of India-China Sub-Committee on Scientific
& Technological Cooperation in Beijing (23-31, May 1999);
u

Visits of Secretary, Department of Steel (September 13-17, 1999),
Secretary, Ministry of Industry, (September 20-24, 1999) and
Secretary, Ministry of Power, (October 28-30, 1999);

u

Visit of a delegation of the Chinese State Administration for
Metallurgical Industry led by its Vice Director General (November
22-26, 1999);

u

Visit of a delegation from the Chinese Ministry of Finance led by
its Vice Minister (December 22-26, 2000).

Exchanges in the cultural field included:
u Visit of an Indian cultural troupe led by Pt. Birju Maharaj to
China from December 29, 1999-January 8, 2000;
u

Visit of an acrobatic troupe from Gansu Province in China to
India from October 17-30, 1999 at the invitation of the Indian
Council for Cultural Relations. The First Lady, Smt. Usha
Narayanan, and the Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri
Ajit Panja attended the inaugural performance in New Delhi.

Exchanges between political parties in India and the Chinese
Communist Party continued. A CPI (M) delegation, led by its General
Secretary, Shri Sitaram Yechuri, visited China from March 30-April 9,
1999. A Congress (I) Party delegation, led by Shri K. Natwar Singh,
visited China from April 7-15 1999.

India-China trade relations have continued to grow in the recent
years. The bilateral trade in 1999 amounted to US$ 1.987 billion, an
increase of 3.4% over 1998. India’s exports to China decreased by
8.82%. Chinese exports to India increased by 14.29%. In 1999, the
border trade across the Lipulekh Pass and the Shipki Pass amounted
to Rs. 36.9 lakh and Rs. 27 lakhs respectively.
The India-China Joint Business Council (JBC), a nongovernmental association of entrepreneurs of the two sides, is meeting
in Beijing on February 22, 2000. The meetings of JEG and JBC
contributed to diversification of trade and promotion of investments
and joint ventures.
Hong Kong & Macao
EAM visited Hong Kong from November 22-23, 1999. During
the visit, EAM interacted with business and media persons and
members of the Indian community.
At the joint invitation of the Governments of China and Portugal,
the Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Ajit Panja, visited Macao
to represent India at the Macao Handover Ceremonies from
December 19-20, 1999 which marked the resumption of Chinese
sovereignty over Macao. Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee sent a
congratulatory message to the Chinese Premier on the occasion.
India’s trade with Hong Kong increased by 28% during JanuaryNovember 1999 over the corresponding period last year. Indian
exports to Hong Kong increased by 17.5% to US$ 2.044 billion while
imports from Hong Kong jumped by 59% to US$ 976 million. To
give further impetus to bilateral trade, the India Trade Promotion
Organisation (ITPO) and the Consulate General of India, Hong Kong
are organising a comprehensive trade promotion event, “India into
the New Millennium” in Hong Kong from February 23-27, 2000.
27

East Asia

Mongolia
India and Mongolia have traditionally had close spiritual, religious
and cultural ties. This year marks the 45th year of the establishment
of diplomatic relations between the two countries (December 24). In
the past 45 years, our relations have diversified and expanded into
new areas further cementing the age-old friendship between the two
countries.
Vice President Shri Krishan Kant visited Mongolia from August
25-29, 1999 at the invitation of the Mongolian President, N.
Bagabandi. He met President N. Bagabandi, Prime Minister R.
Amarjargal, Chairperson of the Mongolian Parliament, Mr.
R.Gonchigdorj, Foreign Minister, Mme. N. Tuya, and other state and
party leaders. The visit afforded an opportunity to renew the traditional
historic and friendly relations between the two countries. During the
visit, the two sides agreed to further expand and diversify the relations
into new areas of cooperation. The Vice President inaugurated two
new faculties - Computer Centre and Gemstone Cutting and Polishing
- in the Rajiv Gandhi Vocational Training Centre (RGVTC) and a
Monastic Teaching Institute.
The Minister for Agriculture and Industry of Mongolia, Mr. Ch.
Sodnomtseren visited India on January 25-30, 2000. Mr.
Sodnomtseren called on the Vice President. During the visit, the two
sides signed a Work Programme for cooperation in the field of
agriculture for year 2000.
Japan
We remain committed to friendly, cooperative, and mutually
beneficial relations with Japan with whom we have shared cultural
links and values of human freedom, commitment to peace, stability
and economic development of the people in Asia and the world.
External Affairs Minister Shri Jaswant Singh visited Japan from
28

November 23 - 26, 1999. He met Prime Minister K. Obuchi and held
talks with Japanese FM Yohei Kono, MITI Minister Takashi Fukaya

Annual Report 1999-2000

Exchanges of scientists, engineers and research scholars,
collaboration between science institutions and cultural interaction
continued.

Bengal, (October 10-16, 1999) to participate in the International
Conference of NGOs.
u

A joint ROK-India Seminar, sponsored by the Institute of Foreign
Affairs & National Security (IFANS) and India AP-21, was held
from November 21-24 to discuss ways to improve regional
cooperation in Asia-Pacific region and bilateral relations.

u

Foreign Office Consultations were held in Seoul from January
24-25, 2000. The Indian delegation was led by Joint Secretary
(East Asia) and the Korean delegation by Director General (Asia).

u

A business & cultural delegation led by the Mayor of Kimhae is
scheduled to visit India in the last week of February 2000. The
delegation is to visit Ayodhya-Faizabad, Lucknow and Greater
Noida to promote cultural and business ties.

Functional exchanges during the period included:
u Investment Promotion Talks (New Delhi, 9-11 August, 1999)
u

u

Sixth Science & Technology Committee meeting (Tokyo, 6-7
September, 1999).
The 30th meeting of the India-Japan Business Cooperation
Committees (New Delhi, January 30-February 1, 2000). The
Japanese delegation was led by Mr. N. Kawamoto and the Indian
delegation by Shri Vikram Thapar. The delegation called on
External Affairs Minister Shri Jaswant Singh and Deputy
Chairperson of Planning Commission Shri K.C. Pant.

From January - October, 1999, our trade with Japan was US $
3883 million (exports: US $ 1882 million & imports: US $ 2001
million). From January 1999 - August 1999, Japanese investments in
India amounted to Rs.13027.7 million or US $ 310.2 million.
Republic of Korea (ROK)
Relations with the Republic of Korea (ROK) continued to be
marked with cordiality and understanding.
High level exchanges/and other important events during
the year included:
u Dr. Najma Heptulla, Deputy Chairperson of the Rajya Sabha
visited Seoul in July 1999 in connection with her candidature for
the presidency of the IPU.
u

Smt. Veena Nayyar, Member National Commission for SC/STs
and Shri Prabodh Chandra Sinha, Minister-in-charge, Deptt of
Parliamentary Affairs and Vice- President of the West Bengal
Federation of United Nations Association, Government of West

During the period January - August 1999, the total volume of
trade was US $ 1.425 billion, registering a growth of 1.11%. Exports
were US $ 539.632 million and imports US $ 886.319 million. In the
period January - June 1999, total investment approvals were of
Rs.31,224.26 million (approx. US $ 726 million).
Exchanges of cultural delegations, students and research scholars
continued.
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK)
India’s relations with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
(DPRK) continue to be friendly.
Dr. Kim Su Hak, Minister of Public Health, visited India from
September 24-28, 1999 at the invitation of WHO to discuss InterCountry Cooperation in priority areas such as primary health care
and health sector reform.
Prof. (Dr.) Ri Kwang Ho, President, Academy of Sciences of
29

East Asia

DPRK (Cabinet rank minister) visited New Delhi to attend the
ESCAP Ministerial Conference on Space Applications for Sustainable
Development in Asia and the Pacific from November 15-20, 1999.
He also had consultations with the Department of Science &
Technology.
On June 25, 1999 a North Korean ship Ku-Wol San was detained
in Kandla. It was found to be carrying machinery parts and blueprints

30

for manufacture of missiles. The DPRK government sent a Special
Envoy Mr. Jong Thae Hwa (Vice Foreign Minister level) to India
(July 20-August 8, 1999) for discussion on this issue. Appropriate
action is being taken under our laws.
Under the Cultural Exchange Programme, a ten-member Kathak
group sponsored by ICCR, visited Pyongyang to participate in the
Annual Spring Friendship Art Festival in April, 1999.
uu

Annual Report 1999-2000

4
Central Asia

Section 1

S

trategic and economic factors establish the importance and
relevance of the Central Asian States (CAS) to India. Their
geo-strategic location, both as an ‘Eurasian bridge’ and a close
proximity to a number of regional hot spots; abundance of natural
resources including hydrocarbons; intense rivalries of, external players
over these resources; secularist state policy; close approximation of
national security interests and concerns of the CAS and India;
attraction of the CAS markets etc., are among these factors.
India’s political relations with the CAS are excellent, underpinned
by historic and cultural bonds and, since the independence of these
countries, marked by regular high level contacts. The recent incidents
of manifestation of cross-border terrorism in a number of these
countries illustrated the commonalty of the threat faced by both sides
as well as the need for coordinated action to combat the menace.
In the economic sphere, while there is natural justification for,
and expectation of, cooperation, given the economic resources of
these countries and India’s technological capabilities, transitional
difficulties have persisted in the CAS to date, negatively impacting on
two-way trade, which remains modest. Efforts are currently being
made to encourage Indian investors to enter the manufacturing sector

in these countries through joint ventures, commensurate with their
preferred policy. There is ample awareness in the CAS of India’s
strength in a number of niche areas, including small and medium
industries, and in human resource development. Slots under the ITEC
programme have been eagerly sought and utilized by these countries.
Drawing upon each other’s areas of expertise, scientific cooperation
has been an on-going feature of bilateral relations.
Interactions in the cultural sphere are strong. Apart from events
at the two Indian cultural centres in Tashkent and Almaty, as well as
activities under the CEP, including reciprocal ‘days of culture’, scholarly
exchanges have taken the form of frequent visits, seminars etc.
Section 2
Azerbaijan

Efforts to strengthen relations with Azerbaijan were continued.
A resident Indian Mission in Baku started functioning w.e.f. 1st March,
1999 and Shri Dinkar Khullar assumed charge on 8th October, 1999,
as the first resident Ambassador. Consular, passport and visa services
were started w.e.f., May, 1999. On the economic and commercial side,
Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd. (BHEL) entered Azerbaijan in
September, 1999 by bagging a contract for supply of power generators
to Azerenergy. A delegation from RITES visited Baku in October,
31

Central Asia

1999 for exploring prospects of entry into the, railways and engineering
sectors. The Minister for External Affairs Shri Jaswant Singh had a
meeting with the Foreign Minister of Azerbaijan in September, 1999
in Almaty during the CICA ministerial conference.
Kazakhstan

Traditionally warm and cordial relations with Kazakhstan
progressed smoothly. Indo-Kazakh Joint Commission meeting was
held in Almaty in March/April, 1999 for which Shri K. Ramamoorthy,
Minister of Petroleum, visited Kazakhstan. Mr. Karibzhanov, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister of Agriculture of Kazakhstan, visited
New Delhi in March, 1999 in connection with a Kazakh Investment
Conference. K. Tokaev, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of
Foreign Affairs, came on a bilateral visit in August, 1999. A treaty on
mutual legal assistance in criminal matters and a protocol on visa free
regime for diplomatic and official passports were signed during the
visit., Shri Jaswant Singh, Minister for External Affairs, visited Almaty
in September, 1999 to attend the CICA ministerial conference. Kazakh
intellectuals participated in various international seminars/conferences
on Central Asia in New Delhi.
Experts from Kazakhstan participated in the international
seminar on ‘Asian Security in the 21st Century’ being organised by
the Institute of Defence Studies and Analysis (IDSA) in New Delhi
from 24-25 January, 2000.

Kyrgyzstan

Indo-Kyrgyz relations witnessed positive developments. The
Kyrgyz President, Askar Akaev paid a state visit to India in April,
1999. An agreement on avoidance of double taxation, treaty on mutual
legal assistance in criminal matters, cultural exchange programme for
the years 1998-2000 and a memorandum of understanding on civil
aviation matters were signed during the visit. Vice President, Shri
Krishan Kant visited Kyrgyzstan in August/September, 1999 and
32

also participated as Chief Guest in the Kyrgyz independence
celebrations. The Minister for External Affairs, Shri Jaswant Singh
wrote a letter to his Kyrgyz counterpart in September, 1999 conveying
Government., of India’s support and solidarity on the issue of
combating terrorist activities in southern Kyrgyzstan. Educational
and cultural contacts remained good. Kyrgyz scholars participated in
various international seminars/conferences in India. Ten Indian
children from Delhi Public School participated in the international
festival “Young Talents, 1999” in Kyrgyzstan. In recognition of
considerable potential of tourism for increased cooperation between
the two countries, a group of Indian tour operators visited Kyrgyzstan
in June, 1999 followed by the visit of Additional Director General of
Tourism in October, 1999. Kyrgyzstan fully utilised its slots under
the ITEC programme.
Kyrgyzstan condemned the hijacking of the Indian aircraft in
December, 1999, in a message that President Askar Akaev sent to
the Indian President.
A team of scientists led by Mr. T. Meimanaliev, Kyrgyz Minister
of Health, visited India in December, 1999 under the bio-medical
research programme between the Defence Institute of Physiology
and Allied Sciences (DIPAS), New Delhi and the National Centre of
Cardiology and Internal Medicine (NCCIM), Bishkek. A study team
of tour operators led by Deputy Director of the State Agency for
Tourism and Sports of the Kyrgyz Republic is scheduled to visit New
Delhi in the latter half of January, 2000 under the ITEC programme.
Director of International Institute of Strategic Research of the Kyrgyz
Republic participated in the international seminar on ‘Asian Security
in the 21st Century in January, 2000.
Tajikistan

Joint Secretary (CA) visited Dushanbe in February, 1999 for
foreign office consultations. Foreign Secretary of Tajikistan visited

Annual Report 1999-2000

New Delhi for consultations with Secretary (East) in April, 1999. An
Indian company Cosmopolitan Hotels Ltd., is establishing a five star
hotel in Dushanbe, the foundation stone of which was laid by
President Rakhmanov in September, 1999. India extended
humanitarian assistance to Tajikistan. Tajikistan benefited from the
ITEC programme by sending nominees for short term technical
courses.

Turkey

H.E. Mr. Korkmaz Haktanir, Under Secretary, Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Turkey visited New Delhi in November, 1999 for foreign

Turkmenistan

Relations with Turkmenistan progressed well. The Minister for
External Affairs, Shri Jaswant Singh visited Turkmenistan in May,
1999. During the visit, a protocol on development of cooperation
between the Ministry of External Affairs of India and the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of Turkmenistan was signed. It was also agreed to set
up a joint working group for the energy sector. A national committee
for 500th anniversary celebrations of Bairam Khan Turkmen headed
by the Vice President of India has been set up. A delegation led by
Joint Secretary, Department of Culture, visited Ashgabat in May, 1999
to discuss and chalk out the programme for the celebrations. A joint
MEA-MOD team visited Turkmenistan in September to explore
opportunities for co-operation in the defence training sector; following
which Deputy Minister of Defence of Turkmenistan visited India in
October, 1999 to participate in the Defence Expo. A 3-member
delegation from the Ministry of Textiles of Turkmenistan visited India
in November, 1999. Under the Distinguished Visitors Programme
of the ICCR, Grand Mufti of Turkimenist ‘ an and President of the
Ganga Club visited India in November, 1999. Turkmenistan utilised
training slots under the ITEC programme.
Experts from Turkmenistan participated in the international
seminar on ‘Asian Security in the 21st Century’ being organised by
the Institute of Defence Studies and Analysis (IDSA) in New Delhi
from 24-25 January, 2000.
33

Central Asia

Scientific and technological cooperation with Uzbekistan remained
very good. Uzbekistan gifted a 1.5 kw solar furnace in the framework
of S &,.T cooperation and a four member team of Uzbek scientists
visited India in July, 1999 to install the solar furnace. Uzbek scholars
participated in various international seminars/conferences on Central
Asia in India. The Rector of the Namangan Engineering Institute

visited India in April, 1999 at the invitation of Indira Gandhi National
Open University.
Experts from Uzbekistan participated in the international seminar
on ‘Asian Security in the 21st Century’ being organised by the Institute
of Defence Studies and Analysis (IDSA) in New Delhi from 24-25
January, 2000.
uu

34

Annual Report 1999-2000

5

The Gulf, West Asia & North Africa

Section 1

I

ndia deeply values its close historical ties and traditional cultural
affinities, with the Gulf countries. Over the years, the mutuallybeneficial relations between India and the countries of the Gulf
region have become multi-dimensional. The presence of a sizeable
Indian community in the Gulf constitutes an important link between
the peoples of India and the Gulf.
The tradition of high-level visits was continued, which contributed
substantially to further expanding and consolidating bilateral relations
particularly in the political, economic and cultural fields. A number
of important agreements, aimed at strengthening cooperation in
several areas of mutual interest, were concluded during the year.

of Commerce and Industry (BCCI). The delegation’s visit was aimed
at exploring the possibilities of investment from India to Bahrain.
Chief Manager, Business Development, Indian Oil Corporation,
visited Bahrain on 26 May 1999 to negotiate a $ 50-70 trillion deal for
supply of kerosene. Two high-level representatives of the Punjab
National Bank visited Bahrain to study the financial market and
explore the prospects of setting up a permanent base in the country.
The Birla Institute of Technology has established its first overseas
branch in Bahrain. The Institute has generated wide response and
interest locally as well as from students in the neighbouring Gulf
countries.
Iraq

Bahrain

India’s traditional ties with Iraq witnessed an upswing during the
year, particularly in the commercial, economic and cultural fields. The
13th Session of the Indo-Iraq Joint Commission was held in Baghdad
from 27-29 July 1999. The Indian side was led by Shri V K
Ramamurthy, Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas.

A delegation of the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) visited
Bahrain in April 1999 and met the Labour and Social Affairs Minister,
the Commerce Minister and senior officials of the Bahrain Chamber

A 4-member team of medical specialists covering oncology,
orthopaedics, plastic and neuro surgery visited Iraq for 15 days during
July 1999 under the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation
(ITEC) Programme of the Ministry of External Affairs to assist Iraqi
doctors in handling critical cases.

Section II
The warm and cordial relations between India and Bahrain were
further strengthened and diversified, particularly in the economic field.

35

The Gulf, West Asia & North Africa

An 8-member Manipuri dance troupe “Pung/Dhoi Choiam
Martial Art” participated in the Babylon International festival held in
Iraq in September 1999.
Dr R S Paroda, Secretary Ministry of Agriculture and Director
General, Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), visited Iraq,
leading a 3-member delegation from 30 September to 5 October 1999
and held extensive discussions with the Iraqi Minister of Agriculture
on strengthening cooperation in the field of agriculture. At the end
of the visit, Agreed Minutes, providing for training of Iraqi experts in
India, and exchange of visits, publications and periodicals on modern
agriculture, were signed.
Dr Ilaseeb Y A D Bashi. Director General in the Iraqi Ministry
of Higher Education, visited India from 25-30 October 1999 finder
the ITEC Programme.
The number of ITEC slots for training of nominees from Iraq
has been increased to 60.
The public sector undertaking, Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited
(BHEL) was awarded by the Government of Iraq a contract worth
(about) 101 million for supply of gas turbines, in the framework of
the UN approved ‘Oil for Food Programme’.
India Trade Promotion Organisation (ITPO) participated in the
Baghdad International Fair (BIF) with an enhanced display of products
which included cars, pick-tip vans, IEEPS, in addition to a wide variety
of engineering goods.
Kuwait

India’s relations with Kuwait continued to be marked by warmth
and closeness. Shri Saleem Iqbal Sherwani, Member of Parliament
and ex-Minister of State for External Affairs visited Kuwait from 36 April 1999, when he met several Kuwaiti dignitaries, including the

36

Speaker of the National Assembly. Shri E K Nayanar, Chief Minister
of Kerala, visited Kuwait for two days from 30 April 1999. The Finance
Minister of Kerala, accompanied by a financial delegation visited
Kuwait on 6 August 1999, and met Kuwait’s Minister for Social Affairs
and Labour. A Kuwaiti delegation, representing the National
Committee for Missing Persons and POWS Affairs, headed by Dr
Sultan AI-Khalaf Deputy Director General, Animal and Fish
Resources, visited India from 10-13 August 1999, and called on the
Minister of External Affairs, Shri Jaswant Singh and Shri Nareshwar
Dayal, Secretary (East) in the Ministry of External Affairs. The
delegation also met a number of prominent political and social figures,
including the Deputy Chairperson of the Rajya Sabha, Dr (Mrs) Najma
Heptullah.
Lt General S K Jaitley, Deputy Chief of Army Staff, visited the
UNIKOM in Kuwait from 19-21 December 1999, which includes 7
Indian army officers.
An Executive Programme for Cultural Exchanges between India
and Kuwait was signed in Kuwait on 22.12.99 by the Indian
Ambassador and the Secretary General of the Kuwaiti National
Council for Culture, Arts and Letters.
Oman

India and Oman have close historical ties and deep cultural
affinities. The Extradition Treaty between India and Oman was
finalised and initialled on 13 April 1999 in Muscat. Also, the
Instruments of Ratification in respect of the Agreement to Combat
Terrorism and Organised Crime were exchanged between the two
countries in Muscat in May 1999.
Shri E.K. Nayanar, Chief Minister of Kerala, visited Oman on 28
April 1999. A team from the National Remote Sensing Agency visited
Oman from 28 April 1999 in connection with a project involving

Annual Report 1999-2000

aerial photography for the AI-Masarrat Water Supply Project in Oman.
A 35-member group of travel agents, representing the Travel Agents
Association of India (TAAI), paid a 3-day visit to Oman on 1-3 May
1999 to familiarise themselves with the tourism potential of the
country. A high-level delegation from the Government of Pondicherry
led by the Health Minister, Shri A M H Nazeem, including the Chief
Secretary (Industries) and the Managing Director of Pondicherry
Industrial Development and Investment Corporation, visited Muscat
on 27 May 1999. Also the Secretary (Fertiliser), Government of India,
visited Oman from 5-6 June 1999 to discuss issues pertaining to the
Indo-Oman Fertiliser Project.
Defence cooperation between India and Oman entered into a
new phase with the official visit of Major General Ali bin Rashid
Alkalbani, Commander of the Royal Army of Oman, and his sixmember delegation to India for five days commencing from 20 June
1999. The Omani Commander met the Minister of Defence, the chief
of Naval Staff and other senior military officers. A defence team
comprising, 33 members from the Command and Staff College of
Oman came to lndia from 8-15 July 1999 and visited a number of
defence establishments in the country.
The public sector company Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited
(BHEL) won a power station extension projecting Oman worth about
US $ 27 million.
The Sultanate and India signed on 10th October, 1999, a bilateral
agreement for Oman's accession to the WTO. During the 54th session
of the UNGA, Smt. Vasundhara Raje, Minister of State for External
Affairs met the Oman Minister Responsible for Foreign Affairs and
exchanged views on bilateral, regional and international issues.
Shri I K Gujral, former Prime Minister, paid a three-day visit to
the Sultanate from 31 October to 2 November 1999 in response to

an invitation from the Omani Govt. During the visit, Shri Gujral
paid courtesy calls on Sayyid Fahd bin Mohmoud Al Said, Deputy
Prime Minister for the Council of Ministers and Mr Yousuf Alawi,
Minister Responsible for Foreign Affairs, and reviewed bilateral
relations and exchanged views on regional & international issues. He
also addressed Omani diplomats at the Diplomatic Institute.
Shri Suresh P Prabhu Minister for Chemicals and Fertilisers,
visited Omani from 21-24 November 1999 at the invitation of the
Oman Oil Company, and met Dr Mohammed bin Hamad Al Rumhy,
Minister of Oil and Gas, and Mr Ahmed bin Abdul Nabi Al Macki,
Minister of National Economy, and discussed bilateral relations
especially cooperation in the proposed Indo-Omani joint venture
Fertiliser Project and the Bharat-Oman Refinery Project.
A high-level sports delegation from Kerala visited the Sultanate
from 19-20 November 1999 to promote India’s first professional
football club, FC Kochin.
For the first time, three Omani companies participated in the
two-week long India International ‘Trade Fair ’99 (IITF), which began
on 14 November in New Delhi.
The Union Minister for Chemicals and Fertilisers, Shri Suresh
Prabhu, visited Oman from 21-25 November 1999. He reviewed with
the senior Omani authorities concerning the on-going developments
regarding the proposed joint venture fertiliser project to be set up in
Oman. He held meetings with the Ministers of Commerce and
Industry, National Economy and Oil and Gas.
The MOS for External Affairs is likely to visit Muscat in the
second half of February 2000 as leader of the Indian delegation for
Annual Political Consultations between India and Oman. Omani
Minister of Commerce and Industry, Mr Maqbool Ali Sultan is
37

The Gulf, West Asia & North Africa

expected to visit India in February/March 2000 as leader of the Omani
delegation to the third session of the India-Oman Joint Commission.
EAM visited Oman from 21-23 January to participate in the
Extra-Ordinary Meeting of the Council of Ministers of IOR-ARC.
During his stay in Muscat, the EAM called on the Deputy Prime
Minister of Oman, Sayyid Fahd bin Mahmoud bin Mohammed Al
Said. He also held discussions with Oman’s Minister Responsible for
Foreign Affairs Yousuf bin Alawi bin Abdullah and Minister of
Commerce & Industry Maqbool Ali Sultan.
Qatar

The traditionally warm and friendly relations between India and
Qatar were given a new dynamism by the State visit of the Emir of
Qatar to India from 6-8 April 1999. The Emir’s delegation included
the Deputy Prime Minister, Foreign Minister, Minister of Energy,
Industry, Water & Electricity, health Minister and senior officials from
the various ministries. His meetings with the President, Prime Minister,
Vice President. External Affairs Minister, Finance Minister and
Industry Minister focused oil bilateral relations. During the visit, six
bilateral agreements/MOUs were signed which included Bilateral
Investment Promotion and Protection Agreement (BIPPA), Double
Taxation Avoidance Agreement (DTFAA), MOU on Foreign Office
Consultations, MOU oil Cooperation ill the fields of Youth & Sports,
Joint Business Council Agreement between FICCI/ASSOCHAM,
and the Qatar Chamber of Commerce and Industry, and MOU oil
Cooperation between the National Small Industries Corporation and
the Qatar Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
The Chief of Army Staff, General V P Malik, paid an official
visit to Qatar from April 3-6, 1999. This was the first visit of the
Indian Army Chief to Qatar. He held discussions with the Chief of
Staff of the Qatari Armed Forces and also met the Chief of the Qatar
Air Force and Navy.

38

All Indian Cultural Week was organised in Dolia by the Indian
Embassy from 21-30 April in cooperation with the Indian Council
for Cultural Relations (ICCR) and local Indian cultural organisations.
The Minister of Health of Pondicherry accompanied by the Chief
Secretary, visited Dolia on 25 and 26 May 1999. Shri Krishnan
Kaniyam Parambil, Kerala’s Minister for Agriculture, visited Dolia
oil 5-9 July 1999 to attend the Silver Jubilee celebrations of the MES
Indian School and to explore the possibility for export of agricultural
products from Kerala to Qatar. Shri T. Sivadasa Menon, Kerala’s
Minister of Finance & Excise, visited Dolia from 2-4 August, 1999.
On 31 July, 1999 Ras Gas of Qatar and Petronet of India signed
the final Sale & Purchase Agreement in London for supply of 7.5
metric tons per annum (MTPA) of Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) to
India over a period of 25 years starting from 2003.
The Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC)
concluded a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with Mannai
Corporation QSC on 13 October 1999 to cooperate and jointly
explore business opportunities in the petroleum industry in the Gulf
States in areas such as petroleum exploration, development,
production and O&M projects. The MOU was signed by Mr. Subhash
C. Jetly, Executive Director (Joint Ventures), on behalf of ONGC
and Mr Ahmed Mannai, Chairman of the Mannai Corporation.
A three-member Qatari defence delegation, led by Brig Abdullah
al- Hajri, attended the DEFEXPO INDIA ’99 field in New Delhi
from 28-30 October 1999. A high-level delegation from the Qatar
National University, headed by the Vice President for Academic
Affairs, Prof. Abdur Rehman visited Delhi and Mumbai in October
1999, to discuss the possibility of selecting faculty members for the
University.
Secretary (East) in the Ministry of External Affairs, Shri

Annual Report 1999-2000

Nareshwar Dayal, accompanied by Shri Talmiz Ahmad, Joint Secretary
(Gulf/Haj), visited Dolia from 19-20 November 1999. During his
meeting with the Qatari Foreign Minister, Sheikh Hamad bin Jassem
bin Jabor AI-Thani, Shri Dayal handed over to him a letter from the
External Affairs Minister. Shri Dayal also had wide ranging discussions
with Permanent Under Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Mr
Abdulrahman bin Hamad AI-Attiyah. The two sides discussed the
situation in the region as well as bilateral relations.

The Indian delegation visited Riyadh, Jeddah and Dammam where it
held meetings with prominent members of Saudi Chambers of
Commerce and Industry. The delegation demonstrated India’s
technological and industrial capabilities, ranging from production of
computer chips to automobiles, railways, cars, aircraft and capital
goods. There are more than 25 Indo-Saudi joint ventures in different
fields in the Kingdom, and Saudi companies are showing interest in
seeking partnerships with reputed Indian companies.

The Permanent Under Secretary of the Qatari Ministry of Foreign
Affairs is likely to visit India in February 2000 for attending the first
meeting under the MOU on Foreign Office Consultations signed
during the State visit of the Emir of Qatar to India. A meeting of the
Joint Higher Committee between India and Qatar is expected to be
held in March 2000.

Shri V K Ramamurthy, Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas,
inaugurated a seminar “Saudi Arabia in 100 years” organised on 12
May 1999 by the Saudi Embassy in New Delhi.

Saudi Arabia

India’s traditional relations with Saudi Arabia continued to grow
steadily. Saudi Arabia showed understanding of India’s viewpoint oil
a number of issues and signalled a desire to intensify the bilateral
relationship.
The Kingdom remained one of the major suppliers of crude oil
to India, meeting about 23% of India’s import requirements. The
Bilateral trade between the two countries during 1998-99 amounted
to US $ 2.6 billion. India’s exports to Saudi Arabia during die year
were worth US $ 766 million, an increase of 9% over the previous
year.
A 13-member Indian Industrial delegation led by the Managing
Director of Tata Iron & Steel Company Ltd., Dr J J Irani, visited tile
Kingdom from 4-11 April 1999. The Indian delegation was invited
by the Council of the Saudi Chambers of Commerce and Industry,
with the aim of promoting joint ventures between the two countries.

Owing to the saturation of Saudi labour market for unskilled/
semi-skilled workers, the slump in the construction industry, and
competition from other countries providing cheap labour, there was
a fall in the number of fresh workers recruited from India during
1999-2000 as compared to the previous years. The total Indian
population in the Kingdom, however, continues to be in the vicinity
of 12 lakhs and remittances of the Indian work-force retained at
around $ 2 billion per annum.
Haj

A total of 98,072 Indian pilgrims performed Haj in March 1999,
out of which 62,107 went under the aegis of Haj Committee, Mumbai.
The Government deputed 362 deputationists (218 Doctors and
Paramedical staff and 144 Administrative staff) to Saudi Arabia to
look after the general welfare and medical needs of the Indian pilgrims.
Also 13 State Haj committees sent 98 Haj Volunteers to guide and
assist Haj pilgrims from their States particularly with regard to living
conditions, transport to pilgrimage centres and Haj rituals. A 30member Haj Goodwill Delegation visited Saudi Arabia during the
Haj period.
39

The Gulf, West Asia & North Africa

In connection with Haj-2000, a Government of India delegation
visited Saudi Arabia and held a meeting with the Haj Minister on 3
November 1999. The delegation took tip the issue of increase in the
Indian Haj quota from the present 91,000 to 125,000 on the basis of
the present Muslim population in India. (The Government of Saudi
Arabia allows one pilgrim per one thousand Muslims in a country.)
Following the meeting, India’s quota for Haj-2000 has now been fixed
by the Saudi Government at 120,000.
Preparations for Haj-2000 are under way. Accommodation is
being rented in Makkah and Madinah, while global lenders have been
floated for the Air Charter Contract to ferry pilgrims to and from
Saudi Arabia. For tile first time, a comprehensive Orientation and
Training Programme is being organised all over India to educate
pilgrims about all aspects of Haj, including religious rituals, living
conditions in Saudi Arabia and safety measures.
The Haj Committee, Mumbai was reconstituted by the
Government and the new Committee took office and became
operational on 16 June 1999.
The preparation of a new Haj Committee Act to replace the Haj
Committee Act of 1959 has been taken up by the Ministry. It is
expected that a draft Bill will be ready for presentation before
Parliament in early 2000.
United Arab Emirates (UAE)

Bilateral cooperation between India and the UAE, in various fields
was further strengthened. India’s Minister of External Affairs, Shri
Jaswant Singh, visited the UAE on 5 April 1999 and met the UAE
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, Sheikh Hamdan Bin Zayed AI
Nahyan, in Abu Dhabi. The two ministers discussed issues of mutual
interest and stressed the importance of joint efforts to maintain
security and stability in the Gulf and the Indian Ocean. Shri Jaswant
Singh welcomed the proposed entry of the UAE into the IOR-ARC.

40

A delegation of the National Association of Software and Services
Companies (NASSCOM) visited the UAE from 1 May 1999 to
promote Indian capabilities in the Information Technology (IT) and
Software Sectors. NASSCOM organised a seminar which was
addressed by the UAE Minister for Higher Education & Scientific
Research, Shaikh Nahyan Bin Mubarak AI Nahyan lie stressed the
importance of partnership between the Indian software industry and
the UAE business, industrial and technical institutions. NASSCOM
also undertook to submit a proposal to the Dubai Government for
setting up UAE’s first IT Park.
The first group of five UAE students from the Higher College
of Technical Education of Abu Dhabi came to India on 26 June 1999
to participate in a job-oriented on-line training programme. This
programme is a pilot project emphasising bilateral. cooperation. The
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) is the nodal agency to monitor
the training programme in India.
Voltas International Limited was awarded an electrical contract
worth Rs.750 million for the Abu Dhabi Trade Centre Project on 15
July 1999.
A 9-member delegation from the Dubai Chamber of Commerce
and Industry, led by Mr Ahmed Saif Belhasa, Chairman, UAE
Contractor’s Association, visited New Delhi and Bombay for seven
days from 27 October 1999 at the invitation of the Confederation of
Indian Industry (CII). The delegation called on the Minister of State
for Commerce’ and Industry and participated in a business seminar
inaugurated by the Minister. The delegation also met Shri Talmiz
Ahmad, Joint Secretary (Gulf & Haj) in the Ministry of External
Affairs, who spoke to them on the Government of India’s policy
initiatives to build a long-standing political and economic ties with
the UAE. At Mumbai, the delegation visited the Godrej Industrial
Complex and held meetings with the EXIM Batik, Indian Merchant’s

Annual Report 1999-2000

Chamber and called on the Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank
of India (RBI).
The Minerals and Metals Trading Corporation organised in
October 1999 a jewellery exhibition i Dubai in collaboration with
Siroya Jewellers of Dubai. The India Trade Promotion Organisation
(IITO) participated in the Arab Jewellery and Watch Show held in
Abu Dhabi in October 1999.
The UAE Minister for Justice, Islamic Affairs and Awqaf, Mr.
Mohammed Bin Nakhira Al Dhaheri, accompanied by an official
delegation, visited India from 25-26 October 1999. During the visit,
three Treaties, namely Extradition Treaty, Treaty on Mutual Legal
Assistance in Criminal Matters and Treaty on Juridical and Judicial
Cooperation in Civil and Commercial Matters were signed. The UAE
Minister called on the External Affairs Minister and the Minister of
Law, Justice and Company Affairs.
During his transit halt in UAE on 21 January, External Affairs
Minister called on Crown Prince of Dubai and UAE Minister of
Defence H.H. Sheikh Mohammed Bin Rashid Al Maktoum and UAE
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs H.H. Sheikh Hamadan Bin Zayed
Al Nahyan.
Minister of State of Information & Broadcasting Shri Arun Jaitley
visited UAE from 31 January - 1 February. He exchanged views with
Minister of Information and Culture of UAE H.H. Sheikh Abdullah
Bin Zayed Al Nahyan.
Yemen

The ties of friendship and cooperation between India and Yemen
continued to grow further during the year. Mr Mohammed AlKhadem AI-Wajeeh, Yemeni Minister of Oil and Mineral Resources
led an oil and gas delegation to India in June 1999. The delegation

met the Indian Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas, and the two
sides discussed the possibility of signing an agreement for exporting
oil and natural gas to India from Yemen.
The third session of the Indo-Yemen Joint Committee for
Economic, Scientific and Technical Cooperation took place in Sana’a
from 18-20 July 1999. The Indian delegation was leaded by Shri
Nareshwar Dayal, Secretary (East) in the Ministry of External Affairs,
and the Yemeni delegation was led by Mr Abdul Rehman Taramoum,
Vice Minister of Planning and Development. A number of areas were
identified for cooperation between the two countries. Besides the
Agreed Minutes of the Joint Committee, two agreements, namely the
Cultural Agreement and the Air Services Agreement were signed Shri
Dayal called on Prime Minister Dr. Abdul Karim Al-Iryani and the
Ministers of Planning, Oil, Trade, Communications, Alwqaf and
Culture and the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs.
Around 3500 pilgrims from the Bohra community, led by its
spiritual leader, Dr Burhanuddin TUS, visited Yemen during August
1999 and held a special function at Haraz. The pilgrims included a
medical team consisting of 25 doctors from various fields of
specialisation who provided free service to patients at the Republican
Hospital in Sana’a and the Manakha Hospital.
Special Kuwait Cell
The Special Kuwait Cell has been working since 1991 on the task
of obtaining compensation for the Indians who were adversely
affected by the Gulf War of 1990-91. After a considerable time, funds
are now being transferred by the United Nations Compensation
Commission (UNCC), Geneva. Transfer of funds is taking place at
almost regular intervals, depending on availability of the same with
UNCC.
41

The Gulf, West Asia & North Africa

Disbursement of the compensation money to successful claimants
is being done by four designated nationalised Banks. The four Banks,
with the active cooperation and guidance of the Special Kuwait Cell,
are carrying out the task of locating the successful claimants (many

42

Annual Report 1999-2000

accompanied by a 26-member delegation visited India from 15-19
June 1999 at the invitation of the Minister of Petroleum & Natural
Gas. A joint working group to oversee cooperation in the hydrocarbon
sector was constituted during the visit. The Minister also called on
the Prime Minister and the Minister of State for External Affairs.
The Algerian Minister of Trade and Commerce, Mr Bakhti Belaib,
visited India from 17-18 August 1999 to participate in the G-15 Trade
Ministers’ Conference in Bangalore. An eight-member Algerian
Defence delegation led by General Bendimerad Mohamed visited
India from 14 - 23 November 1999 to explore possibilities of
cooperation in defence field. During its stay, the delegation called on
the Defence Minister and visited the headquarters of the Indian Space
Research Organization and the Antariksh Corporation in Bangalore,
the Defence Research and Development Organization units in Pune
and Mumbai, the Ordnance Factory Board in Calcutta and held
discussions with the Confederation of Indian Industry representatives
in New Delhi.
Egypt

Bilateral relations with Egypt were further diversified and
strengthened. The first session of the Indo-Egyptian Joint Business
Group was held on 17 May 1999 in Cairo. The Egyptian and Indian
delegations comprising businessmen from the private and public
sector of both the countries identified several areas for further
cooperation. Egypt’s Minister of Trade and Supply Dr Ahmed Goweli
led the Egyptian delegation to the G-15 Ministerial meeting held in
Bangalore from 16-18 August 1999. Minister of External Affairs Shri
Jaswant Singh met Egypt’s Minister of Foreign Affairs Amre Moussa
on the margins of the 54th United Nations General Assembly on 20
September 1999 in New York. They exchanged views on global and
regional issues. An 8-member Egyptian delegation led by Major
General Mohammed Khalifa Farghaly visited India in connection with
DEFEXPO held in New Delhi from 12-16 October 1999. Two Indian

Army Officers participated as Observers in the Exercise ‘Bright Star’
in Egypt from 26 October to 2 November 1999.
Israel

Relations with Israel continued to grow satisfactorily. Pricipal
Secretary to the Prime Minister Shri Brajesh Mishra visited Israel
from 2-4 September 1999, at the invitation of the Israeli Government.
During his stay in Israel, Shri Mishra called on the Prime Minister
Mr. Ehud Barak. His visit was part of the ongoing diplomatic dialogue
between India and israel. Deputy Speaker of the Knesset Ms Naomi
Chazan visited New Delhi on 23 and 24 November 1999.

Jordan

Relations with Jordan continued to be close and friendly. The
Vice President Shri Krishan Kant represented India at the funeral of
King Hussein in Amman on 8 February 1999. During his stay in
Amman, the Vice President called on King Abdullah II. A Double
Taxation Avoidance Agreement was signed between India and Jordan
on 20 April 1999. Former Foreign Minister of Jordan Dr Kamel Abu
Jaber visited India from 22-27 November 1999 under the Indian
Council for Cultural Relations distinguished visitor’s programme.
During his stay, Dr Jaber called on Minister of State for External
Affairs Shri Ajit Panja.

Lebanon

Bilateral relations with Lebanon continued to remain cordial. India
stands for the restoration of sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity
of Lebanon and for extension of the authority of Lebanese State
over the entire territory of Lebanon in consonance with the United
Nations Security Council Resolution 425. An Indian delegation visited
Beirut from 9-12 August 1999 to participate in the meeting of the
Asian Group of G-77.

Libya

Relations with Libya continued to be marked by understanding
43

The Gulf, West Asia & North Africa

and cooperation. Former Prime Minister Shri Inder Kumar Gujral
visited Libya from 10-14 November 1999 at the invitation of the
Government of Libya. During his stay in Libya, Shri Gujral called on
President Col Muammar Al-Qathafi and Foreign Minister Mr Omar
Mustafa Muntassir.
Morocco

Bilateral relations with Morocco were further strengthened and
consolidated. Dr Abid Hussain, who is a member of the Moroccan
Royal Academy, visited Rabat from 6-9 May 1999 for the spring session
of the Academy. During the visit of an 11-member Confederation of
Indian Industry mission to Morocco from 23-26 May 1999 a
Memorandum of Understanding between the Confederation of Indian
Industry and its Moroccan counterpart organisation for creation of a
Joint Business Council was initialled. Vice President Shri Krishan
Kant visited Morocco from 25-26 July 1999 to represent India at the
funeral of late King Hassan II. During his stay in Rabat, Vice President
called on King Mohammed VI and conveyed a message of condolence
from the President. Deputy Chairperson of Rajya Sabha, Dr Najma
Heptulla visited Morocco from 8-11 September 1999 to attend the
Second Preparatory Committee of the Presiding Officers Conference
of the Inter-Parliamentary Union. Secretary (Economic Relations),
Shri S T Devare led the Indian delegation to the 9th G-77 Ministerial
meeting held at Marrakesh from 12-16 September 1999. IndoMoroccan joint venture fertilizer project, one of India’s largest joint
venture projects abroad, commenced production in August 1999.
Minister of State for External Affairs Ms Vasundhara Raje met the
Foreign Minister of Morocco Mr Mohamed Benaissa on 29 September
1999 on the sidelines of the 54th United Nations General Assembly
and discussed matters of mutual interest. A Memorandum of
Understanding has been finalised between the Indian Institute of
Technology, Delhi and Akhawayn University of Morocco.
44

Prime Minister of Morocco Abderrahmane El Youssoufi paid a
State visit to India from 21-25 February. Number of Agreements
were signed during his visit. These include – Agreement on Merchant
Shipping and Related Maritime Matters, Memorandum of
Understanding in the field of Geology and Mining and Agreement
between Prasar Bharti, Doordarshan and Radiodiffusion Television
Marocaine (RTM). In addition an agreement was initialled between
the Confederation of Indian Industry and its Moroccan counterpart
organisation to form a Joint Business Council.
Palestine

India continued to extend its consistent and unwavering support
to the Palestinian cause. India also continued with its moral, material
and technical support to the Palestinian people. Training slots for
specialised training courses to Palestinian personnel were provided
during the year. High-level political contacts between the Indian and
Palestinian leadership were maintained. President Yassir Arafat came
to India on a working visit from 9-10 April 1999. He was accompanied
by Palestine National Authority Minister for Planning and
International Cooperation, Dr Nabeel Sha’ath, Chief Palestinian
negotiator Mr Sa’eb Ereket and Advisor to the President Mr Nabeel
Abu Radneih. During the visit, President Yassir Arafat called on
President and held detailed discussions with the Prime Minister.
Additional Secretary (FA) and Joint Secretary (WANA) visited Gaza
in May 1999 for a review meeting of Indian aided projects. Advisor
to President on Human Rights, Advocate Ibrahim Abu Dagga, visited
India from 2-7 November 1999 in connection with an International
Conference on Human Rights “Union International Des Advocats”.
He had a meeting with Member, National Human Rights Commission
Shri Virendra Dayal.
Western Sahara/Somalia/Djibouti

On Western Sahara issue, India continues to support “UN

Annual Report 1999-2000

efforts”. India continued its support to United Nations efforts to
restore peace and normalcy in Somalia. Former President of Djibouti
Mr Hassan Gouled Aptiden transited through New Delhi on 24 May
1999, 16 December 1999 and 23 December 1999. Foreign Minister
of Djibouti Mr Ali Abdi Farah called on the External Affairs Minister
on the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly in New
York on 21 September 1999. It was followed by External Affairs
Minister’s meeting with President of Djibouti Mr Ismail Omar Guelleh
who also happened to be in New York at that time. “Sindhuvir” a
submarine of the Indian Navy called on Djibouti Port from 4 - 7
October 1999. The Commander of Indian Naval Ship called on the
Djibouti Naval Chief Capt Abourahman Adeb Cher.
Sudan

Relations with Sudan were strengthened. India reiterated its
support for Sudan’s territorial integrity and sovereignty over the whole
of Sudan. President of Sudan, Lt Gen Omar Hassan Ahmed Al Bashir
transitted through Mumbai on 22 July 1999. Registrar of Political
Associations of Sudan, Mr Mohammed Ahmed Salim, visited India
from 18-23 September 1999 and held discussions with the officials
of the Election Commission and Parliament. UN Special Rapporteur
on Freedom of Opinion and Expression Dr Abid Hussain visited
Sudan from 20-26 September 1999. Amongst others, Dr Abid Hussain
met Speaker of National Assembly Mr Hassan Al Turabi. Minister of
State for External Affairs Ms Vasundhara Raje met Foreign Minister
of Sudan Dr Mustafa Osman Ismail on 29 September 1999 on the
sidelines of the 54th United Nations General Assembly and discussed
matters of mutual interest during the meeting.

Syria

Relations with Syria continued to remain friendly and warm. Three
member Syrian defence delegation led by the Deputy Chief of Army
Staff Lt General Abdul Rahman Sayad, participated in DEFEXPO
INDIA’99 held in New Delhi from 12 - 16 October 1999.

Minister of State for Information & Broadcasting, Shri Arun
Jaitley visited Syria from 28-30 January 2000. Besides meeting his
counterpart, Shri Jaitley exchanged views with the Prime Minister
and the Foreign Minister of Syria.
Tunisia

Bilateral relations with Tunisia continued to progress satisfactorily.
A 25-member Tunisian delegation of the Chamber of Commerce &
Industry, Sfax visited India from 20-27 April 1999 to explore avenues
for enhancing economic and industrial cooperation. In return, a 10member Confederation of Indian Industry industrial mission visited
Tunisia from 20-23 May 1999. At the invitation of Deputy Minister
for Women and Family Affairs Ms Neziha Zarrouk, Deputy
Chairperson of Rajya Sabha, Dr Najma Heptulla visited Tunisia from
11-14 August 1999 to participate in the celebrations to mark Tunisia’s
Women’s Day. External Affairs Minister Shri Jaswant Singh met
Foreign Minister of Tunisia Mr Said Ben Mustapha on 24 September
1999 on the margins of the 54th United Nations General Assembly
and exchanged views on bilateral, regional and global issues. Former
Prime Minister Shri Inder Kumar Gujral visited Tunisia from 3-10
November 1999 to attend an International Symposium on the theme
“Third Way: The Emerging Countries”, at the invitation of the
Rassemblement Constitutional Democratic, the ruling party of
Tunisia. During his stay in Tunisia, Shri Gujral had meetings with
Prime Minister Dr Hamed Karoui, Secretary General of
Rassemblement Constitutional Democratic, Mr Adelaziz ben Dhia,
Speaker of Tunisian Parliament Mr Foued Mbazaa. President of the
Council for Competition of Tunisia Mr Mohamed Chatti visited Delhi
from 15-23 November 1999 to represent Tunisia at the India
International Trade Fair 1999. The Tunisian Minister of International
Cooperation & Foreign Investment, Mr Fethi Merdassi, was in India
from 5 - 8 November 1999 to lead a 9-member Tunisian delegation
to participate in the India Economic Summit organised jointly by the
45

The Gulf, West Asia & North Africa

Confederation of Indian Industry and World Economic Forum
During his stay in Delhi, the Minister called on the Vice-President,
Minister of Finance, Minister of Heavy Industry & Public Enterprises,
Minister of State for External Affairs, Minister of State for Commerce
& Industry and the Chief Minister of Delhi. Before concluding the
visit, the Tunisian Minister and his delegation visited Bombay on 8
November 1999 where the Export-Import Bank of India signed a
memorandum of Understanding with two Tunisian Banks viz. Societe
Tunisiene de Banque and Banque International Arabe de Tunisia to

46

jointly promote trade and industrial collaboration between Tunisian
and Indian companies. Shri Abid Hussain visited Tunisia from 5 - 11
December 1999 as a Special Rapporteur to the United Nations on
Human Rights and Freedom of Expression.
League of Arab States

The regular dialogue with League of Arab States was maintained
in Cairo and in New Delhi.
uu

Annual Report 1999-2000

6
Africa (South of Sahara)

Introduction

T

he Government of India continued its policy of consolidating
the gains of almost five decades of close ties of friendship with
the countries in the Sub-Saharan Africa. Most of the countries
in this region are currently engaged in the simultaneous processes of
economic reform and political democratization. These processes,
being in line with India’s own national priorities, have strengthened
our capacity to identify ourselves with the aspirations of the people
of Africa and to engage with them in a constructive programme of
mutually beneficial cooperation.
Bilateral
Indo-Mauritian relations continued to be excellent, as in the past.
Cooperation in the sectors of education, science and technology,
defence, commerce and industry was further intensified. There were
also several visits of cultural troupes from India. Trade between the
two countries grew steadily and India is now the third largest supplier
of goods to Mauritius. The India Trade Promotion Organization
organized a successful exhibition of Indian products - INDEXPO which coincided with the Indian Independence Day celebrations. Mr.
Sikander Bakht, Minister of Industry, was the chief guest during the
exposition.

During this period Telecommunications Consultants (India) Ltd.
successfully completed their projects in Madagascar for installation
of optic fibre and radio transmission network. The Government of
India donated medicines worth Rs. 10 lakhs to check the cholera
epidemic in different parts of Madagascar. Two Indian Naval ships,
INS Krishna and Sujata, called on Malagasy port of Diego Suarez on
a goodwill visit from 20th October to 23rd October 1999.
The close friendship between India and Seychelles saw visible
manifestation during the year by the visits by two Naval Ships from
India on two occasions in October and November 1999 and a visit to
India by a 7-member delegation from the Association of Small
Businessmen of Seychelles in July.
India’s traditional political relations with Ethiopia continued to
consolidate in 1999. The Government of Ethiopia reiterated its;
interest in our small and medium scale industries and in the fields of
dairy, agriculture and agro-industries. In May this year, a Cultural
Exchange Programme was signed with Ethiopia. In the near future a
ministerial delegation is expected to visit India. The Bilateral trade
between India and Ethiopia has also been showing a rising trend,
increasing from US$ 8 million in 1989 to US$ 70 million in 1999.
In Eastern Africa, a treaty aiming at economic union amongst
Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda, known as the East African Community
47

Africa (South of Sahara)

(EAC), was signed by the Presidents of these three countries on the
30th November, 1999 in Arusha (Tanzania). This Treaty will come
into effect after it is ratified by their Parliaments. The formation of
this Community pledges these countries to work towards a customs
union leading ultimately to a political federation. In view of India’s
excellent political relations and the growing commercial and economic
interest with these countries, as also the presence of a large Indian
diaspora in this region, it will be our endeavour to intensify our
interaction with the individual member countries of the EAC as well
as with EAC as a regional organisation.
India’s relations with Kenya were further strengthened during
the period under review. Kenya showed a constructive understanding
of India’s position on key global issues like restructuring of the UN
Security Council, disarmament and the need for an equitable world
economic order. The Government of Kenya has also shown its keen
interest to further improve Indo-Kenyan bilateral relations in the fields
of small scale industries, dairy, agriculture, tourism etc. A special focus
of the year was our efforts to promote bilateral tourism. Seminars to
promote tourism were held in Nairobi in March and in Mombasa in
October’99. A special seminar focusing on business in the new
millennium was also held in Nairobi in association with the Kenya
Institute of Management.
India lost a great friend in the death of Tanzania’s former
President, Julius Nyerere on October 14, 1999. The Vice President,
Shri Krishan Kant, led the Indian delegation at the funeral of the
departed leader. He was also one of the only six leaders chosen to
address the public at the funeral ceremony.
The Confederation of Indian Industry in association with the
High Commission of India, organized a ‘Made in India’ show in Dares-Salaam from 26-29 August, 1999. Mr. Ram Jethmalani, Minister
of Law, Justice and Company Affairs inaugurated the show.
48

Comprising a Ministerial visit, a trade exhibition, five separate business
missions and an array of cultural events including fashion shows, a
dance drama ballet and a food festival, this was the largest event of its
kind to be ever held in Tanzania. A Bilateral Trade Agreement has
been finalized and would be signed shortly. India has emerged as
Tanzania’s largest trading partner. Defence and Cultural Exchange
agreements are also under consideration.
Relations between India and Uganda continued to remain cordial.
Michael K. Werikhe, Minister of State for Housing, led a delegation
to India to participate in the International Exhibition “Build India
99” and “Environment India 99” held in New Delhi between 13-16
April, 1999. Other visits exchanged during this period include that of
Mrs. Miria Matembe, Minister for Ethics and Integrity, a 4-member
delegation from the Ugandan Ministry of Finance to India and the
visits of a delegation from Karnataka Power Corporation Ltd, a 3member TCIL delegation, a 15-member CII delegation and a 14member FEII delegation from India to Uganda. As part of its ongoing
privatization programme, the government of Uganda sold its 49%
shares to the Bank of Baroda (Uganda) Ltd. With this, the Bank of
Baroda (Uganda) became a fully owned subsidiary of the Bank of
Baroda, India. Gujarat Communications and Electronics Ltd. bagged
a US$ 3.5 million project for setting up a digital Video/Audio Earth
Station at Kampala.
Subsequent to signing a Memorandum of Understanding with
the SADC, India continued its efforts to improve bilateral relations
with the individual member countries of SADC as well as with SADC
as a regional organization. Exercise ‘Blue Crane’ held in April 1999,
was a major SADC peace keeping exercise designed to develop
cooperative action in peacekeeping amongst the armed forces of
SADC countries. India was the only developing country requested
for material and technical assistance for this exercise.

Annual Report 1999-2000

market in Botswana. The Botswana Government sponsored two
business level delegations to India in May and December, 1999 and a
number of projects are under active consideration.
With a long tradition of close and cordial relations, India and
Zimbabwe continued to cooperate closely, bilaterally and in multilateral
fora. India participated in the Zimbabwe International Trade Fair
(ZITF) in April, 1999. In August 1999, National Book Trust, New
Delhi and nine other leading Indian publishers participated in the
Zimbabwe International Book Fair 99. Zimbabwe Dy. Minister for
Industry & Commerce, Mr. Obert M. Mpofu participated in the G15 Ministerial meeting on WTO at Bangalore in August. He utilized
that opportunity to sign an MOU with HMT for setting up a Watch
Assembly unit in Zimbabwe as a Joint venture.
Indo-Zambian bilateral relations continued to retain their
traditional cordiality during this year. In April, 1999, RITES bagged
an important contract in the field of infrastructure. Various Indian
companies are also pursuing the possibility of their involvement in
the power sector in Zambia. The Zambian Deputy Minister of Finance
visited India to discuss the issue of blocked funds (the government
of Zambia owes around US$ 37 million to India towards repayment
of GOI’s credit line extended to them earlier). The Zambian Army
Commander paid an official visit to India at the invitation of our
Chief of Army Staff. The Zambian Deputy Minister of Land led a
high level Zambian delegation to India to learn from our experiences
in the field of land reforms, land laws, etc. In the cultural field, ICCR

49

Africa (South of Sahara)

Commission has been approved by both sides and is likely to be
signed shortly. Similarly, a proposal to convene the first meeting of
the Joint Trade Committee under the Indo-Angolan Trade Agreement
in New Delhi is under active consideration by the Angolan side.

1999. During their stay in Delhi they called on Commerce Secretary
and Secretary, Food Processing Industries. They also visited National
Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) headquarters in New Delhi and
met some Indian industrialists at a seminar organized by the CII.

The return of democracy to Africa’s most populous country,
Nigeria, was a development of special happiness to India. In April
1999 Nigerian President-elect Mr. Olusengun Obasanjo, visited India.
During his brief stay in Delhi he met the President and the PM and
held wide ranging discussions on bilateral, regional and international
issues. Nigerian Minister of Commerce Mustapha Bello led a 6member delegation to attend the G-15 Ministerial Meeting on WTO
at Bangalore in August, 1999. During this period a 3-member rice
delegation, a 5-member TCIL-C.DOT delegation and a 3-member
MECON delegation visited Nigeria.

President Olusegun Obasanjo, the newly elected President of a
Democratic Nigeria was present as the Chief Guest at the 50th
Anniversary of India Republic in the first year of the new millennium.
President Obasabjo’s visit provided a new momentum to the wellestablished friendly relations between India and Nigeria. The Nigerian
President had detailed talks with the President and Prime Minister.
Several other key economic Ministers also separately called on him.
Nigeria is India’s second largest economic partner in Africa. During
the visit, both the sides agreed to give a qualitative new dimension to
the bilateral economic relationship. Given their membership of several
multilateral fora such as G-15, G-77, NAM, Commonwealth and their
common endeavour to set up a just and equitable world order, the
renewed contact at the highest political level underlined the need for
strategic consultations between the two countries.

The Minister of Education of Cameroon Charles Etoundi visited
India during July 1999. During his visit he met our Minister of Human
Resource Development. UNICEF sponsored the visit.
Bilateral relations between India and Ghana remained on an even
keel during the period under report. The two countries decided to
hold annual bilateral consultations. It has also been agreed to sign a
fresh Cultural Exchange Programme. A team from NISIET explored
the possibilities of cooperation in the field of Small and Medium
Scale Enterprises; their report is awaited. On the economic and
commercial front, two-way trade showed a rising trend with Ghanaian
companies showing increased interest in doing business with India.
A delegation sponsored by the Indo-African Chamber of Commerce
& Industry, Mumbai visited Accra.
Secretary to the Prime Minister’s Cabinet of Cote d’ Ivoire, Mr.
Jean Claude Brou led a two-member delegation to India in September
50

As part of his travel within India, President Obasanjo visited
Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana; HMT, HAL and Infosys in
Bangalore and went for lunch to his alma mater, Staff College at
Wellington.
The Kenyan Foreign Minister visited India from December 812, 1999. This was the first formal visit at FM’s level after a decade
which resulted in further improvement of Indo-Kenyan relations.
An agreement to establish a Joint Commission at ministerial level
was signed during the visit and the Kenyan Foreign Minister evinced
keen interest in developing cooperation with India in various fields.
He lauded the role played by the Indian community in Kenya in the
field of economic activities in that country.

Annual Report 1999-2000

India’s Assistance to African Countries
Continuing an established tradition, India extended assistance in
the form of machinery, manpower and human resource development
to the Sub-Saharan countries in various crucial sectors. We have been
associated as a partner in Eritrea’s agricultural development at the
initiative of FAO and would depute nearly 100 Indian agricultural
experts to that country to help increase agricultural productivity there.
The first batch of experts will be going there soon. As part of a
tripartite agreement between India, FAO and Mozambique, an advance
team of two agricultural experts from India visited Mozambique in

trial and propagation in Ghana. An Agricultural Development Project
with Indian assistance is in an advanced stage of implementation in
Senegal. The Indian Project Director is in position and is supervising
the remaining part of the project. This project is aimed at providing
expertise and equipment to Senegal to develop rice farming and to
cultivate better variety of cotton.
India donated medicines worth Rs. 8.5 lakhs, to Mozambique in
September. In November, relief supplies (medicines) worth Rupees
five lakhs were donated to Ghana to assist the flood-victims in the
northern parts of the country.
An Entrepreneurial Training and Development Centre was set
up under the Indian technical and financial assistance in Dakar, Senegal
to provide technical training in various vocational fields.
Prime Minister visited South Africa from 12-15 November, 1999
to attend the CHOGM Summit meeting held in Durban. This visit
provided a useful opportunity to renew contacts with the leadership
of South Africa and with several other leaders of Africa as a whole.
uu

51

7
Europe

Eastern Europe
Section 1

R

elations between India and the Russian Federation have been
historically close, friendly and time tested. With the countries
of East and Central Europe, we have traditionally maintained
ties based on goodwill, friendship and close cooperation. The year
saw further consolidation and diversification of these ties to mutual
benefit. The Czech Republic, Poland and Hungary were admitted
into NATO and several of them re-oriented themselves towards
joining Euro-Atlantic Security structures and the EU. Despite these
developments, the countries of East and Central Europe reiterated
that relations their relations with India will continue to develop on
the traditional friendly basis. India’s cooperation with these countries
is multi-dimensional in character and encompasses economic,
commercial, defence, scientific and technological and cultural spheres.
Bilateral exchanges at the political level have played a significant
role in the consolidation of our ties with these countries. These
exchanges provided an opportunity towards creating greater
understanding of each others interests and concerns. Efforts were
made to renew contacts between the Parliaments of these countries.
Specific steps were taken to impart a new thrust towards the expansion

52

of trade and economic cooperation. Initiatives were taken in
diversifying our cultural relations with them.
The President of the Russian Federation, Mr Boris Yeltsin,
resigned on 31 December 1999 and nominated Mr Vladimir Putin,
Prime Minister, as the Acting President. Mr Putin would also continue
to be the Prime Minister of the Russian Federation. Presidential
Elections are scheduled to be held on 26 March 2000 to elect a new
President of the Russian Federation.
Section 2

One of the main priorities in our foreign policy objectives
continued to be the strengthening of our time tested relations with
the Russian Federation. Our multi-dimensional relations with the
Russian Federation have been developing and expanding in all areas
of mutual interest to mutual benefit. We have sought to raise the level
of our bilateral ties to that of a strategic partnership. A Declaration
on Strategic Partnership will be signed between the two countries
during the next Summit meeting. The visit of External Affairs Minister
to the Russian Federation in May 1999 was an important milestone.
The visit to India by the First Deputy Prime Minister Khristenko
and the Deputy Prime Minister Klebanov lent further weight to our
interaction. The tradition of bilateral exchange of visits both at all
levels, including political and official, continued during the year.

Annual Report 1999-2000

A delegation of Indian parliamentarians led by then MOS for
Parliamentary Affairs, Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar, visited the
Russian Federation from 5 - 9 April 1999. He led a multi-party
delegation comprising seven Members of Parliament from the Lok
Sabha and four from the Rajya Sabha. The delegation called on Mr
Gennady Seleznyov, Speaker of the State Duma; Mr Yuri Maslyukov,
First Deputy Prime Minister; Dr Vladimir Lukin, Chairman of the
State Duma Committee on International Affairs; Dr Anatoly
Lukyanov, Chairperson of the State Duma Committee on Legislation,
Courts and Legal Reforms and Chairperson of the Group of
Parliamentarians on Relations with India; Mr A.V. Selivanov, Deputy
Chairperson of the State Duma Committee for Women, Family and
Youth Affairs; Dr Gennady Zuganov, Leader of the Communist Party
of the Russian Federation; Mr Sergei Ivanenko, Deputy Leader of
the State Duma faction of “Yabloko”; and Mr Vladimir Platonov,
Deputy Chairperson of the Federation Council.

Mr Sergei Prikhodko, Deputy Head of the Russian Presidential
Administration, visited India from 15 - 17 May 1999 as Special Envoy

Mr Viktor Semenov, Agriculture Minister of the Russian
Federation, visited India from 11 - 17 April 1999. He met the then
MOS for Agriculture. During this visit, an Agreement on Cooperation
in Veterinary Field was signed. The 1st session of the sub-Group on
Agriculture under the Indo-Russian Inter Governmental Commission
also took place during the visit.
Dr A I Lukyanov, Chairperson of the State Duma Committee on
Legislation, Courts and Legal Reforms and Chairman of the Group
of Parliamentarians on Relations with India, led a Russian
Parliamentary delegation to India from 18 - 22 April 1999. He met
the Vice-President, Speaker of the Lok Sabha, then MOS for
Parliamentary Affairs, and the then Chairman and Members of the
Parliamentary Standing Committee on External Affairs.
The Chairperson of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation,
Mr V M Lebedev visited India from 3 - 5 May 1999. He called on the
Vice-President and had meetings with the Chief Justice of India.
53

Europe

on 27 July 1999. EAM once again had a meeting with Mr Ivanov in
Almaty, Kazakhstan, on 14 September 1999 on the margins of the
Conference on Interaction on Confidence Building Measure (CICA)
and on the sidelines of the 54th UNGA in New York. During these
meetings, bilateral, regional and international issues were discussed.

The “Days of Delhi” were held in Moscow from 26 October - 2
November 1999. The official delegation from the Government of
the NCT of Delhi was led by Dr. Narendra Nath, Minister of
Education of the National Capital Territory of Delhi. More than 130
artists from India participated in this event.

The Russian Foreign Minister, Mr Igor Ivanov, transited through
New Delhi on 25 July 1999 and on 28 July 1999 on his way to and
from the 6th ASEAN Regional Forum Meeting in Singapore.

The Deputy Prime Minister of the Russian Federation in-charge
of military-technical cooperation, atomic energy, space and other
subjects, Mr Ilya Klebanov paid an official visit to India from 4 - 8
November 1999. Mr Klebanov was accompanied by a high-powered
delegation which included the Minister for Atomic Energy, the First
Deputy Defence Minister, the First Deputy Minister of Trade, the
Chairperson of the Inter State Aviation Committee and many senior
Government representatives. During the visit, Mr Klebanov called
on PM and had separate meetings with the External Affairs Minister,
Raksha Mantri and Principal Secretary to PM. The 6th Meeting of
the Indo-Russian Group on Military-Technical Cooperation was also
held, coinciding with the visit. At the conclusion of the visit, a joint
statement was issued.

A delegation from the Central Election Commission (CEC) of
the Russian Federation led by Mr Sergei Bolshakov, Commissioner,
paid an official visit to India from 2 -7 September 1999. The delegation
called on the Chief Election Commissioner of India and visited polling
stations in and around Delhi and Haryana during the first phase of
the Lok Sabha poll on 5 September 1999. Interaction between the
Election Commissions of the two countries has been institutionalised
since 1997.
Mr Vladimir Putin, Chairperson of the Government of the
Russian Federation, transited through New Delhi on 14 September
1999 on his way back to Moscow from the APEC Summit in
Auckland. Principal Secretary to PM had detailed discussions with
Mr Putin on issues of mutual interest and concern.
Foreign Secretary visited Moscow on 16 September 1999 for
Foreign Office Consultations. He called on Mr Igor Ivanov, Foreign
Minister of the Russian Federation and had detailed discussions with
Mr Alexander Avdeev, First Deputy Foreign Minister and with Mr
Grigory Karasin, Deputy Foreign Minister.
The Chief of Naval Staff paid an official visit to the Russian
Federation from 15 - 20 September 1999
Col Gen Anatoly Kornukov, Commander-in-Chief of the Russian
Air Force, visited India from 4 - 10 October 1999.
54

After the hijacking of IC-814, EAM spoke to the Minister of
Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, Mr Igor Ivanov on 26
December 1999. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation issued an official statement on 27 December 1999 and
two official statements on 28 December 1999 condemning the
hijacking.
The Deputy Chairman of the Government of the Russian
Federation and Co-Chairman of the Indo-Russian InterGovernmental Commission for Trade, Economic, Scientific,
Technological and Cultural Cooperation (IRIGC), Dr Viktor
Khristenko, visited India from 14 - 15 January 2000. The 6th session
of the IRIGC was held during the visit. It was co-chaired by the
Finance Minister (Co-Chairman of the IRIGC) and Dr Khristenko.
Dr Khristenko called on the President of India and the Prime Minister

Annual Report 1999-2000

of India and met the Minister of Power, Minister of Civil Aviation
and Minister of Surface Transport. A Protocol on the 6th Session of
the IRIGC was signed on 15 January 2000.

EAM and Mr Boris Tarasyuk, Foreign Minister of Ukraine, had a
meeting in New York on 28 September 1999 on the margins of the
54th UNGA.

The Acting President and Prime Minister of the Russian
Federation Mr Vladimir Putin called the Prime Minister on the hotline
on 27 January 2000 to offer felicitations on the occasion of the 50th
anniversary of the creation of the Republic of India.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine issued a statement
on 30 December 1999 condemning the hijacking of IC-814.

The 1st session of the Indo-Russian Working Group on Export
Controls took place in Moscow from 2 - 3 February 2000.
The Speaker of the State Duma of the Federal Assembly of the
Russian Federation, Mr Gennady Seleznyev, is scheduled to visit to
India from 1 - 3 March 2000 at the invitation of the Speaker of the
Lok Sabha.
The first Resident Ambassador of India to the Republic of
Armenia arrived in the Armenian capital Yerevan in early October
1999 to take up office. At the same time, the first resident Armenian
Embassy to India was opened in mid-October 1999 with the arrival
of a Charge d’ Affaires ad interim in New Delhi.
The Chief of Army Staff paid a goodwill visit to the Czech
Republic from 15 - 19 May 1999.
Mr Hynek Kmonicek, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs of the
Czech Republic visited India on 20 August 1999 and had discussions
with Secretary (West) on issues of mutual interest.
Secretary, Department of Steel, visited Ukraine from 25 - 29
July 1999. During the visit, he had meetings with Mr Viktor Padalko,
First Deputy Minister of Industrial Policy of Ukraine, Mr. Viktor
Pantelenko, Deputy Minister of Industrial Policy, and Mr. Olexandr
Chalyi, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs. Secretary Steel also visited
some industrial sites in the Donetsk region.

The first session of the Working Group on Electronics and
Information Technology under the aegis of the Indo-Bulgarian Joint
Commission for Economic, Scientific and Technical Cooperation was
held in Sofia from 21 - 23 July 1999. An MOU on the Establishment
of the Working Group and a Protocol were signed during this meeting.
Secretary (West) visited Sofia on 23 - 24 September 1999 for
Foreign Office Consultations with Bulgaria. Secretary (West) called
on Ms Nadezhda Mihailova, Foreign Minister of Bulgaria and Mr
Valentin Vassilev, Minister of Trade and Tourism and Co-Chairperson
of the Indo-Bulgarian Joint Commission. Detailed discussions were
held with Mr Marin Raikov, Deputy Foreign Minister. The Instruments
of Ratification of the Indo-Bulgarian Bilateral Investment Protection
Agreement were exchanged during this visit.
The Chief of Army Staff paid a goodwill visit to Poland from
11- 15 May 1999.
MOS (External Affairs) and Mr Janusz Stanczyk, the Under
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of Poland, met in New York on
28 September 1999 on the margins of the 54th UNGA.
The Institute of Oriental Studies, Warsaw University, in
cooperation with our Embassy in Warsaw and ICCR, organised an
“International Conference of Sanskrit and Related Studies to
commemorate the centenary of the birth of Stanislaw Schayer (18991941)” from 7 - 10 October 1999. (Schayer had started Sanskrit studies
in Warsaw University in 1926.) Scholars from India, Japan, Germany,
Sweden, Italy, Finland and Russia participated in this Conference.
55

Europe

Participation from India was by Dr Satya Vrat Shastri and Shri Kunwar
Narayan. The conference was a big success and altogether 38 papers
were presented in the conference.
Foreign Office Consultations were held with Hungary during
the visit of Secretary (West) to Budapest from 20 - 22 September
1999. Secretary (West) called on Mr Zsolt Nemeth, Political State
Secretary and the then Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs. Detailed
discussions were held with Mr Denis Tomaj, Deputy Foreign Minister
of Hungary.
The Foreign Minister of Hungary, Dr Janos Martonyi,
accompanied by his wife and a 3-member delegation, paid an official
visit to India from 30 October - 1 November 1999. Dr Martonyi
called on the President of India. He held detailed discussions with
EAM on bilateral, regional and international issues. The Hungarian
delegation also visited Agra.
The Chief of Air Staff paid on an official visit to Hungary from
25 - 28 October 1999.
Mr Radu Berceanu, Minister of Industry and Commerce of
Romania, visited India from 13 - 17 November 1999. During this
visit, the 14th Session of the Indo-Romanian Joint Commission (IRJC)
and the 7th Session of the Indo-Romanian Joint Business Council
(IRJBC) was simultaneously held in New Delhi from 15-16 November
1999. Shri Murasoli Maran, Minister of Commerce and Industry, cochaired the meeting of the Joint Commission along with Mr Berceanu.
A Protocol of the Joint Commission Meeting and an MOU on
Cooperation between the EXIM Banks of India and Romania were
signed. Mr Berceanu had separate meetings with Defence Minister,
Minister of Petroleum, Minister of Heavy Industry and MOS for
Steel. Mr Berceanu also visited Agra.
Mr Marian Tomasik visited India on 12 May 1999 as a Special
56

Envoy of the Slovak Foreign Minister. He called on Minister of State
for External Affairs and Secretary (West).
The President of the National Council of the Slovak Republic,
Mr Jozef Migas, is scheduled to visit India from 13-17 March 2000 at
the invitation of the Speaker of the Lok Sabha.
The 4th session of the Indo-Slovak Joint Committee for trade
and economic cooperation is scheduled to be held in New Delhi
from 14 - 15 March 2000.
The Government of India has been closely monitoring the
developments in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY),
specifically in Kosovo since late last year. We issued statements on
the issue on 9 October 1998 and on 24 March, 25 March, 11 May and
22 May 1999. We reiterated that the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the international borders of the FRY were inviolable and must be
fully respected by all States. We urged that the crisis should be resolved
through peaceful means; through consultation and dialogue and not
through either confrontation or any military action unilateral or
otherwise. We called for commitments to the UN Charter by pointing
out that no enforcement action should be undertaken under regional
developments without UNSC authorisation. Such actions seriously
undermined the authority of the entire UN system. We were concerned
at the mounting human and material devastation which had among
other things led to far reaching ecological and environmental damage.
Our statements were made on the basis of well established principles
of Indian foreign policy.
We had welcomed all moves which could have led to a diplomatic
negotiated solution. We were happy that NATO action was terminated
pursuant to adoption of UNSCR 1244 which had the consent of the
Government of the FRY.
Secretary (West) visited Bucharest from 9 - 10 December 1999
for Indo-Romanian Foreign Office Consultations. He held detailed

Annual Report 1999-2000

discussions with the Secretary of State in the Romanian Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, Mr Ion Pascu, on bilateral matters and on regional
and international issues. Secretary (West) called on Romanian Foreign
Minister, Mr Andrei Plesu, Minister of Culture, Mr Ion Caramitru,
Defence Minister, Dr Victor Babiuc and the Chairman of the
Romanian Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Mr Gheorghi
Prisacaru. Instruments of Ratification of the Indo-Romanian
Agreement on Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments
were exchanged during the visit.
Secretary (West) visited Bratislava from 13 - 14 December 1999
for Indo-Slovak Foreign Office Consultations. He held detailed
discussions with the Director General in the Slovak Foreign Office,
Mr Frantisek Dlhopolcek on bilateral matters and on regional and
international issues. Secretary (West) called on Slovak Foreign Minister,
Mr Eduard Kukan, State Secretary in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Dr Jaroslav Chlebo and State Secretary in the Ministry of Economy,
Mr Peter Brno.
Western Europe
Western Europe is a region of considerable importance to India
both politically and economically. The European Union is lndia’s
largest trading partner and the second largest source of approved
foreign investment. India has traditionally maintained close and
friendly relations with the EU as well as with individual countries in
the region.
Europe is witnessing rapid moves towards greater integration:
economic, political, and strategic. The European single currency ‘Euro’
was adopted by 11 of the 15 EU member states on January 1, 1999.
The decision taken at the EU Cologne summit in June 1999 to create
a Common Foreign and Security Policy and to appoint a High
Representative for Foreign & Security Policy, marked tangible progress
towards the goal of political unity. The’ related decision to merge the

WEU into the EU marks a major step towards the evolution of a EU
collective self-defence. The expansion of the EU is bound to enhance
its political influence, although the economic costs will, in the short
term, be considerable.
India and the European Union are both addressing themselves
to the task of moving forward relations with the EU and its member
countries economically, commercially, politically and strategically.
During this period, some concrete measures towards the objective of
an intensified dialogue on global political and economic issues with
the European Union and its member countries have been put into
effect. A steady pace of interaction has been maintained at all levels
with the Governments in West Europe. The frequency of high-level
exchanges between India and the countries of Western Europe is
indicative of a mutual recognition of the advantages of, and need for,
closer interaction and co-operation.
The dialogue which has been conducted with various West ,Asian
countries, has led to a better understanding of lndia’s position on
various issues including on non-proliferation and disarmament. There
has also been a considerable growth in bilateral economic ties with
these countries as well as an all-round diversification in various fields
of co-operation.
The trend of warming and deepening of relations with the EU
and its member countries was amply demonstrated in the reaction of
these countries to the Kargil intrusions. There was a clear recognition
that the situation had been caused by cross-border infiltration and
violation of the Line of Control. India’s restraint throughout the crisis
in not crossing the LOC was also acknowledged and appreciated.
Their support and understanding of lndia’s position and concerns
was clearly reflected in individual country statements as well as those
of the EU.
India’s relations with France have gained momentum over the
year. The high-level political dialogue which was initiated with the
57

Europe

visit of French President Jacques Chirac in January 1998 continued
throughout 1999 as well.
The momentum of the relationship is demonstrated by the
numerous ministerial visits from both sides over the year: EAM visited
France on May 26-27, 1999 for bilateral talks and to attend the OECD
Ministerial Conference held in Paris. He also had meetings with French
President Chirac, Foreign Minister Vedrine, National Assembly
President Laurent Fabius and Senate President Christian Poncelet
during the visit. The visit provided an opportunity to extensively brief
the French side and place matters relating to the Kargil developments
in perspective. Jean Claude Gayssot, French Minister of Capital Works,
Transport and Housing, visited India in February 1999; Mr Claude
Allegre, French Minister for Higher Education, Research and
Technology in November 1999; Louis Besson, French Minister for
Public Works, Housing and Transport in December 1999; and Mr.
Francois-Poncet, Co-Chairman, lndo-French Initiative Forum in
December 1999.
Two rounds of talks were held under the lndo-French Strategic
Dialogue in January and July 1999. The Dialogue was instituted
following a high-level decision taken during the Indian Prime Minister’s
visit to Paris in September 1998 and aimed at facilitating structured
and regular discussions on issues of core importance to both sides.
The lndo-French Initiative Forum, a high-level non-governmental
group of eminent personalities set up advise on ways of diversifying
and enriching the bilateral relationship, held two meetings in February
and September 1999. Foreign Office Consultations were held on June
30, 1999 in Paris. The Indo-French Joint High Committee on Defence,
a committee set up to examine the possibilities for defence cooperation, including defence industrial co-operation, held its second
meeting on July 5-6, 1999. The lndo-French Joint Working Group on
Energy held its first meeting on 15-16 March 1999 in New Delhi.
The lndo-French Water Week and the Higher Education in France
58

Forum were organised in India in November 1999. The France-India

Annual Report 1999-2000

a positive ambience for promoting bilateral exchanges and
cooperation. The visits of EAM and Principal Secretary to Prime
Minister, to the U.K in January and February 1999 respectively were
instrumental in an enhanced understanding of our concerns and
position on various issues.
Visits of senior British Ministers including Ms. Patricia Hewitt,
Secretary of State for Economy (February), Mr. John Prescott, Deputy
Prime Minister and Secretary of State for Environment and Transport

59

Europe

first Indian origin Minister in the British Cabinet and has responsibility
for the UK’s relations with Europe and visa/consular matters.
Interaction between India and Germany at the very highest
levels, as well as the people-to-people level has been substantial.
Germany is India’s largest trade partner in Europe and second largest
worldwide, with a bilateral trade of around DM9 billion and a major
technology and investment source with total approved investment of
over Rs 64 billion. However, economic relations witnessed a downturn
in the year with a slump in bilateral trade.
Germany was very supportive of India during the Kargil crisis. It
was the term President of the EU as the crisis unfolded. The numerous
EU statements issued in connection with Kargil clearly acknowledged
that the confrontation was triggered off by infiltration into the Indian
side of the LOC.
EAM’s visit to Germany on September 30- October 1, 1999
facilitated detailed discussions with the German President Rau and
Vice-Chancellor & Foreign Minister Fischer on issues of bilateral,
regional and multilateral importance. The visits of National Security
Advisor Brajesh Mishra to Germany in February and again in July
1999 were also marked by substantive and productive meetings. Prof.
Dr. Klaus Gretschmann, Director-General, Department of Economic
& Financial Affairs, and Personal Representative of Chancellor
Schroeder visited India on September 19-21, 1999 and had useful
interaction with Indian officials as well as with the Indian business
community. Dr. Theo Sommer, co-chairman of the Indo-German
Consultative Group and publisher of the influential “Die Zeit”, visited
in May and November 1999.
Parliamentary exchanges were dynamic with visits by Bundestag
Foreign Affairs Committee chairman, Mr. Hans Uirich Klose in April
1999 and by Bundesrat President Prof. Dr. Kurt Biedenkopf in
December 1999. State level interaction was appreciable with visits to
60

India of the State Secretary for Economics of Bavaria in February
1999 and of Deputy Minister-President of Baden Wuerttemberg in
August 1999 and visits to Germany of the Chief Minister of Kerala
and Deputy Chief Minister of Rajasthan.
The high-level lndo-German Consultative Group, a Group of
eminent personalities which was set up to monitor ongoing
developments and trends in Indo-German relations, and suggest
policy measures for up-gradation of bilateral relations from a long
term perspective, held its eighth meeting on November 13 & 14,
1999 in Bangalore. The meeting generated useful ideas for the further
strengthening of bilateral relations, especially in the economic,
commercial and technological sectors.
Mr. Sebastian Edathy, Member of the ruling Social Democratic
Party and the German Bundestag visited India on February 4-5, 2000.
Mr. Gunter Eymael, Vice-Minister for Economics, Transportation,
Agriculture & Viniculture from the Germany Federal State of
Rheinland also visited India on January 26- February 3, 2000.
The Indo-German Consultative Group was reconstituted in
December 1999 and Dr. I.P. Singh, retired Indian diplomat, has taken
over as the Indian co-Chairman.
National Security Adviser, Shri Brajesh Mishra would visit
Germany on 4-6 February 2000 to participate in the 36th Munich
Conference on Security Policy.
Relations with Austria entered into a new phase with the
exchange of the first Head of State level visit between India and
Austria. Rashtrapatiji visited Austria from 7-11 November 1999 and
exchanged views with the Austrian President, Thomas Kiestil and
the Federal Chancellor, Viktor Klima. The visit has led to an enhanced
understanding of lndia’s position and concerns on various issues.
Rashtrapatiji’s visit to Austria coincided with the celebration of

Annual Report 1999-2000

50 years of diplomatic relations between India and Austria, which
was marked by a number of cultural events and seminars in both
countries. During the visit, the Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement
and the Bilateral Investment Protection and Promotion Agreement
were also signed. The lndo-Austrian Joint Commission met in Vienna
from 14-15 October 1999 to renew bilateral trade and commerce.
The first round of Foreign Office Consultations is scheduled for the
year 2000.
Italy has emerged as lndia’s fourth largest export market in the
EU. India’s US$ 2 billion annual bilateral trade with Italy constitutes
nearly 3% of lndia’s global trade and Italian investment in India has
reached US$ 700 million. A number of Indo-Italian Joint Ventures
are functioning satisfactorily in India.
The Italian Government offered food aid worth US$1.6 million
for the victims of the cyclone, which struck the state of Orissa in
November 1999. In November ’99. Italy announced a grant of US$ 1
million for the national programme of eradication of poliomyelitis in
India. The project is part of the framework of the Indo-Italian
Technical Cooperation Agreement. On the political front, the
beginning of the new millennium is likely to see an enhancement of
the high-level bilateral dialogue between both countries.
EAM visited Italy from 11-12th January 2000 and held wideranging talks with Italian Foreign Minister Lamberto Dini. Besides
reviewing bilateral relations in the political and, economic field they
discussed international terrorism and other international issues of
mutual concern.
We continue to enjoy excellent political relations with Spain.
The economic content of our relationship has been on the upswing
in recent years. An encouraging element has been the interest shown
by regional trade and commercial bodies in Spain in looking at India
as a commercial destination. The Minister of Industry, Commerce

and Tourism of the Province of Catalunya, (Spain), Mr, Antoni Subira,
visited India from May 13-14 along with a business delegation. The
President of Catalunya, Mr. Jordi Pujoi visited India from 6-8
December 1999 to attend the Indian Economic Summit 1999
organised by the World Economic Forum. In an effort to promote
bilateral trade, Spain has been chosen as the partner country for India
Expo 2001. Although total Spanish investment in India has not
exceeded the modest figure of US$ 28 million, the volume of bilateral
trade with Spain has been steadily increasing and annual bilateral trade
stands at US$900 million. Shri Dilip Lahiri has been appointed as
lndia’s next Ambassador to Spain.
Our cordial relations with the Vatican were strengthened with
the State visit of Pope John Paul II to India from 5-7 November
1999. (This was the Pope’s second visit to India. He had earlier visited
India in 1986. An earlier Papal visit to India took place in 1964). The
main objective of the Pope’s visit to India was to sign and release the
post-synodal exhortation of the Special Assembly of the Synod of
Bishops for Asia held in the Vatican last year. During the visit, the
Pope expressed an appreciation for lndia’s secularism and religious
freedom and for the respect that Indian culture has for all religions.
The Pope’s visit has contributed to enhancing the international
community’s understanding of India as a multi-religious, multi-ethnic
society which is committed to the maintenance of secularism.
The high-point of our relationship with the Netherlands was
the visit of Dutch Prime Minister Wim Kok from November 20-25,
1999. This was the first interaction at HOG/HOS level since 1993
and the first important interaction after our nuclear tests in May 1998.
The visit facilitated detailed discussions on issues of importance to
both sides, including bilateral relations, regional developments and
global issues. Co-operation in the economic and commercial field
prospered with bilateral trade amounting to US $ 1.3 billion. The
economic restrictions imposed by the Netherlands following the
61

Europe

Indian nuclear tests in May 1998, viz, freeze on government -to government macro-credit and project assistance have since been lifted.
The restrictions on military supplies remain in place.

The Visit of Greek Foreign Minister George Papandreou is
tentatively scheduled from 9 -14th March 2000. He is likely to be
accompanied by a delegation of Greek businessman.

Mr. Gerrit Ybema, Dutch Minister for Foreign Trade visited India
on January 9-13, 2000. Detailed discussions were held with the
Commerce Minister and apex industry associations.

Iceland: Mr. Olafur Ragnar Grimsson, President of Iceland is
expected to visit India from 21-26 March, 2000.

The year witnessed steady progress in bilateral relations with
Belgium, which is an important economic and political partner for
India. EAM’s visit to Brussels in September 1999 facilitated useful
and cordial discussions on bilateral relations, regional developments
in Europe and Asia and multilateral issues with the Belgian Deputy
Prime Minister & Foreign Minister Mr. Louis Michel. The discussions
lent a fresh impetus to ‘bilateral relations. The need to diversify our
commercial relations from the present diamond-dominated trade was
emphasised by both sides.
Ambassador De. Ruyt, Director General, Belgian Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, External Trade and Development Cooperation visited
India on February 3-7, 2000. He held extensive discussions at the
official level in the MEA.
Our cordial relations with Luxembourg received a boost with
the visit of Luxembourg Prime Minister Jean-Claude Juncker on
January 13-15,1999. This visit carried forward the progress made
during Rashtrapatiji’s visit to Luxembourg in September 1998.
The 4th Session of the lndo-Greek Joint Economic Commission
was held in Athens on July 8-9, 1999. Negotiations on the Double
Taxation Avoidance Agreement (DTAA) were also conducted with
the concerned Greek authorities. The first meeting of India-Greece
JBC Meeting was held in New Delhi on 22nd November, 1999. During
the lndo-Greek Foreign Office Consultations in New Delhi on
October 25, 1999, discussions were held on a wide range of bilateral
and multilateral issues of mutual interest.
62

Mr. Thorsteinn Palsson, the (non-resident) Ambassador-designate
of Iceland based in London is expected to present credentials to
Rashtrapatiji in February 2000.
The second round of Foreign Office Consultations with
Denmark on May 25-26, 1999 in Copenhagen, marked a resumption
of political dialogue. Official interaction continued with the visit of
Mr. C. N. Pedersen, Head of Asia-Pacific Department of the Royal
Danish Ministry for Foreign Affairs on 8th September. The visit
provided an opportunity for a review of bilateral relation and for the
annual aid negotiations.
The Foreign Affairs Committee of the Danish Parliament is
expected to visit India from 27 February to 2nd March 2000.
The first session of Foreign Office Consultations with Norway
in Oslo on July 5-6, 1999 enabled discussions on bilateral relations,
developments in Europe, and regional international issues. The
consultations represent a movement away from the distortions which
had entered into the relationship subsequent to our nuclear tests. Mr.
Nirupam Sen was appointed as our Ambassador to Norway.
Mr. Knut Vollebaek, Foreign Minister of Norway visited India
on 7-11 January 2000 at our invitation. He was accompanied by senior
officials and a 26-member business delegation. Extensive discussions
on bilateral linkages as well as on measures for augmenting economic
cooperation were held during the visit. The Norwegian Foreign
Minister also participated in the CII Partnership Summit while in
New Delhi.

Annual Report 1999-2000

Foreign Office Consultations with Sweden in Stockholm on May
27-28, 1999 provided an opportunity for official interaction on many
issues of mutual interest global significance. The discussions enabled
a resumption of political dialogue, which had been interrupted after
our nuclear tests of May 1998.

Mr. Pascal Couchepin, the Minister of Economy of Switzerland
would be visiting India from 15 - 21 February 2000. During the visit,
both sides are expected to sign the Draft Protocol for amending the
Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement and exchange the Instrument
of Ratification for the Bilateral Investment Protection Agreement.

Finland maintained a neutral position on Kargil crisis and
stressed bilateral dialogue between India and Pakistan. Seven Finnish
soldiers are stationed in J&K and Rawalpindi as part of the
UNMOGIP. The second session of Foreign Office Consultations
was held in Helsinki on July 8-9, 1999. The discussions which were
held at the outset of Finnish Presidency of the European Union from
1" July 1999 covered bilateral relations and developments in Europe.

Secretary (West) would be leading the Indian delegation to the
Foreign Office Consultations with Switzerland to be held from 1415th February in Berne. The two sides are expected to discuss matters
pertaining to bilateral relations, international terrorism and security,
etc.

India-Ireland trade, has shown a consistent growth during this
period. A bilateral Agreement for Avoidance of Double Taxation was
initiated in Dublin in October 1999. Mr. Philip Mc Donagh assumed
charge as the Irish Ambassador to India in September 1999.
Secretary (West) will lead the Indian delegation to the Foreign
Office Consultations with Ireland to be held from 14-15th February
in Dublin.
The relationship with Portugal has progressed very well, building
on the impetus given by our President’s visit to Portugal in September
1998. Bilateral trade stands in favour of India. Prof. Fernando Pacheco,
Portugal’s Secretary of State for Industry and Energy visited India in
March 1999 to explore new avenues for bilateral trade and commerce.
Parliamentary exchanges have been initiated with the visit to India by
a nine-member parliamentary delegation led by Dr. Almeida Santos,
President of the National Assembly of Portugal from 15-22 December
1998. An lndo/E.U Summit in Lisbon is scheduled for mid 2000.
India and Switzerland shared a stable commercial relationship
during this period. Mr. Waiter Gyger has been nominated as
Switzerland’s next Ambassador for India.

Mr. Walter Gyger assumed charge as Switzerland’s Ambassador
to India on 13th January 2000.
During Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in
Durban from November 12-15, 1999 India reaffirmed its support
for independent, sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Republic
of Cyprus and emphasised that the demand for recognition of a
separate state in the occupied part of Cyprus is unacceptable.
The fourth meeting of the Indo-Cyprus Joint Committee on
Economic, Trade, Scientific, Technical and Industrial Cooperation is
scheduled to be held in New Delhi from 6-7th March 2000.
The EU is lndia’s largest trading partner, with an annual bilateral
of US $ 20 billion in 1998. The balance shifted in lndia’s favour for
the first time in 1997 and gap was $282 million. The EU is also India’s
largest source of direct foreign investment, an important source of
technology and home to a large Indian diaspora.
Bilateral exchanges between India and the EU have been intensive
in the past year. The India-EU talks on Export Controls were held in
March 1999. The second and third Senior Officials’ Meeting were
held on May 4 & December 2, 1999 respectively. The second meeting
of the lndo-EU Policy Planners dialogue took place from 20-21 June
63

Europe

1999, in Bonn. EAM paid a visit to Brussels on September 30, 1999
and had a highly substantive meeting with Mr. Chris Patten, EC
External Relations Commissioner. A direct consequence of this
meeting was the India-EU talks which were held prior to the WTO
Seattle round in November 1999 to discuss positions on key WTO
issues. EAM had a second bilateral meeting with the EC External
Relations Commissioner on December 3, 1999, following which a
firm decision on launching the India-EU Think Tank Network as
well as the India-EU Round Table were taken.
The India-EU Ministerial Troika held its 12 th round of talks in
Helsinki on December 3, 1999. The Indian delegation for the talks
was led by EAM. The reconstituted EU-Troika was represented by
Ms. Tarja Hallonen, Finnish Foreign Minister, Mr. Francisco Xeiha
de Costa, Portuguese Secretary of State for European Affairs, Mr.
Chris Patten, External Relations Commissioner of the European
Commission and Mr. Roland Zinzius, Principal Administrator of the
EU Council General Secretariat. The meeting was highly productive
and facilitated detailed discussions on issues such as South Asian
security and prospects of Europe and Asia in the 21st century. An
India-EU summit along the lines of EU Summit meetings with
countries like the USA, Canada, China and Russia is proposed to be
held at the end of the Portuguese Presidency of the EU in June 1999.
Sir Leon Brittan, the then EC Vice President and Trade
Commissioner, paid a visit to India from April 11-12, 1999 as part of
the ongoing high-level economic dialogue between India and the EU.
The India-EU Joint Commission held its 10th meeting from January
14-15, 1999. Its recommendation that joint working groups be set up
to further India-EU relations in specific sectors such ad textiles,
environment, steel etc. has been acted upon. It is expected that these
working groups would hold the first meeting early in the year 2000.
The three joint sub-commissions on trade, economic co-operation

and development co-operation met in October-November 1999 and
had fruitful discussions on various aspects of India-EU economic
relations.
It is expected that certain initiatives taken such as the decision to
launch an India-EU Think Tank Network, an India-EU Round Table
and an India-EU Summit will further cement India/EU relations.
Chief Emeka Anyaoku, the Commonwealth Secretary General,
visited India in March and October 1999 for consultations in the
run-up to the biennial summit meeting of the Commonwealth Heads
of Government (CHOGM) held from 12-15 November 1999, in
Durban, South Africa.
Prime Minister led the Indian delegation to the Durban CHOGM,
which considered several issues of global significance under the broad
framework of the special theme ‘People Centred Development: The
Challenge of Globalisation”.
Finance Minister led the official delegation to the Commonwealth
Business Forum, which preceded the CHOGM.
The Final Communique which was issued at the culmination of
the Durban CHOGM reflected the parameters set by our PM during
the discussions on the recent political developments in Pakistan. The
Durban Communique condemned the unconstitutional overthrow
of the Government in Pakistan. It also endorsed Commonwealth
Ministerial Action Group’s recommendations for suspension of
Pakistan from the Councils of the Commonwealth.
India’s views and positions on the next round of WTO
negotiations were also reflected in the Fancourt Declaration, which
called for a full implementation of Uruguay Round commitments
and for improved market access for the exports of all countries,
particularly developing countries.
uu

64

Annual Report 1999-2000

8

The Americas

USA

T

here was increased dialogue and engagement with the United
States of America on a broad range of bilateral regional and
international issues besides the continuation of the ongoing
dialogue on security and nonproliferation issues. Regional
developments, particularly Pakistan’s armed intrusion in Kargil, the
military takeover in Pakistan, the evolving situation in Afghanistan
and the problem of terrorism, constituted important elements of
constructive dialogue with the US. The US also took steps to increase
cooperation in the energy sector. There was also a useful exchange of
views on WTO related issues in the context of the WTO Ministerial
Meeting in Seattle from 28 November to 3 December 1999. On the
other hand, the US continues to maintain many of the unilateral
restrictions it imposed under its domestic law in the wake of the
nuclear tests in May 1998. India also received broad support from
the US Congress on several issues of concern to India.
Following the nuclear tests, India had decided to engage in a
more intensive dialogue with the United States. Shri Jaswant Singh,
External Affairs Minister and Mr. Strobe Talbott, Deputy Secretary
of State were designated as Representatives to conduct this dialogue.
The talks are being conducted on the basis of the comprehensive

proposals that India has put forward on disarmament and
nonproliferation matters, our unilateral moratorium on explosive
nuclear tests, willingness to discuss converting this moratorium into
a de jure obligation, our offer to enter into constructive negotiations
on FMCT and reaffirming our policies of stringent control on export
of sensitive technologies. The dialogue is focussed on four issues.
These issued are: The CTBT, the FMCT, Export Controls and
Defence posture. On Export Control issues, following the Export
Control level meeting in New Delhi from 9 - 10 November 1998,
another expert level meeting was held in New Delhi from 29 - 30
March 1999.
There was an extensive exchange of views between July 1998
and January 1999. Following the dissolution of the Lok Sabha, it was
decided that the Government that assumes office after the General
Elections in September-October 1999 would take a decision on further
dialogue with the US on these issues. The dialogue was resumed in a
meeting between Shri Jaswant Singh and Mr. Strobe Talbott on
November 16-17, 1999 in London.
The dialogue has led to some progress in creating a better
understanding of India’s security concerns by the US authorities. The
two sides have agreed that the dialogue is useful for increasing mutual
65

The Americas

understanding and for the purpose of building broad-based relations
between India and the US and should continue.
Following Pakistan’s armed intrusion in Kargil and during the
Operation Vijay launched to evict the intruders, India kept the US
along with our other key interlocutors, informed on the developments
and the nature of the intrusion. The US took a forthright position
regarding Pakistan’s armed intrusion in Kargil and called for
withdrawal of the intruders. The US also expressed appreciation of
the restrained and responsible manner in which India conducted
Operation Vijay. India’s position drew support from the US Congress
and the US media.
India and the US also had the opportunity to exchange views on
issues of mutual concern during the meetings that Shri Jaswant Singh,
External Affairs Minister, had with Ms. Madeleine Albright, US
Secretary of State, at the margins of the ARF Meeting in Singapore
on 24th July 1999 and later on 24th September 1999 in New York
during the opening session of the United Nations General Assembly.
During these meetings, the US reiterated its desire for better relations
with India.
India and the US have also been engaged in consultations on the
problem of terrorism. As part of the dialogue on matters relating to
terrorism, official level talks were held in Washington from September
2-3, 1999 which was followed by another round of official level talks
in New Delhi on 17th September 1999. The two Government have
agreed to intensify cooperation in this area. The Indo-US Extradition
Treaty, signed on 25th June 1997 in Washington, came into force
after the exchange of the Instruments of Ratification on 21st July
1999 in New Delhi. The Treaty represents an important step in the
law enforcement cooperation between India and USA in the area of
counter-terrorism.
66

As part of the process of regular consultations on bilateral,
regional and international issues. Shri Brajesh Mishra, National
Security Advisor, visited the US from 26-28 October 1999. The US
Deputy Trade Representative, Susan Esserman visited India from
1st to 3rd November 1999 for discussion on WTO related issues, in
the context of the WTO Ministerial Meeting in Seattle. From 28th
November to 3rd December 1999. The US Secretary of Energy, Mr.
Bill Richardson visited New Delhi on 26th October 1999. During his
visit, the US Secretary of Energy discussed cooperation in the fields
of energy and environment. The External Affairs Minister. Shri
Jaswant Singh and the US Energy Secretary also signed a Joint
Statement on Cooperation in Energy and Related Environmental
Aspects. General VP Malik, Chief of the Army Staff, visited the US
from 8th to 17th November 1999 to participate in the Conference of
the Defence Chiefs of Asia-Pacific Countries in Honolulu hosted by
the US Commander-in-Chief of the Pacific Command.
Following the nuclear tests in May 1998, the US had imposed
certain restrictive measures against India. Effective from 1st December
1998, the US had partially lifted some of these restrictions till 21st
October 1999. In partial exercise of the fresh waiver authority given
by the Defence Authorisation Act 2000, passed by the US Congress
in October 1999, the US Government once again removed some of
the economic restrictions with effect from 27th October 1999.
However, non-basic humanitarian financing from multilateral financial
institutions is still subject to US restrictions. India regards these
unilateral restrictive measures as unjustified and counter-productive,
which should lifted in entirety. Several members of the US Congress,
including the Chairperson of the House International Relations
Committee. Mr. Benjamin Gilman, has written to the US President
to remove restrictions on the US support for loans to India by the
World Bank and other international financial institutions.

Annual Report 1999-2000

There was a considerable increase in bilateral dialogue between
India and the US during the period January to March 2000. The
dialogue on Nonproliferation, Security and Disarmament, which was
resumed in London in November 1999, was further continued from
January 18-19, 2000 in London. Apart from security issues, the two
sides also had extensive discussions on counter-terrorism, the hijacking
of IC-814, regional developments and President Clinton’s visit to India.
At London, the two sides announced the creation of the IndoUS Joint Working Group on Counter-terrorism to institutionalise
their cooperation in combating all forms of terrorism. The Joint
Working Group on Counter-terrorism held its first meeting from
February 7-8, 2000 in Washington D.C. The two countries agreed to
share their expertise, experience, resources and information in
countering terrorism and also agreed to work together to bring the
perpetrators of the hijacking of IC-814 to justice.
The Commander in Chief of the US Pacific Command, Admiral
Dennis Blair, visited India from January 8-12, 2000. This follows the
visit of COAS General Malik to Washington and Honolulu in
November 1999 and together represents the first steps in revitalising
Indo-US Defence contacts.
The US Treasury Secretary, Lawrence Summers, visited India from
January 17-19, 2000. Issues relating to trade and investment between
the two countries, the unilateral US restrictions imposed after the
nuclear tests and the resumption of the dialogue process in WTO,
following the collapse of the Ministerial Conference in Seattle, were
discussed with Treasury Secretary.
Several US Congressmen visited India in January 2000. These
included influential Congressmen such as Senator Tom Daschle,
Senate Minority Leader; Representative Sam Gejdenson, Ranking
Democrat in the House International Relations Committee; and,

Senator Sam Brownback, Chairman of the Senate Sub Committee
on Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs.
Visit of President Bill Clinton

President Bill Clinton is scheduled to visit India for five days
from 20th March 2000. Both sides expect that the visit of the US
President will pave the way for qualitatively new and closer relations
between the two democracies.
Canada
In the wake of India’s nuclear tests in May 1998, Canada had
decided to put political contacts with India “on hold”. However during
the current year. Canada has taken steps to re-establish political
contacts with India. A Canadian delegation led by Secretary of State
(Asia Pacific), Raymond Chan, visited India from 13-15 May, 1999.
During the ARF meeting held in Singapore in July 1999, EAM
had talks with the Canadian Foreign Minister Lloyd Axworthy. The
two Foreign Ministers also had the occasion to meet during the
Durban CHOGM in November. These meetings were utilised by
EAM to put India’s views on the question of CTBT and Nuclear
Doctrine in the right perspective.
Trade between the two countries has been on the rise. Indian
exports during the period January-August 1999 stood at Rs. 1,858
crores registering an increase of 10%. Indian imports from Canada
during the same period stood at Rs. 695 crores, up by 21%. A large
number of Indian delegations visited Canada during the year. Some
business delegations from Canada also visited India. Among the
important Indian visits, was that by a 7-member CII delegation in
August 1999. The delegation met the Chamber of Commerce besides
meeting with various Canadian business houses. These visits are
expected to result in further growth in economic and commercial
cooperation between the two countries.
67

The Americas

Latin America and the Caribbean
India’s relations with the countries of Latin America and the
Caribbean region have been traditionally problem-free and cordial.
The thrust of our policy towards the region is to strengthen and
widen the existing relationship and to give more economic content
to it. Our interactions and cooperation, both at the bilateral and
multilateral levels, have been mutually beneficial. India maintains, at
present, 13 resident diplomatic missions and one post in the region.
Eleven countries from the area have their resident missions in New
Delhi.
An important component of our bilateral relations has been the
mechanism of Foreign Office level bilateral consultations. Over the
years we have signed MOUs on the subject with ten countries from
the region and a few more are under consideration. The regular review
of bilateral relations has facilitated a better understanding of the
potentials and concerns of the dialogue partners and has led to
improved coordination on multilateral issues of mutual interest. Other
official and technical level visits have complemented the Foreign
Office level consultations. In the economic and trade arenas there
has been a growing interaction at the private sector level giving depth
to our relationships.
As a follow up of the “FOCUS LAC Programme” of the
Government of India, participation by Indian Export Promotion
Councils and business houses in international exhibitions in the Latin
American and Caribbean region as well as visits by trade delegations
to the region have helped dissemination of valuable information on
Indian commodities and technological advancement. Concerted
efforts have been made to overcome the barriers of distance and
language. In this context another important element has been the
liberalisation of many economies in the region opening up avenues
68

for enhanced cooperation. We have signed trade and economic
agreements with seven countries of the region and set up business
councils with some others. As a result of the growing understanding
between the private sectors of LAC and India, a number of accords
have also been signed between the apex trade and industrial bodies.
However, because of the economic difficulties that the region as a
whole continued to experience during the year, the actual increase in
overall trade with India was marginal and currently stands at US$
1.32 billion only.
Culturally India enjoys considerable goodwill in the LAC region.
Indian philosophy, yoga and Mahatma Gandhi and his teachings have
been a source of inspiration for many in the region. Between them
the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean have named more
than five hundred institutions, schools, libraries, streets and squares
after India and its leaders. As a mark of respect to our Father of
Nation, his busts and statues have been installed at important places
in a number of countries in the region. The latest being the one
unveiled at the campus of the University of Londrina in Brazil on
November 19 1999. The bust was gifted by the ICCR to the Centre
for Afro-Asian Studies of the University. At the institutional level we
have cultural agreements and cultural exchange programmes with
fourteen countries in the LAC area. Indian artists and academicians
have visited the region with the help of ICCR. Another interesting
aspect of our cultural relations with the Caribbean region in particular
is that some of the countries there have a substantial population of
Indian origin that still has a high regard for its cultural heritage.
Technical assistance under the ITEC Programme for students,
academicians and technical personnel for training and study tours in
India is another important mechanism by which we forge mutually
beneficial relations with the LAC countries.

Annual Report 1999-2000

The region has witnessed steady progress towards
democratisation and economic liberalisation. Presidential elections
were held during the reporting period in Antigua and Barbuda, El
Salvador, Panama, Argentina and Uruguay. In Guyana, a new President
took office due to the ill health of Mrs. Jannet Jagan and in Paraguay,
a new President assumed office after Mr. Raul Cubas resigned. The
countries in the region are steadfastly promoting regional groupings.
There has also been a tendency towards developing a Pan American
approach to national and international issues. The opposition of the
countries of the region to the US-sponsored economic and trade
embargo against Cuba is indicative of this approach. Keeping the
above in mind we have established institutional relations with regional
organisations. India has observer status with the Organisation of
American States (OAS), the Association of Caribbean States (ACS)
and the Andean Community. Our High Commissioner in Georgetown
(Guyana) is concurrently accredited as India’s Ambassador to
CARICOM. We have been participating regularly in the meetings of
these organisations. Mechanism for dialogue with the Rio Group has
also been established and we are seeking to set up an institutional
relationship with MERCOSUR as well.
The Former Minister of State for External Affairs, Smt.
Vasundhara Raje, led the Indian delegation to the Fourth Session of
the Indo-Cuban Joint Commission held in Havana from April 5-7
1999. During her stay in Havana, the Minister called on President
Fidel Castro and had meetings with other high dignitaries. The Joint
Commission provided an opportunity to review India’s overall
relations with Cuba and to explore avenues for further cooperation.
The meeting of the Trade Revival Committee between India and Cuba
was also held along with the Joint Commission. As agreed in the last
Joint Commission, the Work Plan of Cooperation for the period 19992000 in the field of Agricultural Research and Education was signed
in Havana on 13 August 1999. Secretary, Department of Science &

Technology, visited Cuba on 28-29 September 1999. Under the S&T
agreement, the Protocol for Cooperation in Science & Technology
between India and Cuba for 1999-2000 was signed during the visit.
Mr. Jose Armando Guerra Menchero, Cuban Vice-Minister of
Foreign Affairs, accompanied by Mr. Miguel Angel Ramirez Ramos,
Acting Director of the Asian Affairs Division of the Ministry, visited
New Delhi from 24-27 November 1999 for Foreign Office level
consultations. During the visit the Cuban Vice-Minister handed over
a letter of invitation to our EAM from his Foreign Minister for visiting
Cuba. The Vice-Minister also requested for Indian assistance in next
year’s South Summit to be held in Havana.
The Former Minister of State for External Affairs, Smt.
Vasundhara Raje, visited Paramaribo, Suriname, as the leader of the
Indian delegation to the Second Session of Indo- Surinamese Joint
Commission from 9-10 April 1999. During the visit, she called on
President Jules Wijdenbosch and held discussions with other
dignitaries. The Joint Commission identified a number of areas of
bilateral cooperation.
Shri Ranjit Singh Kalha, Secretary (West), accompanied by Shri
Amitava Tripati, Joint Secretary (LAC), visited Colombia, Ecuador,
Argentina and Brazil from 5-19 June 1999 for bilateral consultations
and for briefing these countries on the Kargil situation. During the
visit, Secretary (West) handed over to President Andres Pastrana of
Colombia a formal invitation from our President to visit India. The
Colombian Government also awarded a concession to upgrade the
country’s Atlantic railway system to an international consortium of
which the Indian public sector undertaking RITES is a member.
The Minister of External Affairs held meetings with the Foreign
Ministers of Brazil, Jamaica, Cuba and Guyana in New York during
the UNGA in September in tune with our policy of high level
69

The Americas

interaction with the region. A meeting between former MOS(EA)
and the Foreign Minister of Trinidad and Tobago also took place
during the UNGA. These meetings provided an opportunity to review
our overall relationship as well as to identify new areas of cooperation.
During the discussion the Jamaican Foreign Minister supported India’s
right to a permanent seat on the UN Security Council .
The first meeting of the Joint Working Group set up between
India and Venezuela as a mechanism for bilateral cooperation in the
energy sector was held in Caracas from 12-15 July 1999, in which it
was agreed that the national oil companies of the two countries will
collaborate in R&D, training of personnel and collaboration in
engineering services etc..
The second Indo-Brazil Workshop of climatic research under
the Bilateral Science and Technology Agreement was held in Brazil
from 20-24 September 1999. Both sides had useful interactions and
identified areas including climate variability and its impact on
agriculture and vegetation, use of parallel processing in meteorology,
El Nino phenomenon and its implication on climatic pattern in
different parts of the globe and pollution control for joint
collaboration.
Dr. A.P. Kulshreshtha, Advisor, Deptt. of Science and
Technology, visited Mexican counterpart to discuss the development
of cooperation between the two countries in the field of science and
technology. He also visited the National Council for Science and
Technology of Mexico during which it was agreed that two joint work
shops would be organised, one in Mexico and another in India, on
Manufacturing Technology with the participation of senior scientists
working in different fields.
A Memorandum of Undertaking on establishment of diplomatic
relations between India and the Dominican Republic was signed in
70

Santo Domingo on 4 May 1999. For India, High Commissioner to
Jamaica with concurrent accreditation to the Dominican Republic,
Shri O.P Gupta, and for the Dominican Republic, Foreign Minister
Mr. Eduardo Latorre signed the MOU.
A Bilateral Investment Protection Agreement (BIPA) was signed
on 20th August 1999 during the visit of Dr. Julio Caceres, Secretary
of Cooperation in the Ministry of Economy of Argentina to India.
Argentina is the first ever Latin American country with whom we
have signed the BIPA. Dr. Caceres has also participated tin the G- 15
ministerial meeting in Bangalore on 16-18 August.
The Chairperson and Managing Director of India Trade
Promotion Organisation, Shri Yogesh Chandra, visited Santiago, Chile
from 25-30 July 1999 in connection with the proposed India
Exhibition to be held in Santiago July 2000. During his visit Shri
Chandra held discussions with Finance Secretary, officials from the
Foreign Office, trade representatives and members of the IndoChilean Chambers of Commerce.
A programme to commemorate Gandhi Jayanti was organised in
Sao Paulo during the week 2-9 October 1999 in which a number of
workshops, lectures, yoga demonstrations etc. were presented. An
Autobiography of Mahatma Gandhi in Portuguese was also published
during the event.
Dr. Felipe Humberto Pachano Rivera, Rector, University of
Merida, Venezuela visited India from 18-22 October 1999 under the
Distinguished Visitors Programme of the ICCR. Separate MoUs
between the University Merida and the University of Delhi and
Jawaharlal Nehru University were signed during the visit.
This year, too, the Central American region was affected by natural
calamities in the form of hurricanes and heavy rains. India has offered
medical relief worth Rs. 5 lakhs to El Salvador.

Annual Report 1999-2000

Shri Parimal Kumar Das took over as India’s High Commission
for Trinidad and Tobago on 16 July 1999.
Shri H.K.Singh took over as India’s Ambassador to Colombia
on 28 September 1999.
Shri Tara Singh presented his credentials to the President of
Panama on 11 October 1999 as India’s Ambassador to that country.
The new Ambassador of Colombia Her Excellency Marica C
Betancur presented her credentials on 7 May 1999.
Her Excellency Mrs. Vera B Machado presented her credentials
to the President as the new Ambassador of Mexico to India on 27
August 1999.
The new Venezuela Ambassador His Excellency Mr. Walter
Marquez presented his credentials as Ambassador of Venezuela on
23 September 1999.
Dr. Hugo Fernandez Faingold, Vice President of Uruguay visited
India from December 5-9, 1999, at the invitation of our Vice President.
He was accompanied by an eleven-member official delegation and
five businessmen. This was the first high level visit of an Uruguayan
dignitary to India. During the visit the Uruguyan Vice President had
talks with our Vice President, Prime Minister, EAM and other
dignitaries and attended the Rajya Sabha session as well. Two MOUs
- one on Foreign Office Level Consultations and another on
Cooperation between the diplomatic academies of the two countries
and an agreement on doing away with visa requirement for diplomatic

and official passport holders of the two countries were signed. Mr.
Faingold also addressed a seminar on “Uruguay and MERCOSUR;
Business and Investment Opportunities” organised by CII. The
Council of Industries of Uruguay and the National Commercial
Council of Uruguay signed MOUs for cooperation with CII, FICCI
and ASSOCHAM. A street in Chanakya Puri was renamed after
Uruguayan national hero, General Jose G. Artigas. During his talks
with the Indian dignitaries the Uruguayan Vice President offered his
country’s assistance to India in establishing an institutional relationship
with MERCOSUR.
Venezuela was hit by heavy rains followed by mud and landslides
resulting in approximately 30,000 deaths and left over 2,00,000 people
homeless. The Government of India sent medical relief worth US$
20,000. Separately, more than ten tonnes of relief material meant for
the victims of Orissa Cyclone received as donations from the
Venezuelan entities and individuals was diverted for the victims of
the natural disaster in Venezuela.
Forecast of important events

Visit to India by the Cuban Special Envoy H. E. Alberto Valzco
San Jose from 19 to 22 January, 2000.
Visit to India by the Mexican Foreign Minister H. E. Ms. Rosario
Green from 15 to 19 February, 2000.
The Fourth Session of the Indo-Mexician Joint Commission from
14-15 February, 2000 in New Delhi.
uu

71

9
United Nations and International Organisations

Introduction

T

he year 1999 was an eventful one for the United Nations. The
Security Council had before it important matters concerning
resolution of conflicts in different parts of the world like
Kosovo, East Timor, Sierra Leone, Congo and Lebanon. Debate on
important issues relating to Security Council restructuring and
terrorism continued during the year in concerned Committees and
Working Groups. India remained actively involved in all these matters
and breakthroughs were achieved in the area of terrorism where India’s
proposal for a comprehensive convention on international terrorism
has received approval for initiation of discussions in September 2000.
Public support for India’s candidature to the Security Council was
forthcoming from Russia, Vietnam and Laos.
The General Assembly was held against the backdrop of an
ongoing debate on the concept of humanitarian intervention. Kosovo
and East Timor had sensitised the world on this matter and India
continued to be an active participant in the global debate on the
subject.
Political Issues in the UN

Security Council Expansion & India’s Candidature

The Open Ended Working Group of the UN General Assembly

72

on the Restructuring of the Security Council wound up its deliberations
for the year on 30.7.99 without making any substantial progress. No
decisions were arrived at on any of the key issues including categories
to be expanded, size of the expanded Council, the question of veto
and review mechanism. The report of the OEWG recommends that
the Group would continue its work and submit its report including
any agreed recommendation at the end of the next (54th) session of
the UNGA in September 2000.
Several countries addressed the subject of UN expansion and
restructuring in their plenary speeches at the 54th UNGA. Among
these, Vietnam and Laos expressed support for India’s candidature
to an expanded Security Council. Russia also expressed support for
India’s candidature earlier during the debate in OEWG.
The question of UN Security Council restructuring was also
debated under Agenda Item 38 during the closing days of the session.
The debate only revealed the wide differences in opinion and stands
that still exist. Support for India’s candidature was expressed by Cyprus
& Mauritius.
New NonPermanent Members of Security Council Selected

General Assembly on 14th October, 1999 selected five new
members who would begin their two-year term as non-permanent
members of the Security Council starting 1st January, 2000. These
members are :

Annual Report 1999-2000

a)
b)
c)
d)

Asian Group - Bangladesh replaces Bahrain
Latin American Group - Jamaica replaces Brazil.
East European Group - Ukraine replaces Slovania
African Group- Mali and Tunisia replace Gambia and Gabon
There will be no change in the OEWG Group in the year 2000.

The 54th UN General Assembly

The 54th session of the UN General Assembly officially
commenced on 14th September, 1999 with the election of Mr. TheoBen Gurirab, Foreign Minister of Namibia as the President of the
Session.
The 54th UNGA had a 172-item agenda dealing with political,
economic, social and development issues. An important aspect of
the 54th UNGA has been the focus and widespread interest on the
question of humanitarian intervention that was sparked of by the
Secretary General who led off the general debate by inviting the GA
to consider laying down terms and conditions under which
humanitarian intervention would be carried out. Opinion on the
subject was divided and it was rejected by NAM during the Ministerial
meeting on the margins of the GA.
The Indian delegation to the 54th Session of the UN General
Assembly was headed by the External Affairs Minister Shri Jaswant
Singh who addressed the Plenary Session on September 22, 1999. As
this was the last UNGA session of the 20th century, his address
surveyed the major developments of the century. The dominant
themes of the address were the global menace posed by terrorism,
including narco-terrorism, recent developments in Indo-Pak relations
and global nuclear disarmament. India’s interest in a permanent
membership of an expanded Security Council was reiterated with
EAM mentioning that by any objective criteria India’s credentials for
permanent membership are persuasive.
Other important developments from India’s point of view are

the expression of support for India’s candidature by Russia, Laos,
Vietnam, Cyprus and Mauritius in spite of the fact that debate on the
question of the UN restructuring was conclusive only in once more
reflecting the wide differences in opinions and stands that prevail.
India’s initiative in the Sixth Committee also resulted in adoption
of the Convention for Suppression of Terrorist Financing as well as
the resolution on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism
which has the provision for discussing India’s draft of a
Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism from
September 2000.
NAM

NAM Foreign Ministers’ Meeting was held on the margins of
the 54th UNGA on September 24, 1999 to coordinate NAM’s
approach to issues deliberated during the GA session.
The meeting adopted a statement, which covered political and
economic development since the XIIth NAM Summit at Durban. It
reiterated NAM position on Security Council restructuring, selfdetermination and terrorism. It also expressed deep concern at the
updating of strategic defence doctrines that set out new rationales
for the use of nuclear weapons. It expressed deep concern over the
new “Alliance Strategic Concept” adopted by NATO in April, 1999
and the negative implications of the development and deployment of
anti-ballistic missile system. The statement reiterated the decision of
the Durban Summit mandating the Coordinating Bureau to study
further the question of mechanism for peaceful settlement of disputes
between member states and rejected the so called concept of
‘humanitarian intervention’.
EAM in his address to the Meeting emphasised the need for
maintaining and reinforcing unity of the movement.

Terrorism

The phenomena of international terrorism was an important area
73

United Nations and International Organisations

of attention of the UN during the year. The Ad Hoc Working Group
of the Sixth Committee had before it drafts of the French sponsored
Convention on Suppression of Terrorist Financing which was adopted
and the Russian sponsored Convention against Nuclear Terrorism
which is still in debate.
The Sixth Committee of the UN General Assembly also adopted
the resolution on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism in
November 1999 during the General Assembly session. This resolution
contains provision for initiating work on the Indian sponsored draft
convention on international terrorism in September 2000. The
resolution also refers to the Egyptian proposal for convening a global
conference to discuss the issue of terrorism.
Important aspects of the Indian sponsored convention are that
they lay emphasis on responsibility of states and also covers terrorist
acts in all its aspects. All previous international conventions on
terrorism concentrated only on specific acts of terrorism e.g.. terrorist
bombing, hijacking, etc.
The Convention on Suppression of Terrorist Finance and the
resolution on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism were
subsequently adopted by the main GA on 9th December, 1999.
UN Security Council on October 19, 1999 adopted resolution
No. 1269 condemning all acts of terrorism and calling upon all States
to combat terrorism in all its forms. An important element of the
resolution is that it calls upon all states to prevent and suppress
preparation and financing of any acts of terrorism in their territories
and deny safe havens to terrorists. The resolution was adopted at the
initiative of Russia.
Peacekeeping

UNIFIL, Lebanon: The UN Security Council on 30.7.99 voted
to extend the mandate of the UN Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
for a further period of six months until end January 2000. In its

74

unanimous resolution the Council reiterated its strong support for
the territorial integrity, sovereignty and political independence of
Lebanon within its internationally recognised borders. It also stresses
the need for urgent implementation of its resolution 425 of 1978
which initially set up the UNIFIL to confirm the withdrawal of Israeli
forces from Southern Lebanon, restore international peace and
security and assist Lebanon to re-establish its authority in the area.
India had contributed the IInd Battalion of the 4th Gorkha
Regiment to UNIFIL. The battalion completed its one year term of
duty in November 1999 and has been replaced by a battalion from
the Madras Regiment.
Democratic Republic of Congo: On 10.7.99 in Lusaka, the
Heads of State of the Democratic Republic of Congo, Namibia,
Rwanda, Uganda and Zimbabwe and the Minister of Defence of
Angola signed an agreement for the cessation of hostilities between
all the belligerent forces in the Democratic Republic of Congo. The
representatives of the rebel forces The Rally for a Democratic Congo
and the Movement for the Liberation of the Congo declined to sign.
The agreement contains modalities for implementation of a ceasefire and establishment of a joint military commission comprising two
representatives from each party under a neutral Chairperson to be
appointed by the OAU in consultation with the parties.
It also contains provisions for the constitution, facilitation and
deployment of an “appropriate force” by the UN in collaboration
with OAU.
In anticipation of requirement of peacekeeping troops, the UN
Department of Peacekeeping operations has initiated contingency
planning and approached various countries, including India, to provide
troops.
India has already contributed 20 Army officers as Military liaison
officers for the UN Mission in Congo.

Annual Report 1999-2000

UNOMSIL, Sierra Leone: A peace agreement was signed
between the Government of Sierra Leone and the Revolutionary
United Front of Sierra Leone in Lome on 7.7.99.
UN Security Council on October 22, 1999 passed resolution No.
1270 establishing the UN Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). The
resolution authorises deployment of a 6000-strong UN peacekeeping
force in Sierra Leone.
The first group of these peacekeepers arrived in Sierra Leone on
29th November,1999. Among other tasks, the UN Mission in Sierra
Leone will assist the Government in the implementation of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration plan, and monitor
adherence to the cease-fire assistance. The peacekeeping troops will
work together with some 220 UN military observers already on the
ground in Sierra Leone.

parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the months of July and October
1999 for an initial period of one year.
Kosovo: International efforts towards resolving the crisis in
Kosovo culminated in an agreement being hammered out and
legitimised vide the UN resolution No. 1244 of June 10, 1999 whereby
Yugoslav forces would withdraw from Kosovo to make way for the
entry of an international force with NATO at its core as well as a
parallel civilian interim administration under the UN flag. The UN
resolution on Kosovo clearly indicates that the political solution for
Kosovo will be based on principles enunciated by the G-8.
The UN presence in Kosovo with the acronym UNMIK (United
Nations Interim Administrative Mission in Kosovo) has four main
components, each with a partner agency.
u Interim civil administration: the United Nations;

India has confirmed contribution of 2 Infantry battalions (of
which one has already been deployed), a level-3 medical unit, a quick
reaction company and a medium helicopter transport unit along with
an aviation refuelling unit for UNAMSIL. With complete deployment
of the above military configuration, India will be the single largest
contributor of troops in UNAMSIL. Other major troop contributors
are Nigeria, Kenya and Ghana. Maj. Gen. Vijay Kumar Jetley of India
has been appointed as the Force Commander of UNAMSIL. Prior
to the creation of UNAMSIL, the UN had only an observer mission
in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL).

u

Humanitarian affairs: the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNCHRR);

u

Institution-building: the Organisation for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE); and

u

Reconstruction: the European Union.

In a related development, Mr. Oluyemi Adeniji, a senior diplomat
from Nigeria, has been appointed as UNSG’s Special Representative
and Head of UNAMSIL, on 19th November, 1999.

East Timor

Bosnia: UN Security Council vide its resolution No. 1247 dated
18.6.99 has extended the mandate of UNMIBH upto 21.2.2000. India
has contributed 134 civilian police officers for the UN Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. These officers were deployed in various

India has contributed 88 civilian police officers to UNMIK. The
officers were deployed in Kosovo in early December 1999. In addition,
two companies of CRPF Rapid Action Force have also been
committed for UNMIK by the Indian government.
A major breakthrough on the question of East Timor was reached
when the Foreign Ministers of Indonesia and Portugal, in the presence
of the UN Secretary General signed two agreements on 5.5.99
concerning details for holding of a ballot to decide the question of
autonomy for East Timor.
After some initial delay, consultative balloting was finally held in
75

United Nations and International Organisations

East Timor on 30th August, 1999. The exercise saw 438,968 persons
or 98% of the registered voters cast their ballot. Results of the ballot
announced by the UN Secretary General on 3rd September, 1999
indicated that a total of 344, 580 or 78.5% of the voters had voted
against the proposed special autonomy status, thereby indirectly opting
for ultimate independence. The balloting was followed by an escalation
of violence and fighting between the pro-independence and prointegration factions in the Island.
In response to widespread international reaction to the killings
and the humanitarian crimes which followed, the UN Security Council
adopted Resolution No. 1264 on 15th September, 1999 and gave
approval for the deployment of a multinational peacekeeping force
in East Timor. The multinational task force, going by the acronym
INTERFET (International Force in East Timor) consists mainly of
the Australian troops with contributions in various forms also from
Thailand, the UK, France, Canada, the US, Singapore, New Zealand
and some others.
This was followed by the Security Council resolution No. 1272
(1999) of 25th October, 1999 which established the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) as a Chapter
VII exercise. The resolution empowers UNTAET with the overall
responsibility for the administration of East Timor and also gives it
legislative and judicial powers. The resolution gives mandate for
UNTAET for an initial period until 31st January, 2001.
A Donor’s Meet for East Timor was held in Tokyo from 16-17,
December,1999 under the co-chairmanship of World Bank and
UNTAET. The donors pledged a total of US$ 522 million in a three
year programme to accelerate the nation building process
Afghanistan

International efforts under the aegis of the UN to find a peaceful
solution to the Afghan problem continued through out the year
without any success. The group of 6+2 held their last meeting in

76

Tashkent on 19-20 July, 1999, where they reiterated that negotiations
for a peace settlement in Afghanistan must be conducted under the
UN auspices in a two-stage manner, the first stage consisting of
confidence building measures including immediate and unconditional
ceasefire as well as direct negotiations and followed by the second
stage where the Afghans would themselves draw up basic principles
for a future Afghan State. Almost immediately after 6+2 meeting in
Tashkant, the Taliban launched an offensive on July 28,1999 against
other factions.
On 27th August, 1999 the UN held an open debate on
Afghanistan in which India also participated. The debate generally
saw countries taking tough positions against the Taliban.
Indian statement during the debate noted that the criminal
conduct of Taliban had negative implication for peace and security in
Afghanistan and the region. India also drew attention to international
terrorist groups who find a safe haven in Afghanistan and the
dangerous nexus between the Taliban, terrorism and the drug mafias
operating in the region. India called upon the Security Council and
the international community to take meaningful and effective measures
in this regard.
The Security Council on 15.10.99 passed resolution No. 1267 on
the situation Afghanistan. The resolution calls upon all States to deny
permission to any Taliban owned or leased aircraft to take off from
or land in their territory and also freeze funds and other financial
resources of the Taliban. This is the first time that elements of
sanctions are included in a Security Council resolution on Afghanistan.
India played an active role in the formulation of the resolution.
The sanctions on the Taliban came into effect on 14th November,
1999.
Iraq

The UN Security Council remained engaged on the question of

Annual Report 1999-2000

sanctions against Iraq for a considerable part of the year. At the centre
of their discussions were two drafts concerning economic sanctions
against Iraq. The first, a Russian resolution supported by China,
France, Malaysia and Namibia and the second one proposed by Britain
with the support of the US. The two drafts, while having common
elements on the strengthening of mechanisms for verification of
weapons and inspection systems, differed greatly on the question of
easing of sanctions.
The Security Council finally adopted Resolution No. 1284 (1999)
on 17th December, 1999.
This so-called “Omnibus” or “Comprehensive resolution
authorises the creation of a successor body to UNSCOM called
UNMOVIC (UN Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission), for the verification of compliance by Iraq of various
resolutions, particularly UNSCR 687(1991).
Once UNMOVIC and the IAEA report that Iraq has been
cooperating in all respects with their reinforced monitoring system
for a period of 120 days, the sanctions would be suspended for 120
days, renewable by the Council.
Ceiling for the export of Iraqi oil under the “oil for food”
programme has been removed.
The United Nations programme of humanitarian assistance to
Iraq known as Oil For Food Programme continued to be regularly
extended by the Security Council.
Iraq however has given oral notification on 20th November 1999
that it rejects further extension of Oil-for-Food programme and
informed the UN that it would not renew the Memorandum of
Understanding governing the Council’s Oil-for-Food programme.
South Asia Task Force

The SATF was set up in 1988 following the nuclear tests in South

Asia. Members of the SATF are Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada,
China, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, Russia,
United Kingdom, United Sates, European Union and Ukraine.
The SATF held an official level meeting in Kyiv on 23rd June,
1999. In addition to the expected calls to both India and Pakistan to
adhere to the CTBT and expression of concern at the absence of
progress in the implementation of UNSCR 1172, reference was also
made to the fighting in Kargil.
The SATF also met at the official level in New York on September
7 and November 5, 1999. It is understood that the general sense in
New York was that the group had not been able to achieve much and
there was no decision on future action except that the members should
continue their dialogue with India and Pakistan and exchange views
among themselves. It is important to note that France was the only
member to insist that SATF should be wound up and that the dialogue
should be pursued at bilateral levels. Other members particularly the
US, the UK and China, wanted the group to continue.
Indo-Pak Matters

Atlantique Episode: The Secretary General of the UN
expressed regrets over the loss of lives following the downing of the
Pakistani Atlantique surveillance aircraft by the Indian Airforce and
concern at repeated incidents between India and Pakistan. He also
urged that differences between the two countries be resolved by
peaceful means.
The Security Council did not accept China’s proposal to issue a
Presidential Statement on the subject.
Pakistan took the matter to the International Court of Justice,
The Hague and the matter is under examination by the ICJ.
Kargil: In his report on the Work of the Organisation, the
Secretary General mentioned that the recent upsurge of fighting along
77

United Nations and International Organisations

and across the line of control in Kashmir, specially in the Kargil area
is a reminder of the fragility of the situation in this region. The SG
also stressed the need to put the Lahore Process back on track.
Separately, the Kargil issue was also touched upon in the statement
issued at the end of the G-8 Summit on 20th June, 1999, where deep
concern was expressed about continuing military confrontation in
Kashmir following the infiltration of armed intruders which violated
the Line of Control. The G-8 statement also called for restoration,
and full respect in future for the Line of Control, thus vindicating
India’s stand.
Hague Peace Conference

To commemorate the centenary of First Hague Peace Conference
of 1899, the Netherlands and the Russian Federation organised an
Intergovernmental Conference (IGC) in The Hague from 17-19 May,
1999 to be followed by the Intergovernmental Conference at St.
Petersburg from 22-25 June, 1999.
The two IGCs were preceded by an NGO event at The Hague
on May 11-15,1999. The basic idea was to provide an alternative forum
for discussions on matters relating to disarmament, human security,
resolution of conflicts, human rights, etc. and ultimately forward the
results of the conference to the UN as input during its discussions.
The results and suggestions of the meetings are supposed to nonbinding.
Disarmament and International Security
India’s stand on issues related to disarmament and international
security in multilateral and regional forums continues to reflect India’s
national security interests and the nation’s tradition of restraint and
engagement with the international community. In particular, India’s
commitment to non-discriminatory and universal nuclear
disarmament continued to be reflected in India’s pronouncements
and initiatives. At the regional level, India pursued purposeful dialogue

78

aimed at building confidence, trust and cooperative security structures.
The visit undertaken by the Prime Minister to Lahore in Pakistan on
the inaugural run of the Delhi-Lahore-Delhi bus service, the
agreements signed during the visit as well as the visit of the External
Affairs Minister to Beijing demonstrate that given the political will
the region is capable of responsibly managing the nuclear dimension
of bilateral security equations. This certainly is an important objective
for India.
The challenge of Pakistan’s aggression in the Kargil sector of
Jammu & Kashmir and its attempt to question the sanctity of the
Line of Control in violation of the commitments undertaken at Shimla
and Lahore was met through a skilful use of diplomacy and military
force. The international community has appreciated the restraint
shown by India during this conflict.
The series of bilateral dialogues commenced after the nuclear
tests of May 1998 were pursued during this year with the objective of
harmonising India’s security concerns with international concerns
on non-proliferation and disarmament. The results of these dialogues
are encouraging. In particular there is greater appreciation of India’s
security concerns and the underpinning of restraint and responsibility
in India’s conduct and policies post May 1998.
United Nations General Assembly

India participated in the First Committee of the 54th United
Nations General Assembly held in New York from October 11November 12, 1999. India put forward its traditional resolutions on
the ‘Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons’
adopted by the General Assembly by 104 votes in favour, 42 against
and 17 abstentions, and on the ‘Role of Science and Technology in
the Context of International Security and Disarmament’, adopted by
the General Assembly 98 votes in favour, 46 against and 19
abstentions. In addition, a new resolution which was introduced by
India last year, to highlight the dangers associated with hair-trigger

Annual Report 1999-2000

alert of nuclear Weapons leading to risks of accidental or unauthorized
launch of nuclear weapons, was adopted by the General Assembly by
104 votes in favour, 43 against and 17 abstentions. India projected its
national policy on Nuclear Disarmament and was actively involved
in deliberations on a number of resolutions in the First Committee.
Conference on Disarmament

The Conference on Disarmament (CD) could not undertake any
substantive negotiations during 1999 in the absence of adoption of
its Programme of Work due to lack of consensus on two issues Nuclear Disarmament and Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer
Space (PAROS). The areas on which consensus existed included reestablishment of the Ad Hoc Committees on FMCT and Negative
Security Assurances, and the reappointment of Special Coordinators
dealing with a ban on transfer of Anti Personnel Landmines (APLs),
Transparency in Armaments (T1As) and procedural/reform issues
relating to the CD. following the adoption of the traditional agenda
early in the 1999 session, the remaining time of the CD was taken up
in trying to craft a ‘balanced and comprehensive’ Programme of Work,
an exercise which remained inconclusive. The only important decision
adopted by the CD during the year related to the expansion of its
membership by admitting five new members - Ecuador, Ireland,
Kazakhstan, Malaysia and Tunisia. India along with a number of other
countries remained actively engaged in the work of the CD and efforts
to reach a consensus on its Programme of Work. India remains
supportive of a comprehensive and balanced Programme of Work in
the CD.

United Nations Disarmament Commission

The 1999 Substantive Session of the UTNDC from April 12-30
in New York addressed three issues, all of which were in the final
year of their deliberations in the respective Working Groups: The
establishment of Nuclear Weapon Free Zones on the basis of
arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the region

concerned (NWFZs); the Fourth Special Session of the General
Assembly devoted to disarmament (SSOD-IV); and Guidelines on
conventional arms control/limitation and disarmament, with
particular emphasis on consolidation of peace in the context of
General Assembly Resolution 51/45 N (CD). The UTNDC reached
consensus on Guidelines pertaining to NWFZs and CD. No
consensus was possible on SSOD-IV due to absence of agreement
on the Chairperson’s Paper concerning the Objectives and Agenda
of SSOD-IV. India’s position was that SSOD-IV should ‘reaffirm
the principles and priorities of SSOD-1’, which accord priority to
nuclear disarmament.
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC)

As an original state party to the CWC, India has endeavoured to
discharge, fully and faithfully, its obligations under the Convention.
On 29th April 1999, the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW), which is headquartered in The Hague, Netherlands
completed two years of its existence. During this period, the Technical
Secretariat (TS) of the OPCW has conducted more than 400
inspections at chemical weapons storage and former production
facilities, as well as at industrial plant sites in States Parties to the
Convention. A number of inspections have taken place in India, and
our cooperation with the OPCW in implementing the CWC has been
impeccable. As a member of the Executive Council from the entry
into force of the Convention, India has been playing an active role in
the deliberations of the Council to oversee the implementation of all
obligations assumed by States Parties. The lack of progress in
implementing some of the provisions of the convention that are of
interest to the developing countries, such as those relating to
International Cooperation and assistance, casts a shadow on what is
otherwise a unique disarmament treaty. It is also a matter of collective
concern that some States Parties have not provided full declarations
to the OPCW, adversely affecting the inspection schedules.
79

United Nations and International Organisations

Biological and Toxic Weapons Convention

India actively participated in the work of Ad Hoc Group of States
Parties to the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention (BTWC) in
Geneva during 1999 to negotiate a Protocol on the basis of the agreed
mandate. The Indian delegation continued to support strengthening
of BTWC through an effective Protocol for creating a nondiscriminatory and transparent compliance regime including the
unimpeded exchange of bio-technology for peaceful purposes.

International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)

The 43rd General Conference (GC) of the IAEA was held from
September 27 - October 1, 1999. The Indian delegation was led by
Dr. R. Chidambaram, Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission. After
25 years a resolution on amendment to Article VI of the IAEA Statute,
relating to the membership of the Board of Governors, finally received
the approval of the General Conference. The Board of Governors
was expanded by 8 seats from the present 35 to 43. The final proposal
increases the seats for Middle East & South Asia (MESA), the area
group India belongs to and is the Chairman of, by 1 elected and 1
designated seat. Presently MESA has 1 designated seat (India) and 3
regular seats as well as 2 floating seats shared between 3 area groups.
In the Committee of the Whole, India as the Chairperson of the
Group of 77, introduced the resolutions pertaining to Strengthening
of the Agency’s technical cooperation activities, Plan for producing
potable water economically, Extensive use of isotope hydrology for
water resource management, Staffing of the Agency’s Secretariat and
Women in the Secretariat.
Third UN Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space (UNISPACE-III)
The third UN Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space (UNISPACE-III) was held at Vienna in July 1999.
Professor U.R. Rao of India was elected as President of the
Conference. The Indian presence at the Conference was active and
80

positive: India participated in the Space Exhibition, the Technical
Forum meeting organised workshops, and also supported the Space
Generation Forum (for youth). The Conference adopted the Vienna
Declaration which essentially recognises the need for international
cooperation in the peaceful uses of the outer space and outlines
definitive recommendations to achieve these objectives.
Anti-Personnel Landmines (APLS) and Small Arms

India remains fully committed to the eventual elimination of AntiPersonnel Mines (APLs). The current humanitarian tragedy of antipersonnel mines has been caused by their illegal and irresponsible
exports and indiscriminatory use. India has always refrained from
exporting APLs and is of the view that the individual moratoria on
exports should be strengthened by developing a universal agreement
that would ban such exports and transfers. India is not a party to the
Ottawa Convention because our own legitimate security concerns
require us, in view of long land border, to make use of APLs in a
purely defensive mode. India’s responsible use of APLs has been
universally acknowledged, including by the ICRC. India is a major
contributor to UN demining efforts since its participation in the
Congo peace keeping operations in 1963. Experts from the Indian
Army’s Corps of Engineers have been associated with UN demining
efforts in Angola, Rwanda, Mozambique, Somalia and most recently
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
India is a party to the Protocol - II of the Inhumane Weapons
Convention and was actively involved in strengthening this Protocol
during the 1995-96 negotiations. India’s instruments of Ratification
on Amended Protocol - II on Anti-Personnel Landmines and
Protocol-IV on Blinding Laser Weapons were deposited with the
UN Secretary General on 2 September 1999. India put forward the
idea of a complete ban on use of APLs in situations other than
‘international armed conflict’ but this suggestion did not enjoy
agreement among all the countries. India had also made suggestions

Annual Report 1999-2000

for banning Remotely Delivered Mines (RDMS) as well as a complete
ban on all transfers of APLs and IEDs (Improvised Explosive
Devices). These proposals still remain on the table and India hopes
that they will enjoy greater support at the forthcoming meeting in
mid-December.
The First Annual Conference of States Parties to the Amended
Protocol II of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons
(CCW) was held in Geneva, 15-17 December 1999. The Conference
adopted a declaration calling on all States that have not done so to
ratify Amended Protocol II as soon as possible. India participated
actively in this Conference. While reiterating its commitment to the
objective of the total elimination of landmines, India supported a
phased approach that would balance the humanitarian considerations
arising from an indiscriminate use of landmines on one hand, and
their use for legitimate purposes of self-defence by States.
During the past decade, the issue of small arms proliferation has
become a major concern. These weapons have become more portable
and at the same time more lethal. Non-state actors such as terrorists,
drug smugglers and organised crimes syndicates find it easy to procure
these weapons and use it against civil societies and law enforcement
agencies. India has a strict arms licensing policy with production of
small arms and ammunition being undertaken in ordnance factories.
Proliferation of these weapons during the Afghanistan war had led
to large quantities of such weapons being smuggled into India in
order to perpetrate the low intensity conflict and step up acts of
terrorism and violence. India has repeatedly called for concerted
international efforts to stem illegal manufacturing and trafficking of
small arms and explosives. India has welcomed the call for an
international conference in 2001 and remain actively engaged in the
negotiations of a Firearms Protocol as part of the Convention on
Transnational Organised Crime.

Bilateral Dialogue on Confidence Building Measures
(CBMs); ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF)

India’s approach to confidence building has unilateral, bilateral
and regional aspects. The Bilateral Confidence Building Measures
(CBMS) have been negotiated both in the India-Pakistan and the
Sino-Indian context. With Pakistan, conventional CBMs were sought
to be supplemented with nuclear and missile related CBMs in the
framework of the MOU signed between the Foreign Secretaries of
the two countries at the February 1999 Lahore Summit. The agreement
also envisaged updating of conventional CBMs in the light of new
realities. However, Pakistan’s aggression in Kargil constitutes a setback
to this process.
As regards China, the brief hiatus in dialogue post-May 1998 is
now over. India and China have agreed to begin a security dialogue
following the visit of the External Affairs Minister to China. India
and China have a number of conventional CBMs in place. India would
be prepared to enter into bilateral restraint arrangements also in the
nuclear field taking into account the unilateral commitment of both
countries to no-first-use.
At the Asia-Pacific level, the only arrangement for a regional
security dialogue is the ASEAN Regional Forum. ARF has been
focussing on building confidence and trust and has built a basket of
proposals on CBMS, which can be negotiated. External Affairs
Minister led the Indian delegation to the 6th ARF meeting held in
Singapore on July 26, 1999. The meeting was followed by PostMinisterial Conferences (PMC) with the ASEAN. The ARF/PMC
meetings provided an opportunity for a wide range of bilateral contacts
including with the US, China, Japan, Russia and some ASEAN
countries. Unlike the ARF Meet in Manila last year when nuclear
testing by India was in focus, there was no discussion on India-specific
issues. There was a general reference in the Chairperson’s statement
issued at the end of the meeting for states that had tested nuclear
81

United Nations and International Organisations

weapons last year to exercise restraint, including by adherence to the
CTBT. In our bilateral contacts, India’s restraint on Kargil was
appreciated and the Chairperson’s statement endorsed our stand on
bilateralism. Officials from the Ministry of External Affairs and the
Ministry of Defence continued to participate in the inter-sessional
meetings of the Forum.
Environment and Sustainable Development Issues
The Seventh Session of the UN Commission on Sustainable
Development (CSD), established by the ECOSOC to review progress
in the implementation of Agenda 21 (Sustainable Development - Earth
Summit, 1992), was held from April 19-30, 1999. The main themes
were Tourism, Changing Consumption and Production Patterns,
Oceans and Seas, and, Small Island Developing States - Programme
of Action. The issue of oceans’ governance was a major point of
discussions in the Oceans and Seas segment. It was agreed that there
would be a more comprehensive review of oceans-related matters by
the UN General Assembly, which will be the sole forum in which
coordination of oceans’ issues will take place.
The VIIth Meeting of the Conference of Parties (COP-VII) of
the 1971 Ramsar Convention on Wetlands was held in San Jose, Costa
Rica from May 10 to 18, 1999. Among the issues before the
Conference was the question of adoption of guidelines for (a)
integrating wetlands conservation and “wise use” into river-basin
management and (b) for international cooperation under the
Convention. The Indian delegation actively participated in the
negotiations and ensured that India’s concerns were adequately
addressed, including by stipulating that the implementation of these
guidelines is to be in accordance with the national plans and priorities.
The meeting of the Subsidiary Bodies of the Convention on
Climate Change was held in Bonn from May 29 - June 11, 1999 to
discuss the flexibility mechanisms of the 1997 Kyoto Protocol to the
82

Convention, available to the developed countries, in order to achieve
their legally-binding caps on Green House Gases’ emissions. This
was preceded by a meeting of the Group of 77 and China on May 2930, 1999, at which India was appointed as the Coordinator and the
Spokesman of the Group on mechanisms of the Kyoto Protocol.
The meeting agreed that the priority should be accorded to the Clean
Development Mechanism (CDM), one of the three flexibility
mechanisms under the Protocol. The Group also agreed on a paper
outlining its perspectives on the CDM, which was submitted to the
5th Conference of Parties to the UN Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) which met in Bonn from October 25November 5, 1999.
The 5th Conference of Parties to the UN Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) met in Bonn from October 25November 5, 1999. It considered the implementation of the Buenos
Aires Plan of Action and in this context decided to have additional
meetings of the Subsidiary Bodies to help COP VI in arriving at
decisions as set out in the Plan of Action. In addition to its position
paper on the Mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol, G-77 and China
had tabled before COP V, additional papers on two of the Mechanisms,
viz , the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) and Emissions
Trading were tabled. India played a leading role in the meeting of G77 and China in this regard. The Conference also decided to authorise
the consolidation of a text for further negotiations on the Mechanisms
so as to be ready for adoption at COP VI.
Economic And Social Commission For Asia And The Pacific

The most important event relating to Economic And Social
Commission For Asia And The Pacific (ESCAP) from India’s point
of view was the Second Ministerial Conference on Space Applications
for Sustainable Development in Asia and the Pacific held in New
Delhi from November 15-20, 1999.
The Ministerial segment of this important conference was

Annual Report 1999-2000

inaugurated by the Prime Minister. The Conference was attended by
20 ministers from 27 ESCAP member countries participating in it. It
served as an excellent exposition of India’s achievements in the use
of space systems towards sustainable development and showcased
India’s capabilities for sharing its experience with other countries in
the region. The Delhi Declaration on Space Technology Applications
in Asia and the Pacific, unanimously adopted at the Conference, is a
landmark in regional cooperation with particular emphasis on national
capacity building and enhancing the regional capability in space
technology applications, through the participation of countries of
the Asia Pacific region.
In addition, there was the annual ESCAP Commission Session
held in April 1999 and the regular intergovernmental and other
Committee meetings, in which the delegations from India participated
actively .
Development Issues

The Working Group set up by the 53rd UN General Assembly
to prepare for the International Conference on Finance for
Development adopted its report at the concluding substantive session
on 27th May, 1999. An inclusive agenda list, incorporating issues of
interest to India such as, trade and reform of financial architecture
was the main feature of the Report in the drafting of which India had
a major role to play as one of the two Vice-Chairmen. The 54th
session of the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution on the
basis of these recommendations. The text of the resolution on
financing for Development was satisfactory from India’s view point
as it preserves the outcome of the preparatory process thus far and
sets in place a similar process on substantive matters. The Conference
on Financing For Development to be held in 2001 is expected to be
a high-level inter-governmental event, with ministerial level
participation.
The 54th UN General Assembly adopted by vote the resolution

on international financial stability with the US setting out their position
that the UN had no role to play in this area, which should be left to
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
United Nations International Narcotics Control Bureau

The 67th session of United Nations International Narcotics
Control Bureau was held from November 1-18 ,1999. The meeting
was attended from Indian side by Member, International Narcotics
Control Bureau. He criticized the UN International Drug Control
Programme’s policy of maintaining contacts with Taleban government
in Afghanistan and for ignoring Taleban complicity in the cultivation
of illicit opium crops.
Social, Human Rights and Humanitarian Issues
In the discussions on human rights issues in sessions of the UN
Commission on Human Rights, the Sub Commission on Promotion
and Protection of Human Rights, the Economic and Social Council
and the General Assembly, India’s participation was substantive and
constructive.
The 54th session of the UN General Assembly adopted 250
resolutions , 19 of which were on the strengthening of the machinery
for coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance by the
UN , with regard to 19 countries either recovering from conflict or
devastated by natural and man-made disasters. The Assembly
commemorated the 10th anniversary of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and decided to convene a special session in September
2001 to review the implementation of the goals of the 1990 World
Summit for Children. Assembly also adopted an Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination
Against Women (CEDAW) which was opened for signature on
October 6,1999 and will enter into force, once ratified by 10 states.
The resolution on right to development was voted upon.
83

United Nations and International Organisations

India participated actively in the 55th session of the UN
Commission on Human Rights held in Geneva from March 22 to
April 30,1999 and made significant contribution to the substantive
issues, consensus building and decision-making . The session was
preceded by meeting of 8 working groups of the Commission on
various issues mandated to these working groups, such as indigenous
people, migrant workers, children in armed conflict and child
prostitution and child pornography. India revived a resolution on the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights which was
adopted by consensus and was the leading sponsor of resolution on
Mainstreaming Technical Cooperation which was adopted by vote in
the session of UN Commission on Human Rights. India also piloted
a resolution on Regional Cooperation in the Asia-Pacific based on
the conclusions of the Workshop on Human Rights held in New
Delhi in February 1999. The resolution on the Right to Development,
cosponsored by India and presented by the group of Non-Aligned
countries, was adopted with out a vote in the Commission. India
worked with the US on a new resolution on Promotion of Democracy.
The resolution on Human Rights and Terrorism moved by Turkey
was cosponsored by India and was adopted by vote. The Indian
delegation made 36 interventions and statements and cosponsored
22 resolutions during the meeting of UN Commission on Human
Rights .
A number of eminent Indians continued to serve with distinction
as the members of important human rights mechanisms and treaty
bodies. These included Smt. Shanti Sadiq Ali (Member of the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination), Sh. Soli
Sorabjee (Expert member on the Sub Commission on Promotion
and Protection of Human Rights) , Sh. Kapil Sibal (ChairmanRapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights Working Group
on Arbitrary Detention), Sh. P. N. Bhagwati (Vice Chairman of the
Human Rights Committee and Regional Adviser for the Asia Pacific
Region for promoting technical cooperation in the field of Human
84

Rights), Sh. Abid Hussien (Special Rapporteur on the Right to
Freedom of Opinion And Expression). Sh. M. J. Ahmadi was
appointed as a Member of the International Commission of Inquiry
on East Timor.
The crisis in Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY)-Kosovo found
its reverberations in environment-related bodies e.g.. Commission
on Sustainable Development and the Commission on Human
Settlements (Habitat) .India argued against the politicisation of these
bodies by the introduction of such politically sensitive and divisive
issues.
The Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC)’s Substantive
Session was held from July 5-30, 1999 in Geneva. The ECOSOC
considered the reports of its various subsidiary bodies in the fields of
economic and environmental matters and social and human rights
questions. The high level segment during the session focussed on the
theme - the role of employment and work in poverty eradication: the
empowerment and advancement of women. The Ministerial
Communique issued on the focal theme adequately reflected India’s
position with regard to sustained economic growth being the key to
poverty eradication and employment generation.
India participated in the 21st Special Session of the General
Assembly to review the implementation of the Programme of Action
(POA) of the 1994 International Conference on Population and
Development, which was held in New York June 30 to July 2, 1999.
The Indian Delegation was led by Hon’ble Minister of State for Health
and Family Welfare, Shri Dalit Ezhilmalai. The final documents of
the Special Session reflected our concerns with regard to the creation
of an enabling environment to achieve sustained economic growth
in the context of sustainable development and eradicating poverty;
empowerment of women, resource mobilization, etc.
The Special Session of the Commission on Human Rights was

Annual Report 1999-2000

held from September 23-27 on East Timor against the background
of questionable procedures adopted by the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Bureau of the Commission.
India spoke against the establishment of an international commission
of inquiry as steps had been taken by Government of Indonesia to
restore normalcy and cooperate with UN and international agencies.
Further , such a move may have had the opposite effect of exacerbating
tension, leading to further conflict and confrontation.
India was an active participant in the 27th International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent held from October
31 to November 6,1999. India contributed actively to drafting of the
Conference Plan Of Action both during the preparatory process and
the Conference. Besides recalling its age old humanitarian traditions
and emphasizing its full commitment to humanitarian causes as also
the principles enshrined in the Geneva Conventions, India also
stressed the need to keep international humanitarian assistance with
in the ambit of the principle of state sovereignty.
India played an active role in the 50th Session of the Executive
Committee of the Office of The United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees in October, 1999 in Geneva and highlighted issues of
concern to developing countries such as economic and social impact
of the massive refugee flows into these countries. India’s statement
on the annual theme of the Executive Committee – “Strengthening
Partnership to Ensure Protection , also in relation to Security”–
stressed its commitment to the protection of asylum seekers, the
significant contributions made by developing countries to refugee
issues and the importance of international solidarity and burden
sharing . India also emphasized the need to tackle poverty which is
the root cause of number of refugee flows. India expressed concern
at the growing tendency of a number of signatories to the 1951
convention on the Status of refugees to derogate from its basic
principles and provisions.

Specialised Agencies
WHO

The Indian delegation contributed extensively in the deliberations
of the World Health Assembly in May 1999. A number of important
decisions including adoption of budget 2000-2001, the launching of
a campaign to enact a Framework Convention on Tobacco Control”
,as also on the Roll back Malaria Programme and the revised drug
strategy were taken .India outlined its fast track approach to meet the
target of eradicating polio by the end of 2000 with an ambitious plan
of National Immunisation Days.

ILO

The 87th session of the International Labour Conference held
in June 1999 unanimously adopted a Convention supplemented by a
Recommendation concerning the prohibition and elimination of the
worst forms of the child labour. The Indian delegation played a key
role in the deliberations and was able to get the poverty dimension of
child labour reflected in the text , in emphasizing the need to address
this root cause and to strengthen obligations related to international
cooperation.

FAO

The Food and Agriculture Organisation Council at its meeting
in Rome from 14-19 June, 1999, elected Shri Bhaskar Barua, Secretary,
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture
as Chairman of the Commission-II of the Conference. The previous
Chairman of Commission-II from India had been Dr. M.S.
Swaminathan.
The 30th session of the Food and Agriculture Organisation
Conference was held from 12-23 November in Rome. The Indian
delegation was led by Shri S.B.P.B.K. Satyanarayana Rao, Hon’ble
Minister of State for Agriculture. India was re-elected to the Council
as well as to the Finance Committee during the session.
85

United Nations and International Organisations

Dr. Jacques Diouf of Senegal was re-elected as the Director
General of the Food and Agriculture Organisation at the elections
held on November 13, 1999 during the 30th session of the Food and
Agriculture Organisation Conference in Rome.
UNESCO

Ambassador Koichiro Matsura of Japan was confirmed as the
new Director General of United Nations Education , Scientific and
Cultural Organisation on November 15 during the General
Conference of the Organisation held in Paris.
Elections and Appointments
During the year, India was elected to the following bodies:
1. Hon’ble Dr.(Mrs.) Najma Heptullah, Deputy Chairperson, Rajya
Sabha, was unanimously elected on October 16,1999 as President
of the Inter-Parliamentary Council of the Inter Parliamentary
Union. Dr.(Mrs.) Heptullah is the first-ever woman President in
the history of the Inter Parliamentary Union.
2. Executive Council of World Meteorological Organization
(WMO), for the period 1999-2003.
3. UN Commission on Narcotic Drugs, for the period 2000-2003.
4. UN Commission on Human Settlements for the period 20002003.
5. Executive Board of UNICEF, for the period 2000-2002.
6. Dr. P.C. Rao was re-elected as Judge of the International Tribunal
of the Law of the Sea (ITLOS), for the period 1999-2008.
7. Council of Administration (CA) and Postal Operation Council
(UPU), for the period 2000-2004;
8. Council of Food & Agriculture Organisation (FAO), for the
period 2000-2003.

86

9. UN Environment Programme (UNEP), for the period 20002003.
10. Shri V.K. Shunglu was elected as External Auditor of the
International Maritime Organisation (IMO), for the period 20002004.
11. Council of the International Maritime Organisation, for the period
2000 -2001.
12. Executive Board of WHO for the term 1999-2002.
International Law : Development and Activities
The 54th Session of the United Nations General Assembly
(UNGA) commenced on 14 September 1999. The report of the
International Law Commission (ILC) on the work of its fifty first
session was discussed. ‘The discussion centred on the various subjects
including: State Liability; State Responsibility; Reservations to Treaties;
Nationality in Relations to the Succession of States and; Unilateral
Acts of States.
During the session, the Sixth Committee (Legal) considered the
following agenda items including: Convention on jurisdictional
immunities of States and their property; United Nations Programme
of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider
Appreciation of International Law; United Nations Decade of
International Law; Outcome of the action dedicated to the 1999
centennial of the first International Peace Conference; Report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its thirty-second session; Report of the Committee on Relations
with the Host County; Establishment of an international criminal
court; Report of the Special committee on the Charter of the United
Nations and on the strengthening of the Role of the Organization;
Measures to eliminate international terrorism and; Review of the Statue
of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal.

Annual Report 1999-2000

The Legal & Treaties Division prepared briefs on all these topics
of ILC as well as Sixth Committee, for the use of the Indian delegation,
for making statements in the session.
Also during the session, a Convention for the Suppression of
the Financing of Terrorism was adopted. A resolution condemning
terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable was also adopted. The mandate
of the Adhoc Committee on Terrorism and to hold its meetings in
the year 2000 was also renewed.
The Thirty-second Annual Session of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) was held at
Vienna from May 17 to June 4, 1999. During the current session, the
major focus was on the Government contract Management and
support for privately financed infrastructure project as well as ways
of selecting participation companies core terms of project agreement,
legal issues of constructing, operating and regulating infrastructure,
duration of projects as well as extending or ending them, governing
law and settlement of disputes. Legislative guide aims to help the
government and legal bodies at the national provincial or local levels,
review adequacy of laws regulations, decrees and other legal texts for
carrying out privately financed infrastructure projects.
The Commission also discussed the Reports of Working Group
on Electronic Commerce of its Thirty-third and Thirty-fourth
Sessions, preparing uniform rules on digital signatures, other electronic
signatures, certification authorities and related legal issues, the report
of Working Group on International Contract Practices entrusted with
the task of preparing uniform law on assignment in receivables
financing. The commission also discussed the possible future work
on insolvency law and the prevailing view was that an exploratory
session of Commission should be convened to prepare a feasibility
proposal for consideration by the Commission at its Thirty-third
Session.

Pursuant to Resolutions of the Preparatory Commission of the
International Criminal Court, meetings were held at New York in
February, August and December 1999. During these Sessions the
Elements of Crimes and the Rules of Evidence and Procedure were
discussed. A separate working group has also been set up on the
definition of aggression.
The Legal & Treaties Division participated in negotiations, held
at: Tunis, Tunisia; Muscat, Oman; New Delhi, India, respectively from
8-9 February 1999, 11-12 April 1999, 20-22 October 1999 and 22
November 1999 for concluding extradition treaties with Tunisia,
Oman, Poland (second round) and Mangolia. In the 22 November
1999 meeting with Mangolian delegation, discussion also took place
on agreements on Mutual legal assistance in criminal matters and
civil matters. The Division also participated in negotiations held at
Astana, Kazakhstan from 26-28 July 1999, for concluding agreements
on Mutual legal assistance in criminal matters and civil matters. A
proposal received from Egypt for concluding an Extradition treaty
was also examined and advised upon. Proposals received from Hong
Kong, Egypt, Nepal, Bulgaria and Turkmenistan, for agreements on
Mutual legal assistance in criminal matters were also so examined.
This Division examined various extradition requests and requests
for mutual judicial assistance, received both from domestic as well as
foreign jurisdictions and rendered legal advice therein. Various requests
prepared by CBI, aimed to seek assistance from foreign countries in
ongoing criminal investigations including those with which there exists
no formal agreement in this area, were also examined by this Division.
Legal advice was rendered in all extradition court cases pending in
Indian and foreign courts.
The Division participated in the Meeting of Legal Experts of the
member States of Indian Ocean Rim -Association for Regional
Cooperation (IOR-ARC), held in Maputo, Mozambique, from 8-10
87

United Nations and International Organisations

December 1999. The important issue, inter alia, that came up for
discussion was the finalization of the instrument of acceptance.
Pursuant to a request from the United States, the Division
examined the status of ‘UN Standard Minimum Rules for the
treatment of prisoners’ in respect of India. Also legal issues involved
in a case concerning missing Indian war prisoners believed to be in
Pakistan were examined in this Division.
This Division attended the Diplomatic Conference on the
Adoption of the Second Protocol to the 1954 Hague Convention for
the Protection of Cultural Property. The Protocol seeks to make the
rules regarding grant of special protection to cultural property more
liberal. A simplified regime is expected to provide more flexibility
regarding the eligibility of cultural property to become specially
protected. Once a property is placed under special protection then
any violation of such property either by using it for military purposes
or making such property an object of attack will be treated as a serious
violation. This puts an obligation on the Parties either to try or
extradite the offender. The Protocol, also prohibits acts of hostility
directed against any cultural property and puts an obligation on states
to make such offences punishable. However, the concept of military
necessity has been retained and the Protocol lists out the conditions
under which the obligations may be waived in case of imperative
military necessity.
The 38th Annual Session of the Asian African Legal Consultative
Committee was held at Accra from 19-23 April, 1999. Officers of the
Division prepared briefs in various subjects that formed agenda of
discussion during the session. Those items include: Report on the
Work of the International Law Commission at its Fiftieth Session;
Status and Treatment of Refugees; Legal Protection of Migrant
Workers; Law of the Sea; Extraterritorial Application of National
Legislation; Sanctions Imposed Against Third Parties; The United
88

Nations Decade of International Law; Report of the Expert Group
meeting, New Delhi 11-12 February 1999; the Report of the UN
Conference of Plenipotentiaries on the Establishment of an
International Criminal Court; United National Conference on
Environment and Development; Follow-up and; Trade Law matters.
The Division participated in the second to fifth sessions of the
Ad Hoc Committee on the Elaboration of a draft convention against
Transnational organized Crime held in 1999 in Vienna.
The Division also participated in the negotiations for concluding
Bilateral Investment Protection Agreement with Bangladesh, Hungary
and Austria.
The 27th International Conference of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent was held at Geneva from 31st October to 6th November
1999. The Conference adopted a Plan of Action to the coming four
years. The Plan of Action is divided into 3 chapters i.e, Protection of
Victims of Armed Conflict; Humanitarian Response; and Health
Services and Humanitarian Principles. Under these three chapters
various goals have been identified and actions which are required to
be taken to fulfil those goals are proposed.
The Legal and Treaties Division prepared a note on United States
sanctions against India: A Case for Invocation of WTO Dispute
Settlement Mechanism. It coordinated with Haj Cell in constituting
new Haj Committee by clearing legal hurdles created by the members
of old Haj Committee by filing writ petitions in the High Courts of
Delhi, Allahabad and Jammu & Kashmir and Supreme Court of India.
Asia and Africa were represented in the Drafting Committee of the
Bio-Safety Protocol. Legal advice was rendered in handling the matter
of arrest and seizure of North Korean ship and another similar matter
of Vietnamese vessel.
The issue of the WTO requirement of a comprehensive legislation

Annual Report 1999-2000

at the National level on transparency in government procurement
was also examined in this Division.
This Division gave legal opinion on Pakistani petition before the
International Court of Justice (ICJ) on downing of Atlantique and
also organized consultation in evolving the litigatory strategy in this
connection. Also matter relating to the extent of the legal right of hot
pursuit in territorial waters contiguous zone and Exclusive Economic
Zone (EEZ) was examined in this Division and the legal opinion
rendered.
A seminar on “Issues Relating to the Implementation of
Intellectual Property Rights” was held from 15-16 November, 1999
under the auspice of the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee.
This Division along with the Ministry of Industry Coordinated this
seminar.
The Division participated in the meetings of the Core group
concerning various aspects of intellectual property rights constituted
under the HRD Ministry.
India has signed/ratified many bilateral agreements in various
fields during the year. A list of treaties/agreements entered into by
India with foreign countries during the year is given at Appendix-IX.
A list of instruments of Full Powers issued during 1999 for signing
treaties/agreements on behalf on India is at Appendix-X and a list of
instruments of ratification is at Appendix-XI.
Forecast of important events scheduled for the period of
January-February, 2000

In her first official visit of the new century, Dr. Gro Harlem
Brundtland, Director General of World Health Organisation , visited
India from January 6 to 8, 2000. She called on President, Prime
Minister, Health Minister and Chief Justice of Supreme Court. She

participated in the International Conference on Framework
Convention on Tobacco held in New Delhi from January 7-9. India
participated actively in the Working Group Meetings of the Framework
Convention leading to the Conference. The Convention would provide
an international instrument to address and steer the global health
debate through capacity -building, transfer of resources to the
developing countries for developing alternative crops, and for moving
the population depending on tobacco-growing to new means of
livelihood. Launching the “Final Push for Polio” programme in New
Delhi, she paid tributes to India’s phenomenal efforts towards polio
eradication .
Meeting of the State Parties to the Convention on Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination is to be held in New York on
January 18. India presented candidature of Sh. R. V. Pillai for the
election to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination.
India’s first Periodic Report on the Convention on the Rights of
the Child submitted in February, 1997 along with India’s written
response to the List of Issues identified from its First periodic Report
were discussed at the 23rd session of the Committee on Convention
on the Rights of the Child held in Geneva on January11-12.
India would present its first initial report to CEDAW on January
24 in New York during the meeting of The Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination Against Women. Indian delegation
would be led by Smt. Kiran Aggarwal, Secretary, Department of
Women And Child Development.
Juan Somavia, Director General of International Labour
Organisation will visit India from February 16 to 22 ,2000.During
his visit , he is expected to call on the PM, the EAM and the FM.
uu
89

10
Foreign Economic Relations

Economic Division

T

he year 1999-2000 saw a significant improvement in the global
economic situation. The financial crisis that plagued the world
in 1998 and 1999 definitely bottomed out. The East Asian
region came out of recession through disciplined macro-economic
policies and structural reforms. The growth in the world economy is
set to gain moderate strength in the coming years. It may, however,
be necessary for governments to resist pressures from special interest
groups to take protectionist measures, as such measures may be
counterproductive and undermine a promising economic
environment.
The launch of the EURO on 1 January 1999 to replace the national
currencies of eleven countries of the European Union (EU) was a
major step taken by the EU towards economic integration. The EURO
was expected to enable the EU to exert a greater influence over the
direction of the world economy.
India’s trade and economic relations with other countries
continued to expand during the year. Efforts by the Ministry and
Indian Missions abroad to promote foreign trade and Indian
investment abroad continued. India’s total exports amounted to
Rs.1416 billion during April 1998 - March 1999 as against Rs.1301

90

billion during April 1997 - March 1998. The exports from the country
during April 1999 - July 1999 stood at Rs.474 billion compared to
Rs.417 billion in the corresponding period in 1997-98. The European
Union continued to be India’s principal trading partner. The other
major trading partners were the USA, Japan, China, UAE and Russia.
Major commodities of India’s exports included agricultural and allied
products, marine products, iron ore, leather goods, gems & jewellery,
chemicals and related products, engineering goods, electronic goods
and textiles.
Export promotion activities such as organizing and participating
in trade fairs, exhibitions and seminars both at home and abroad
continued. Besides the annual India International Trade Fair held in
New Delhi in November 1999, the 13th India Engineering Trade
Fair organized by the Confederation of Indian Industries in New
Delhi in February 1999 with the Republic of Korea as the partner
country, a seminar-cum-exhibition on technology in electronics
organized by the Department of Electronics in New Delhi in February
1999 and an India International Maritime Expo in Goa in October
1999 supported by the Ministry of Surface Transport were some of
the notable trade promotion events held in India. The Ministry
sponsored a Made in India Show along with the Confederation of
Indian Industry in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania in August 1999. A trade

Annual Report 1999-2000

fair in Panama City in March 1999, an international trade fair in Athens
in September 1999, the Israel Agritech Exhibition 1999 in Haifa also
in September 1999, and the International Leather Goods Fair at Messe
Oftenbach, Germany were some of the exhibitions abroad in which
Indian Missions abroad played a very significant role.
India continued to encounter certain problems in the area of
exports, such as the European Union’s anti-dumping/anti-subsidy
cases against Indian products. India has been one of the most targetted
countries for trade defence instruments like anti-dumping duties. Antidumping/anti-subsidy investigations were mainly directed towards
textiles, pharmaceuticals and iron and steel sectors where Indian
exports are competitive. India shared the first position with China
for the largest number of cases since 1994, with 22 investigations
each out of a total of 175. Out of the 29 new investigations initiated
in 1998, India shared the top position with South Korea with 7 cases
each. Of the provisional measures in 30 cases in 1998, India was
again the country affected by the largest number of cases, namely
seven.
The Ministry has worked closely with the Ministries of Labour,
Commerce and Textiles on the issue of child labour, and in the setting
up of the mechanism by the Ministry of Labour for the investigation
of complaints relating to the use of illegal child labour in the export
consignments of goods such as hand made carpets.
India has also been facing some difficulties in the matter of export
of textiles to the countries of the European Union (EU). While the
Memorandum of Understanding on Textiles signed by India and the
EU on 31 December 1994 provides for the grant of exceptional
flexibilities by the EU for better utilisation of quotas, the EU has not
granted such flexibilities in 1998 and 1999. The Ministry has been
working closely with the Ministry of Textiles on this issue. The matter
has been taken up with the European Commission and the EU
national governments and is being actively pursued.

The Ministry continued to support and encourage Indian
investment abroad with a view to promoting India’s economic
cooperation with other countries. In 1999-2000, the Ministry cleared
241 proposals for the setting up of Joint Ventures/ Wholly Owned
Subsidiaries abroad. The Ministry has been responding positively to
the Reserve Bank of India’s proposals with regard to simplification
of procedures for Indian investment overseas. India’s important
investment destinations were the USA, UK, UAE, Singapore, Malaysia,
Thailand, Indonesia, Sri Lanka and Mauritius. Engineering and
construction, software, telecom, textiles and allied produces, chemicals
and pharmaceuticals, leather and rubber products, iron and steel,
consultancy and trading and marketing were some of the notable
areas of collaboration. The Ministry has been working closely with
various governmental and other bodies in the matter of promoting
overseas exports and investment. It is represented in the Governing
Bodies of OCCI, ITPO, IRCON Ltd, WAPCOS and ONGC Videsh Ltd.
Exchanges between India and other countries on economic
related matters at official and unofficial levels continued. The Second
India-UK Annual Talks on International Economic & Financial issues
took place in London in May 1999. The third round of dialogue
between the Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of
International Trade & Industry (MITI) of the Government of Japan
was held in Tokyo in February 1999. Shri Jaswant Singh, Minister of
External Affairs, paid an official visit to Japan from 23-27 November
1999. He had discussions with his counterpart and others in the
Japanese Government on several bilateral matters including IndiaJapan economic relations. An economic commission sponsored by
the MITI of Japan proposes to visit India shortly to study and examine
the avenues of investment. A meeting of the India-Japan Joint Business
Council is also proposed to be held in the near future. There also
have been visits of commercial and industrial delegations from India
to other countries and from the other countries to India .
91

Foreign Economic Relations

Exchanges took place between India and other developing
countries in the area of technical training under the Colombo Plan
and the Technical Cooperation Programmes. Under these
programmes Government of India nominees participated in training
programmes in Thailand, Indonesia and Singapore in such fields as
health, family planning, environment, urban development, housing,
quality control, irrigation and drainage engineering and taxation.
Following India’s nuclear tests in May 1998, some countries
imposed certain restrictive economic measures against India. The
Government of India had explained the rationale behind the nuclear
tests and has been continuing the of dialogue with key interlocutors
with regard to the withdrawal of the restrictive measures. The USA
has recently announced relaxation of a number of restrictive economic
measures against India. Exercising the authority given to him under
the Defence Appropriation Act passed by the US legislature in
October 1999, the US President waived, for an indefinite period,
restrictive measures against India in respect of the following:
i)

Activities and programmes of the Export-Import Bank (EXIM
Bank)

ii) Activities and programmes of the Overseas Private Investment
Corporation (OPIC)
iii) Assistance under the International Military Education and
Training Programme (IMET)
iv) The making of any loan or the providing of any credit to the
Government of India by any US bank
v) Assistance to the Asian Elephant Conservation Fund, the
Rhinoceros and Tiger conservation Fund, and the Indo-American
Environmental Leadership programme and
vi) Any credit, credit guarantee, or other financial assistance provided
by the Department of Agriculture to support the purchase of
food or other agricultural commodity.
92

Multilateral Economic Relations
The year under review witnessed an improvement in the global
economic situation. Although still undergoing some post-crisis
symptoms, there were definite signs of recovery in South-East Asian
countries like Malaysia, Philippines and Thailand where various strict
fiscal and economic measures were rigorously implemented. Most
multilateral groupings focussed on ways and means to prevent
recurrence of crisis-like situations in the future. Besides questioning
the validity of blind adherence to globalisation, they also focussed on
critical issues like reform of the international financial architecture
and containment of social impact of future crises. During such
deliberations, it was generally acknowledged that the cure to the
economic malaise would require active collaboration between the
developed and developing countries.
India played an active role during the deliberations of various
multilateral and regional groupings like the Group of 15 (G-15), Group
of 77 (G-77), Association for South East Asian Nations (ASEAN)
and Indian Ocean Rim Association for Regional Cooperation (IORARC). The Ministry of External Affairs monitored such developments
and actively participated in all such deliberations in the light of our
long-term national interests. Further, the Ministry, through its various
Missions abroad, collaborated with other GOI Departments and
agencies in promoting foreign business investment and presence in
India in important infrastructural sectors like power, information
technology, telecom, etc.
Similarly, in various international fora, India pointed out that
globalisation has not led to economic growth or increased the per
capita incomes in many developing countries. In order for it to become
sustainable, the globalization process would have to give due regard
to the economic development objectives of developing countries. The
shortfall in the flow of official development assistance as also the

Annual Report 1999-2000

inherent shortcomings of private financial flows would have to be
remedied. Accordingly, the international community would have to
address three fundamental issues - a stable level of financial flows to
developing countries, initiatives to reincorporate world economic
growth, and consultations for the design of a new financial
architecture.
Besides the above issues, during the latter part of 1999, the
multilateral circuit was largely dominated by discussions on the World
Trade Organization (WTO) issues of mutual concern, which were
taken up at the third WTO Ministerial Conference at Seattle. EAM
met Ambassador Charlene Barshefsky, United States Trade
Representative, in Paris on 26 May 1999. During the meeting, the
External Affairs Minister (EAM) reiterated India’s principled position
on various areas of importance in the context of the WTO, including
the proposed Millennium Round, Industrial Tariffs, Agreement on
Agriculture and Information Technology Agreement - II.
The Ministry contributed tangibly to the preparatory process for
the Seattle Ministerial by ascertaining positions of important WTO
members through its Missions. Besides participating in the interministerial exercise to finalise India’s strategy for the Seattle Meeting,
Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) also collaborated with the Ministry
of Commerce in organizing a G-15 Ministerial Meeting at Bangalore
in August 1999 in preparation for the Third WTO Ministerial
Conference at Seattle. MEA officials also participated in the G-77
Ministerial Meeting held at Marrakech, Morocco, in September 1999
where a message was issued by the G-77 Ministers to the Third WTO
Ministerial Conference about the concerns of developing countries.

in Uruguay Round Agreements on Anti-Dumping, Subsidies, TRIPs,
operationalization of Special and Differential Treatment provisions,
etc. Under the Agreement on Agriculture, India maintained that it
was important not only to reduce subsidies on agricultural exports
but also to focus on concerns of developing countries in matters
such as food security, rural employment, etc. India was however, willing
to show flexibility in areas such as e-commerce and information
technology.
The ASEAN-India Dialogue Partnership received a further fillip
with India’s participation led by EAM in the 32nd ASEAN Post
Ministerial Conference (PMC) in Singapore on 27-28 July 1999.
Besides participating in the multilateral plenary sessions, EAM also
had bilateral meetings with Ministers from some ASEAN and
Dialogue Partner countries. In his detailed intervention on the
international economic and financial situation, he mentioned that due
attention would have to be paid to the specific priorities of each
country in order to make globalisation a more ‘“humane” and equitable
process.
India’s bilateral exchanges with ASEAN were also most rewarding.
ASEAN conveyed appreciation for the support given by India to
various activities in ongoing areas of cooperation through mechanisms
such as the ASEAN-India Fund to which India, contributes to the

At the Seattle Ministerial Conference of WTO, India categorically
rejected any attempts to link trade with labour, or trade with
environment. India also emphasized the need to take remedial action
on implementation issues pertaining to asymmetries and inequities
93

Foreign Economic Relations

Dr. Mohamed Ariff, Executive Director of the Malaysian Institute of
Economic Research, Kuala Lumpur and H.E. Mr. Soubanh Srithirath,
Minister from Lao People’s Democratic Republic, delivered lectures
in India in May and November 1999 respectively. Similarly, eminent
Indian educationist, Dr. Kapila Vatsyayan delivered lectures in Malaysia
and Indonesia in September 1999.
India remained an active participant in the ‘Group of 15’ (G-15).
G-15 representatives met at the Senior Officials and the Ministerial
level on 22 & 24 September 1999 on the margins of the United Nations
General Assembly (UNGA). Egypt, current G-15 Chair, led the
discussions. During their deliberations, G-15 leaders exchanged views
on the prospects of adopting a common G-15 position on matters of
mutual interest for the Seattle WTO Ministerial Conference (30
November - 3 December 1999), the 10th G-15 Summit in Cairo in
May 2000 and the steps taken for initiating a G-15 - G-8 dialogue as
decided at the IX G-15 Summit in Jamaica.
A GOI delegation participated in the meeting of G-15 Experts
on the “Financial Crisis and the Reform of the International Financial
Architecture” held in Cairo from 23-24 October, 1999. The meeting
offered a useful opportunity for interaction on important issues such
as capital account liberalization, monetary management and foreign
debt, strengthening of the banking system, role of monetary and fiscal
policy in financial markets, good governance, social safety nets, early
warning mechanisms and review of the role of credit rating agencies.
An Indian delegation also participated in the G-15 Symposium on
“Globalization and its Economic and Social Impacts – A South
Perspective” held at Cairo on 22-23 November 1999, and presented
an important paper on ‘Globalization and the Trade of Developing
Countries’. The discussions focussed on various aspects of
globalization such as the world economic and social environment
and the process of globalization and liberalization, transnational
corporations, capital markets, trade of developing countries, social
impact of globalization, etc.
94

India participated in the South-South forum of G-77 Ministerial
Meeting on 24 September 1999 on the margins of UNGA. The G-77
adopted a Ministerial Declaration which covers the global economic
situation highlighting issues such as globalization and interdependence,
international trade matters as evolving in the WTO, financing for
development, Official Development Assistance (ODA) and the
external debt of developing countries, environment, science and
technology, etc. The meeting also adopted a statement on the
forthcoming South Summit to be held in Havana, Cuba in April 2000.
The G-77 Ministerial Declaration followed up on the G-77 Ministerial
Meeting held in Marrakech, Morocco from 14-16 September 1999.
The Marrakech Meeting discussed preparatory action for the Tenth
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTADX) to be held in Bangkok in February 2000, as well as the WTO
Ministerial Conference in Seattle. Multilateral trade issues, as
highlighted in the Marrakech Declaration, were reiterated in the G77 Ministerial Meeting in New York.
India participated actively in the grouping of Indian Ocean Rim
Association for Regional Cooperation (IOR-ARC). A high-level
Indian delegation, led by External Affairs Minister, participated in
the Second IOR-ARC Ministerial Meeting, which was held in Maputo,
Mozambique from 30-31 March 1999. The Ministerial Meeting was
preceded by a Seminar on Trade & Investment in IOR-ARC Region
held on 26-27 March 1999, and a meeting of the Committee of Senior
Officials on 28-29 March 1999. Mozambique will chair IOR-ARC
meetings until 2001, when, Oman - after convening of the Third
IOR-ARC Ministerial meeting in Muscat in 2001 – will assume
Chairmanship of the grouping.
The IOR-ARC Ministerial Meeting decided to expand the
Association’s membership by admitting five new members, namely
Bangladesh, Iran, Seychelles, Thailand and United Arab Emirates.

Annual Report 1999-2000

The Ministerial Meeting also decided to extend Dialogue Partner status
to Egypt and Japan. The IOR-ARC Ministers met again in New York
in September 1999 on the margins of UNGA session for discussions
on the IOR-ARC Extraordinary Meeting of Ministers in Oman in
January 2000 and other IOR-ARC issues.
A meeting of Experts of IOR-ARC was held at Maputo on 8-10
December 1999 to finalize three draft documents for the grouping Instrument of Acceptance, Rules of Procedure, and a Headquarters
Agreement between the Government of Mauritius and the IOR-ARC
Coordinating Secretariat. A clause requiring all new members to extend
Non-discriminatory (MFN) trade treatment to all members of the
grouping was incorporated in the Instrument of Acceptance. All the
three documents were considered and approved by the Special Meeting
of the Committee of Senior Officials (CSO) and the Extraordinary
Meeting of the Council of Ministers held at Muscat, Oman from 2023 January 2000. The meeting also considered and approved dialogue
partnership status for UK and China. No consensus emerged on the
French application for membership. In case of Pakistan, the Council
of Ministers decided that membership would be considered upon its
adhering to non-discriminatory trade treatment to all members of
IOR-ARC and signing the Instrument of Acceptance.
The first meeting of the IOR-ARC Working Group on Trade
and Investment was also held on 20 January 2000 at Muscat prior to
the CSO meeting to discuss issues of trade facilitation, trade
promotion, technical cooperation among members.
India took active interest in the sub-regional grouping called
‘Bangladesh – India – Myanmar – Sri Lanka – Thailand Economic
Cooperation’ (BIMST-EC). A GOI delegation participated in the
BIMST-EC Preparatory Meeting for the Establishment of an
Economic Forum (8-9 November, 1999) and Trade and Investment
Sectoral Committee (10 November 1999) convened by the

Government of Bangladesh at Dhaka. The Economic Forum would
provide strategic leadership in initiating economic activities to benefit
the group, facilitate implementation of development projects, develop
mechanisms for greater private sector involvement in BIMST-EC
activities, enhance quality of information flows and promote
institutional linkages and networking, and generate increased
participation by the business community in the identified sectors of
BIMST-EC. India would be participating in the BIMST-EC meeting
of Experts in Energy Sector being convened by Myanmar on 28-29
February 2000.
The Sectoral Committee on Trade and Investment discussed the
critical role of information flows (on trade and investment matters)
within BIMST-EC member countries and the networking of private
sector agencies/institutions and investment promotion agencies of
member countries. India proposed setting up a BIMSTNet on the
Internet.
India also hosted a ‘World Intellectual Property Organization’
(WIPO) Sub-Regional Forum on Intellectual Property Rights among
BIMST-EC Countries in New Delhi on 18-19 November 1999. In
order to give greater impetus to cooperation in this area, the meeting
proposed that it would be desirable to officially include Intellectual
Property Rights (IPRs) as a sub-sector of cooperation under the trade
and investment sector in BIMST-EC. The meeting stressed the critical
role which Information Technology could play in facilitating IPRrelated cooperation under BIMST-EC and stressed the need to
intensify linkages between IPR-related institutions in member
countries.
Besides participating in the deliberations of various regional
economic and multilateral groupings, the Ministry also associated itself
with various other international economic conferences and seminars.
A high-level Indian delegation led by EAM participated in the bilateral
95

Foreign Economic Relations

India-United Kingdom (UK) talks on International Economic and
Financial Issues held on 24 May 1999 in London. The talks provided
an opportunity to both the countries to review the present state of
UK and Indian economies, bilateral economic relations, and global
economic issues of significance.
EAM visited Paris to participate in a special dialogue between
‘Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development’ (OECD)
Council of Ministers and selected non-member countries, held at Paris
on 26 May 1999. Other non-member countries which were invited
were Argentina, Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, the Russian
Federation, the Slovak Republic and South Africa. The meeting
provided an opportunity for the 29 member countries of OECD to
discuss policy coherence on a range of key economic issues, with
important non-member countries, representing a population of over
3 billion people and a rising share of the global GDP.
The Ministry played an active coordinating role in the ‘Economic
and Social Council for Asia and the Pacific’ (ESCAP) Projects of
Trans Asian Railway and Asian Highway. A 4-member Indian
delegation comprising representatives of the Ministry of Railways,
the Ministry of External Affairs, and ‘Container Corporation of India’
(CONCOR) participated in the meeting for development of TransAsian Railway - Southern Corridor (TAR-SC), convened by ESCAP
in Dhaka on 25-28 May 1999.
In the context of South-South cooperation, a GOI delegation
participated in the 11th Session of High Level Committee (HLC) on
the Review of Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries
(TCDC), held at New York from 1-4 June 1999. The HLC mechanism,
which has been created by the UN General Assembly, pursuant to
the Buenos Aires Plan of Action (BAPA) on TCDC in 1978, meets
every two years. Participation in the meeting provided an excellent
96

opportunity for reiterating India’s active involvement with the TCDC
cause. India’s statement was widely circulated within participant
countries along with other information booklets on the ITEC
programme. India announced the establishment of a specific Trust
Fund for beneficiaries in Africa, Latin America and South Pacific
countries.
Solidarity with Africa continues to be one of India’s main planks
of its multilateral economic relations diplomacy. Thus, India
participated in the Regional Review Meeting of the Tokyo Agenda
for Action - finalized at the Second Tokyo International Conference
on African Development (TICAD) at Tokyo in October 1998 - held
in Lusaka, Zambia from 23-25 November 1999. The Indian delegate
gave an overview of the initiatives being undertaken by India for the
economic development of Africa, both at a bilateral level under the
Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) Programme,
and in other multilateral fora such as the G-15, Southern African
Development Community (SADC), Special Commonwealth African
Assistance Plan (SCAAP), Economic and Technical Cooperation
among Developing Countries (ECDC/TCDC), Common Market for
Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). During the
conference, India conveyed its willingness to partner with developed
countries like Japan for developmental initiatives in Africa on a case
by case basis. Under such triangular cooperation, Indian experts could
collaborate in development-oriented projects funded by developed
countries in select areas such as information technology, agriculture,
small-scale industries, public health and education. India also
highlighted the potential for strengthening some of the Indian
institutions and centres of excellence imparting HRD training in
various fields to African candidates through assistance by developed
countries.

Annual Report 1999-2000

iv) Study visits of senior officials / decision makers to India.

used by the end of this financial year. The number of Training
Institutes has been increased to 51 after empanelling 12 new Institutes
in the current financial year in response to needs expressed by our
partner countries. The new Institutes cover fields such as Drugs and
Pharmaceuticals, Labour Administration and Employment Relations
in a global Economy, Hotel Management, Oceanography, Artificial
Insemination, Telecommunications, Sugarcane Production
Technology, Wildlife Management, Remote Sensing, etc. Regular
courses were conducted in the usual fields of Audit and Accounts,
Banking, Diplomacy, Manpower Planning, Parliamentary Studies,
Rural Development, Small Scale Industries, Information Technology,
Food Processing, Textile Technology, News Agency Journalism,
Standardisation, Educational Planning and Administration,
Entrepreneurship and Small Business Development, Packaging,
International Management, Human Resource Planning and English
Language. Under ITEC Civil Training Programme all costs including
international travel are borne by the GOI.

ITEC has created considerable goodwill for India and helped
boost her image as a country with indigenous technological skills and
capabilities who shares her knowledge and experience with other
developing countries without any strings attached. There has been a
growing demand for ITEC assistance from partner countries. From
actual expenditure of Rs. 22.69 crores in 1997-98, the programme’s
budget grew to Rs. 34.29 crores in 1998-99. The budget allocation
for 1999-2000 has been enhanced to Rs. 36.00 crores.

For the first time in 1999-2000, neighbouring countries, Nepal,
Bhutan, Sri Lanka, Maldives, Bangladesh and Myanmar were allotted
slots under ITEC’s Civil Training Programme. Utilisation of these
slots is, however, uneven; while Sri Lanka and Maldives have utilised
the entire allocation, Bangladesh, Bhutan and Myanmar have not so
far been able to utilise the slots to the extent desired. We expect the
utilisation to improve as information about the offer percolates better
into the system next year.

In 1999-2000, 1967 slots were allotted for Civil training (as against
1485 in 1998-99) in prestigious Training Institutes and Establishments
(Annexure-XIII) including 240 slots allotted to 24 Pacific, CARICOM
and Central American States under a newly created window for
technical cooperation with these countries. Until now 1067 slots have
been utilised (Annexure-XIV and XV) and more are expected to be

Under Military Training, nominees of friendly countries are
imparted training in national institutions in all three wings of defence
services, including the prestigious National Defence College, New
Delhi and National Defence Services Staff College, Wellington. The
Training covers fields such as Security and Strategic Studies; Defence
Management; Artillery; Electronics, Mechanical, Marine and

Technical Cooperation
The Technical Cooperation Division offers technical assistance
under the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC)
Programme and the Special Commonwealth African Assistance Plan
(SCAAP) to 141 developing countries in Asia, Africa, Latin America,
Eastern Europe and the Pacific. For the purposes of this report,
reference to ITEC will also include SCAAP (under which only civil
training is provided) as the two programmes are different only in
budget heads under which accounts are maintained.
The ITEC assistance takes the following four forms:
i)

Training (both civil and military).

ii) Projects and project-related assistance such as supply of
equipment, consultancy services and feasibility studies.
iii) Deputation of experts and

97

Foreign Economic Relations

Aeronautical Engineering; Anti-marine Warfare; Hydrographic;
Logistics and Management and Qualitative Assurance Services.
All Military training costs, including international travel, for
ITEC-I category candidates are met by GOI. For ITEC-II category
candidates, costs are partially covered under ITEC and partially
(international travel ) shared with the partner country. During 1999 2000, 195 slots for long and short term training courses were offered
under ITEC/SAP and 140 slots under Self-Financing Scheme. Some
slots were also offered on reciprocal basis. Annexures XVI- XIX
contain lists of beneficiary countries of ITEC Military Training
Programme.
Projects and project related assistance has helped enhance India’s
image as a modern economy and technologically and scientifically
advanced State. In 1999 - 2000, a project was launched to establish a
Plastic Technology Demonstration and Common Facility Centre in
the backward area of Ondangwa (located about 800 kms. from
Windhoek) in Namibia at a total cost of approximately Rs. 3.40 crores.
NSIC is the Implementing Agency for this project. The Centre will
provide vocational skills to the youth of Namibia and enhance
employment opportunities for them. Another project costing
approximately Rs.13 crores for setting up an Entrepreneurship and
Technical Development Centre (ETDC) in Senegal, started in 1998
by HMT(I), is expected to be completed in January/February, 2000.
Envisaged in the long run as a Regional Centre for all the French
speaking West African countries, ETDC provides vocational training
to 96 students in selected mechanical and electronic trades. After a
midterm review of the project was conducted by Additional Secretary
(FA) and Joint Secretary (TC), the Ministry of National Education,
Government of Senegal decided to confer National Diploma to each
student passing out from the Centre which will be recognised not
only in Senegal but also in other franco-phone countries in West
Africa.
98

The Indian Farmers’ Project in Burkina Faso aimed at transferring
Indian Green Revolution technology, particularly in rice cultivation
to Burkina Faso was also launched this year. This is a unique project
under which six practical farmers from Punjab have been sent to
Burkina Faso for three years to implement the project. Farm
machinery, equipment and other inputs have also been supplied by
the GOI. In fulfilment of a high-level commitment, equipment for
setting up five primary health centres was also supplied this year to
Burkina Faso. In Mongolia, where ITEC had set up the Rajiv Gandhi
Vocational Training Centre (RGVTC) in September 1996, two
additional faculties i.e. Computer Programming and Gem Stone
Cutting and Polishing were provided this year, to augment the existing
five faculties (auto mechanic, radio and TV repair, plumbing, electrician
and machine shop mechanics). These two additional faculties were
inaugurated by the Hon’ble Vice President of India during his visit to
Mongolia in August 1999. Smaller projects, feasibility studies and
consultancy services were undertaken in countries such as Myanmar,
Kyrghyzstan, Guyana, Cambodia and Fiji. A list of projects and
project-related assistance extended this year so far to different
countries may be seen at Annexure XX.
Under the much sought after Study Visits Programme, senior
decision makers from various partner countries are invited to India
for exchange of views and guided exposure to Indian capacities in
fields of interest to them such as small scale industries, agriculture,
health, education, foreign-trade, etc. Twenty study visits were planned
this year as against 10-11 in previous years. Manpower constraints in
TC Division were overcome by engaging the services of retired Deputy
Secretary / Director level officers of the Ministry to act as Liaison
Officers for the visiting delegations. A 2-member delegation led by
Mr. Yura Jigj, Director, Rajiv Gandhi Vocational Training Centre
(RGVTC), Ulaanbaatar, visited India from 19 - 25 June, 1999 to see
Computer Programming and Gem & Jewellery Processing facilities

Annual Report 1999-2000

in India and to discuss with the officials in the Ministry of Education
the possibilities of cooperation in the education field. A 2-member
team from Suriname led by Mr. S F Polanen, Chairman of the Electoral
Council of Suriname, visited India from 18 - 23 September, 1999 to
study India’s electoral process. Dr. Haseeb Bashi, Director General,
Iraqi Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research, visited
India from October 25 - 29, 1999 to select books in engineering,
technology, science, etc. which are proposed to be supplied to Iraq
under ITEC Programme. A 3-member delegation from Turkmenistan
led by H.E. Mr. N U Utamyshev, Deputy Minister of Textiles, visited
India from November 14 - 21, 1999 to study and discuss possible
cooperation in textile industry. Mr. M. Y. C. Lumbanga, Chief Secretary
of Tanzania visited India from December 14-20, 1999 to study the
industrial and technological progress made by India. Other study visits
are scheduled this year from Jamaica, Kyrgyzstan, Uganda and
Seychelles.
Indian experts are deputed abroad as advisors in response to
requests received from Governments of developing countries for
advice on technical and developmental subjects such as health,
agriculture, engineering, teaching, accounts, small scale industries and
legislation drafting. Over the years Indian experts have effected
incremental improvement in vital developmental sectors of the
economies of many countries with their well considered advice which
is generally respected for being most relevant to the needs and
capacities of the developing economies. Expenses on deputing experts
are shared with the host country although the larger share is borne
by the GOI. The number of experts until 1998-99 was 23 but there

are plans to raise this number to 50 to meet the growing demand.
Through the valuable cooperation and support of the Department
of Personnel and Training, we have been able to reduce our response
time taken to send an expert abroad. At present there are 22 long
term and 1 short term experts (Annexure XXI) in Guyana, Laos,
Mauritius, Namibia, Seychelles, Trinidad & Tobago, Vietnam, Zambia
and Zanzibar.
In May, 1999 a documentary video film on ITEC Programme
entitled, “The South Imperatives of Cooperation” was prepared and
shown at New York during the 11th Session of High Level Committee
on TCDC held from June 1-5, 1999. Copies of the video film were
also sent to Indian Missions for use on ITEC Day on 15th September,
1999. The film was well received. In some countries the film was
shown on local TV network.
Under the Aid for Disaster Relief (ADR) Programme
humanitarian assistance for victims of natural disasters in various
countries is provided in the form of medicines, food items, tents,
blankets etc. Under this programme 92 MT of sugar and 500 MT of
rice were supplied to Indonesia/ West Timor while medicines and
surgical items were supplied to Madagascar, Mozambique, Ghana and
Honduras for the victims of a cholera epidemic and floods. Tents
were supplied to Tajikistan in the wake of unseasonal torrential rains
and tea, surgical items and medicines were supplied to Turkey for the
victims of earthquake. The list containing the details of the relief
supplies is at Annexure XXII.
uu

99

11
Trade and Investment Promotion

T

he Central Government and the State Governments took
several initiatives and measures during the year aimed at
encouraging foreign investment inflows, particularly the flow
of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) into India. The major thrust
areas included infrastructure development, particularly energy, power,
telecom and information technology. It was the task of the Investment
Promotion and Publicity Division to actively undertake effective
investment promotion and publicity efforts, particularly through the
Indian Missions and Posts abroad for attracting foreign investment
into the country. Quite often, Commercial Wings in the Missions are
the first point of contact for the foreign investor. It is, therefore,
essential that the Missions are given full backup support in their efforts
in the form of providing up-to-date information about the economy,
the liberalised policies and the procedures, the project and
opportunities available in different sectors, the incentives offered by
the Central Government and various State Governments etc. Missions
are also approached by investors seeking their intervention in case of
delays in respect of clearances for their proposals or in respect of
other hurdles faced in the implementation of projects. For all these
and related matters the Investment Promotion and Publicity (IPP)
Division in the Ministry has acted as a nodal point of contact and
coordination to serve as an effective channel of communication
100

between the Missions and the relevant Ministries/State Governments
or other agencies, as the case may be.
Policy
The Ministry provides inputs for policy formulations, whenever
required, based on investment trends worldwide and based on the
need to maintain harmony between foreign policy objectives and our
economic policies. Regular feedback was received from the Missions
on foreign investor perceptions about India’s investment policies or
about successful model/policies followed elsewhere for serving as
inputs to the evolution of any new policies or to the review of an
existing one, if the same was considered necessary in the national
interest.
The Ministry also actively participated in the meetings of Foreign
Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) and Foreign Investment
Implementation Authority (FIIA) in collaboration with other
Ministries and State Governments. In FIPB, the Ministry was
represented by Secretary (ER) and investments from NRIs were given
particular attention. In FIAA, specific policy measures to speed up
the investment already made were taken up with concerned Ministries
and State Governments.

Annual Report 1999-2000

Promotional Efforts and Initiatives
The Ministry undertook several initiatives towards suitably
projecting the various investment policies and announcements of the
Government by coordinating with the Missions on the one hand and
various economic Ministries of the Central Government and State
Governments on the other. Economic news about India was regularly
disseminated to all the Missions highlighting major policy decisions
and new opportunities, thus keeping them abreast of the
developments. Missions were also encouraged to hold investment
promotion seminars and workshops besides extending investment
support services, for which suitable publicity material, speaking points
etc. were regularly despatched. Such seminars were held by several of
our Missions in identified target countries. The Ministry also
undertook special efforts to highlight the policies, procedures and
opportunities available in the Information Technology sector.
The Missions also provided support to visiting Indian delegations
including those sponsored by the State Governments by arranging
suitable meetings with potential investors, local Government officials
and the local Chamber of Commerce or Products Associations.
The Ministry also assisted, based on information provided by
the Missions, visiting foreign investor delegations/groups in having
appropriate meetings with concerned Government Departments, the
Apex Chambers of Commerce, the State Governments etc. The
Ministry also participated in many bilateral or other meetings/
conferences involving overseas investor groups.
The Ministry also actively assisted various Departments/
organisations in the country in organising investment/trade
promotion events in India, including the Ministerial Conference on
Space Applications for Sustainable Development in Asia and Pacific
organised by the United Nations Economic and Social Commission

for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) in New Delhi from 15-20 November
1999 and hosted by the Government of India. This Division liaised
with our Missions/Posts abroad for participation of the ESCAP
member countries in the above Conference. Indian and French space
agencies have joined hands to launch a scientific satellite, ‘Megha
Tropiques’, which will provide data on atmospheric and oceanic
activities to scientists across the world.
The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) and the French
space agency Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES) signed a
statement of intent in New Delhi to launch the satellite in an effort
to understand weather and climate better.
The Government launched a comprehensive scheme for the
persons of Indian origin - called ‘PIO’ Card Scheme on 30th March.
Under this scheme persons of Indian origin upto the fourth generation
(great grand parents settled through out the world except citizens of
Pakistan, Bangladesh and other countries as may be specified by the
Central Government from time to time), would be eligible. The Card
would be issued to eligible applicants through concerned Indian
Embassies/High Commissions/Consulates and for those staying in
India on long-term visa (more than one year), the concerned
Foreigners Regional Registration Officer (Delhi, Mumbai, Calcutta,
Chennai) would do the same. The fee for the Card which will have
validity of 20 years, would be US$ 1000. The Ministry actively
participated in the efforts to mobilise good response for the PIO
Card.
Publicity
The IPP Division has reprinted 10,000 copies of its brochure
“India Means Business - Perspectives” in view of the positive response
received from investors in India and abroad. The Division is also
bringing out the French, German and Spanish versions of this
brochure.
101

Trade and Investment Promotion

The Division is planning to set up a specialised web site on the
internet aimed at foreign business community. It will carry up-todate information on policies and procedures for investment in India,
economic reforms including second generation reforms, economic
data covering investment trends, success stories, interactive section
for business queries and specific projects on offer, etc.
Agreements
The Ministry participated in the negotiations for drawing up of
Bilateral Investment Promotion and Protection Agreements (BIPPAs)

and Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements (DTAAs) that were held
in respect of a number of countries. Such agreements were signed
during the year with New Zealand, Trinidad & Tobago, Kyrgyzstan,
Qatar, Indonesia and Zimbabwe.
The Ministry also participated in the negotiations relating to
bilateral Civil Aviation matters with other countries. The Ministry
provided legal inputs, as required, and also tendered advice based on
the need for increased civil aviation links particularly with our
neighbouring regions to evolve in consonance with the initiatives being
taken on the foreign policy front.
uu

102

Annual Report 1999-2000

12
Policy Planning and Research

T

he Policy Planning and Research Division of the Ministry
continued to perform its role of preparing briefs and
background papers on important topics and issues on the
evolving international situation. These covered issues of long-term
relevance to broad foreign policy objectives. The Division prepared
analytical position papers for Ministry’s interaction with other agencies.
An in-depth paper on ‘Euro’ prepared in the Division was circulated
in the Ministry and Missions abroad.
The Division continued to serve as a nodal point for interaction
with the National Security Council Secretariat (NSCS) formerly known
as the Joint Intelligence Committee (JIC), the University Grants
Commission (UGC) and its affiliates and the Area Study Centres
(ASC) located in various universities and specializing in research on
various regions of the world.
The Division extended financial, assistance to various academic
institutions/think tanks located in different parts of the country for
holding conferences, seminars, preparation of research papers,
exchange of scholars and support for Track-II programmes on issues
related to India’s external relations and security.
The subject of these seminars, conferences and research projects
covered Indian Foreign Policy, India-Iran Relations, India-Korea

Dialogue, Indo-US Dialogue, Contribution of Persons of Indian
Origin (PIOs) in the development of countries of their-adoption,
Conference on South Asia, Regional Cooperation among SAARC
Countries. Support was also provided to Indian scholars and experts
attending seminars and conferences in Turkey, Sri Lanka. Singapore,
Kyrghystan, Tajikistan, USA, UK and Canada.
The Centre for Advanced Study of India at the University of
Pennsylvania, USA is given an annual recurring grant by the Division.
A proposal for giving another grant is currently under examination
as a part of the continuing Indo-US cooperation in various fields.
The Division took initiative in promoting exchanges with official
and non-official visiting experts and projected India’s views and
perceptions on important issues. In continuation of this interactive
role, Joint Secretary (PP) led a delegation to Tehran, Iran or the First
Meeting of the Working Group on Research and Study between Iran
and India. During the meeting held on 7th and 8th December 1999
in Tehran, the two sides underlined the importance of research and
study in increasing bilateral cooperation and better understanding of
regional and international issues of mutual interest. It was agreed at
the meeting that:
a) research and study should be carried out on subjects which have
103

Policy Planning and Research

an immediate and direct impact on bilateral relations or issues of
common interest to both countries and
b) experts and scholars from outside the Foreign Ministries should
be engaged in research and study. Apart from holding discussions
on various political issues, science and technology issues were
also discussed under which it was agreed that a dialogue between
the scientific organizations and experts of both countries should
be held at the earliest convenience of both sides to identify specific
areas for cooperation and joint research. Economic and
commercial issues were also discussed wherein it was agreed to
undertake studies on economic complementarities, strengths in
specific sectors, obstacles to trade and economic cooperation
and greater rise of transit routes available under existing
arrangements. During the visit, the Indian delegation also called
on the Deputy Foreign Minister, H.E. Mr. Sadeq Kharrazi and
Deputy Minister for Technology, H.E. Dr. Sayed Ahmad
Motamedi. In view of the fruitful discussions at the First Meeting,
it was agreed that further meetings would be held alternatively in
New Delhi and Tehran at mutually convenient dates.
To further strengthen Ministry’s capabilities in research and
analyses, the Division prepared a detailed proposal for revival of the
Research Cadre as recommended by the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on External Affairs. The proposal and Cabinet Note are
in the last stages of being processed and with the revival of this vital
Cadre, it is hoped that our research and analytical capabilities will be
further strengthened to face challenges in formulating our foreign
policy.
The ‘Ambassadors-in-Residence’ Programme was also revived
with the posting of two Ambassadors – one specializing in Gulf
Studies and the other in Euro-Atlantic Studies. Both Ambassadors
are now attached to the School of International Studies, Jawaharlal
104

Nehru University, New Delhi. Agreements have also been obtained
from the universities of Mumbai, Goa and Delhi for posting of such
‘Ambassadors-in-Residence’ and volunteers having the required
qualifications and experiences are awaited for filling tip these posts.
The Division continued to edit and publish the Annual Report
of the Ministry. The Report served as a compendium of India’s
interaction with the rest of the world in the political, economic and
cultural fields, including the views of the government on various facets
of international relations.
The Division rendered all possible assistance to the terrorism
divisions as well as Indian Missions abroad whenever any specific
information or document on international relations was required. The
Research Wing examined the depiction of India’s international
boundaries in foreign publications. Cases of incorrect depiction were
taken up with the concerned government or the publisher through
Indian Missions abroad for necessary corrective measures. The
Division also scrutinized foreign publications containing maps
depicting India’s external boundaries before these were imported into
the county and offered its views to the Ministries dealing with such
matters. It coordinated the supply of map-sheets to various
Government and semi-Government agencies for use in their official
work with the Survey of India and the Ministry of Defence. The
Research Wing dealt with requests from research scholars for access
to the records of the Ministry. A Committee has been constituted
with representatives from the Ministries of External Affairs, Home
Affairs and Defence to examine the access of Research Scholars to
Pre-Independence ‘closed period’ records in the National Archives
of India.
In support of research, the Ministry’s Library has modern
information technology equipment and rich resource materials, with
over one hundred thousand books and a large collection of maps,

Annual Report 1999-2000

microfilms and official documents. The Library receives and maintains
600 periodical titles. It has in-house computer systems with fifteen
terminals, two of which support data entry and retrieval in Hindi. It
also has CD-ROM work station and has CD-ROM databases on
foreign affairs and current affairs. The Library is also equipped with
a CD-writer, a Colour Scanner (with OCR capability as well as facility
for storage and retrieval of images), a microfilm/fiche reader printer,
a plain paper photocopier, as well as a VTR and colour monitor and
a laser printer with Desk Top Publishing (DTP) software. This has
enabled better presentation of publications and documents of the
Division. The Library has internet and E-mail facilities. These are
being gradually made available to visiting users who including former
Foreign Service officers, Documentation/bibliographic services as
well as other library operations and services have been computerised,
using an integrated library software package. Information on all books,
maps, documents and selected periodical articles received in the
Library since 1986, and pre-1986 publications in active use, are
available on-line through each terminal in the as well as in the Ministry’s
headquarters in South Block and in Akbar Bhawan through network
in operation in these buildings. Library’s information databases can
also be accessed on internet on MEA Library's websites by eligible
users including our officials in Missions abroad. All new documents
received in the Library – books, maps, microfilms, selected articles
from periodicals – are being fed into the in-house computer system
to create a database on foreign affairs.

Using this database and CD-ROM Databases, the Library
provides Current Awareness Service and Bibliographical and
Reference Services. In addition, the Library regularly issues ‘Foreign
Affairs Documentation Bulletin’ – monthly list of selected periodicals,

105

13

External Publicity

A

s an instrument of foreign policy management, the External
Publicity Division discharges several key functions, namely:
responding to the citizens’ right to information; articulating
the policies and responses of the government on foreign policy and
international security affairs; projecting a holistic and correct image
of the country; playing the role of a catalyst for enhancing contacts
between Indian media and their counterparts in foreign countries;
dissemination of published information through Indian libraries
abroad; maintaining an internet website with a comprehensive database
and daily updates; and publishing an in-house monthly India
Perspectives in ten languages for wide circulation abroad. A special
responsibility was placed on the XP Division in the summer of 1999
to organise and anchor the inter-ministerial daily briefings to the
national and international media on political and military developments
following Pakistan’s aggression against India in the Kargil sector of
Jammu and Kashmir. These briefings helped galvanise international
public opinion in support of India’s message that aggression against
India would have to be reversed by Pakistan and that the sanctity and
inviolability of the Line of Control in the Indian State of Jammu and
Kashmir must be respected.
The official spokesman articulated and projected India’s position
on various national and international issues through official

106

statements, press briefings and public relations efforts. Over 200
official statements and press releases were issued by the XP Division
during the period 1999-2000 and circulated to Indian media, foreign
media resident in India, foreign missions in New Delhi and made
available on the ministry’s internet website.
The ‘Foreign Affairs Record’, a compilation of all press releases,
agreements, speeches and significant diplomatic developments, was
brought out on a monthly basis. Our news dissemination function
also includes daily news bulletins and clippings for headquarters and
missions and posts abroad; regular feedback to missions and posts
on developments concerning India. MEA’s internet website serves as
a vital tool in the overall effort towards information dissemination.
Efforts were made jointly with Indian missions and posts abroad
to enlarge areas of positive perception about India. Some focus areas
included: India’s foreign policy and international security approach;
India’s millennial history and civilization; its diverse and profound
religious and philosophical traditions; its democratic and secular
political culture and institutions, its pluralistic, tolerant and progressive
social ethos; its wide experience in nation building; its impressive
economic, scientific and technological achievements and its market
potential.

Annual Report 1999-2000

Audio visual publicity : Documentary and feature films were
used to reinforce the country’s positive image. In the year 1999-2000,
several documentaries on a variety of themes were completed while
others are under various stages of production. These include City
Scapes, Foreigners Who have Adopted India as their Home, Heart of
the Matter (foreign policy show), India & the UN, Wisdom of India,
SAARC in the Next Millennium, Software Frontiers and Coronation
of the King of Bhutan.
Documentary films were circulated for non-commercial publicity
through Indian missions and posts abroad. These include India in
Space, Adoor – A Journey in Frames, Bamboo Flute, Indian Nobel
Laureates, Rooted Imagination, Women in Panchayats, Design Classics
of India, Healing Tree, Heart of the Matter, Echoes from the Past
(Old Monuments of Delhi), Unheard Melodies, Fragrance of Love,
Nisbat, Of Melodies Divine, and Abiding Grace. On the occasion of
India’s Independence Day – 1999, several documentaries were sent
abroad for telecast on local TV networks and international channels.
A positive feedback was received from Indian missions and posts on
these telecasts.
A CD-ROM titled “India-Timeless Civilization....Vibrant
Democracy”, was brought out by the ministry and its English version
was sent to all missions and posts abroad. The Hindi, Arabic and
Chinese versions are in the final stages of completion, while the
Russian, Spanish and French language versions are also expected to
be completed in the near future. A major exercise was undertaken to
procure and distribute audio and video CDs, representative of the
best of Indian music and cinema, for reference and information.
Film festivals were organized by various missions and posts
abroad and foreign cultural centres in coordination with the ministry.
11 international film festivals, including retrospectives on Ritwik

Ghatak and Adoor Gopalakrishnan, were organized in Paris, Madrid,
Hanoi, Damascus, Glasgow, Cairo, Rome, Copenhagen, Kuala
Lumpur, Mexico City. 49 prints of feature films were supplied from
the XP audio-visual library and other prints were procured from
Directorate of Film Festivals (DFF) and other agencies for this
purpose. Assistance was also provided in facilitating foreign
participation in the 31st International Film Festival in Delhi in January
2000. The division also extended its support in the arrangement of
slide shows and photo-exhibitions in missions and posts abroad.
Requests for information infrastructure and audio-video hardware
from missions and posts were processed. These included sanctioning
of equipment such as satellite antenna, TVs, VCRs, projectors and
photocopiers.
Press facilitation: Foreign media, both print and electronic,
continued to evince keen interest in India through sustained visits.
India’s foreign policy and its approach to security issues, the general
elections and Pakistan’s aggression in Kargil further stimulated the
media’s interest in India. Various facilities were extended by the
Ministry to meet the increased inflow of media persons.
During the year, about 100 journalists, individually or as part of
media and TV delegations visited India from Australia, Austria,
Bangladesh, Brunei, China, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Egypt, Gaza,
Indonesia, Israel, Iran, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Philippines, Russia,
South Africa, South Korea, Syria, Turkey and Venezuela. These visits
led to a balanced coverage of India in foreign media, as well as to a
better understanding of the country. Many journalistic visits were
unstructured and spontaneous. The division provided assistance to
them, including arranging meetings with senior ministers, high-level
government officials, academicians, representatives of business houses,
industry, etc.
107

External Publicity

Another important aspect of press facilitation work handled by
the division was to provide assistance to foreign media accompanying
Heads of State or Government on visits to India, including those
from Australia, Bangladesh, Cambodia, Estonia, Kazakhsthan,
Kyrghyz Republic, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, Nigeria, Qatar,
Russia, Seychelles, Singapore, South Korea, Spain, Uruguay, Vatican
and Vietnam. The assistance rendered entailed facilitating media
coverage, arranging press briefings and providing other logistical
arrangements. Over 200 journalists, both Indian and foreign, covered
Prime Minister’s historic visit to Lahore in February 1999. Another
large media event was the visit by H.H. Pope John Paul II to India in
November 1999.
All logistical arrangements were made for coverage by the Indian
media persons accompanying the President, Vice President and Prime
Minister on their state visits abroad to Jamaica (G-15), Trinidad and
Tobago, Morocco, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Mongolia, Kyrghyz Republic,
Austria, Tanzania and South Africa. This included the setting up and
operation of media centres, media briefings and other facilities and
logistical arrangements. Assistance was also provided to Indian
journalists travelling abroad on specific assignments.
The making of documentary films by foreign TV channels was
encouraged and facilitated through timely clearance and administrative
assistance. Around 300 proposals were received from documentary
makers all over the world relating to diverse aspects of India including
tourism, wildlife, social and cultural issues, travelogues etc. Over 90
per cent of these proposals were cleared, while others are at various
stages of clearances awaiting requisite approvals of other central and
state government departments.
Supply of print material : The division continued to procure
and supply books, magazines, journals and other periodicals for use
in the libraries of and for distribution to local dignitaries, opinion
108

makers and academic institutions abroad. 77 titles of books were
purchased and distributed to all Indian missions and posts abroad.
Booklets on Prime Minister’s speeches at 9th G-15 Summit, brochures
on India and UN (in English and French); India’s role in UN peacekeeping; biographies of Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers;
and India at a Glance (in Portuguese) were some of the projects taken
up for implementation. Quarterly compilation of press releases and
Spokesman’s statements were printed regularly.
Infrastructure : Major renovation and restructuring work,
including the construction of a new state-of-the-art auditorium, an
audio-visual library and a waiting room for visitors is under
implementation.
MEA website : The ministry’s website was kept updated on a
daily basis to cover all developments relating to foreign policy, nuclear
issues, international terrorism, speeches and interviews of dignitaries,
official spokesman’s statements, bilateral treaties and agreements
signed by India, India’s political and economic developments, general
elections, Parliament questions and answers etc. During the Kargil
conflict, a special section was launched which included daily updates
by the Armed Forces, statements by the ministry and international
and Indian press coverage of the conflict. The website server was
also upgraded to incorporate audio-visual contents and a greater
volume of textual material. The website received an average of 2.2
million hits per month and was widely appraised and appreciated by
the users. The website was also hyper-linked by some of the important
organizations like CNN, The Economist, etc. for information relating
to India. An e-mail-based media reporting system for feedback from
abroad on the local reporting and for retrievable storage of this
reporting was started with selected missions abroad. Extensive archival
material on India’s foreign policy is being loaded on the website for
reference and easy retrieval.

Annual Report 1999-2000

India Perspectives, the monthly magazine of the ministry was
published every month in ten different languages for distribution
through Indian missions and posts abroad. Demand for the
publication has been ever-increasing and 55,000 copies were printed
during the year for supply to Indian missions and posts. Besides
highlighting India’s historical and cultural heritage, the journal has
been focussing on the impressive progress made by India in the fields

of science and technology and the steps taken to globalize the country’s
economy. Two special issues of the magazine were brought out in
March 1999 to mark the Prime Minister’s historic visit to Lahore and
to commemorate the celebration of the tricentenary of the
establishment of the Khalsa Panth Special Millennium issues, which
would carry articles of abiding interest on all facets of India are being
produced.
uu

109

14

Protocol

State Visits by Heads of State/Government/Vice Presidents/Crown Prince to India
January 1999

10-13
24-29

H. E. Mr. Jean Claude Juncker, Prime Minister of Luxembourg
King Birendra Bir Bikram Shah Dev, King of Nepal

February 1999

3-10

H. E. Mr. Lennart Meri, President of Estonia

April 1999

6-8
12-16

H. H. Sheikh Hamad Bin Khalifa AI-Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar
H. E. Mr.Askar Akaev, President of Kyrghzstan

July 1999

21-24

H. E. Dr.Sam Nujoma, President of Namibia.

November 1999

5-8
20-25

H. H Pope John Paul II
H. E. Mr. Witn Kok,PM of Netherlands

December 1999

1-5

H. E. Mr. Tran Duc Luong, President of Socialist Republic of Vietnam

February 1999

17-19

H. E. Hun Sen, Prime Minister of Cambodia

January 2000

17-20
24-27
110

H. E. Mr. Gok Chok Tong, Prime Minister of Singapore
H. E. Mr. O. Obasanjo, President of Nigeria

Annual Report 1999-2000

February 2000

8-9
21-24

H. E. Mr. Abdurrahman Wahid, President of Indonesia
H. E. Mr. Abderrahmane Youssouf, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Morroco

Official Visits by Heads of State/Government/Vice Presidents/Crown Prince to India
January 1999

5-8
27-29

H. E. Mr. Angadi Chettiar, Vice President of Mauritius
R. E. Sheikh Hasina, PM of Bangladesh (Calcutta)

February 1999

10-12

H. E. Mr. Kim Jong Pil, PM of South Korea

March 1999

21-25

H. E. Mr. James Michell, Vice-President of Seychelles

December 1999

5-9

H. E. Dr. Hugo Fernandez-Faingold, Vice-President of Uruguay.

Private Visits by Heads of State/Governments/Vice Presidents/First Ladies
January 1999

5-10

Mrs A.Oyunbileg, Wife of President of Mongolia

April 1999

16-17

H. E. Genl. Obasanio, President-elect Nigeria

May 1999

24-27

H H King of Bhutan Jigme Singye Wangchuk

August 1999

12-14

HRH Don Felipe de Borbon, Crown Prince of Spain (Jaipur/Agra)

November 1999

9-17

Mrs Zohra Uteem, First Lady of Mauritius

December 1999

25-2 January H. E. Queen Beatrix of Netherlands

111

Protocol

January 2000

12-26

H. E. Mr. A. V. Chettiar, Vice President of Mauritius

Transit visits by Heads of State/Government/Vice Presidents/Crown Princes/Foreign Ministers
January 1999

22

H. E. Mr. E. Rakhmanov, President of Tajikistan

March 1999

13-14
20
24 & 31

H. E. Mr.Ali Abdulah Saleh, President of Yemen
H. E. Mr. Kawasnewaski, President of Poland
H. E. Dr. Mahathir Mohammad, PM of Malaysia (Mumbai)

April 1999

9-10

H. E. Mr. Yasir Arafat, President of Palestine

May 1999

9
24-25

Mr. Taha Y. Ramdan, Vice President of Iraq
H. E. Mr. Harun Aptidon, President of Djibouti (former)

June 1999

19-20

H. E. Mr. Lakshman Kadirgamar,FM of Sri Lanka

July 1999

1-5
7-8
22 & 28
25 & 28

H. E. Dr.Sam Nujoma, President of Namibia (Mumbai)
H. E. Mr. Lakshman Kadirgamar, FM of Sri Lanka (New Delhi)
President of Sudan (Mumbai)
H. E. Mr. lgor Ivanov, FM, Russia

August 1999

25

H. E. Mr. R. S. Mahat, FM of Nepal

September 1999

14
14

H. E. Sheikh Hasina, PM of Bangladesh
H. E. Mr. Putin., PM of Russia (Delhi)

October 1999

23
112

H. E. Mr.Hugo Chavez., President of Venezuela (Mumbai)

Annual Report 1999-2000

December 1999

16

H. E. Mr. Milos Zeman, Prime Minister of the Czech Republic

January 2000

5-6

H. E. Mr. Tariq Aziz, Deputy Prime Minister of Iran

February 2000

1

H. E. Mrs. Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister of Bangladesh

Official Vists by Foreign Ministers or Equivalent and other Dignitaries
January 1999

Jan 29-Feb 1
Jan 30-Feb.3

Mr. Strobe Talbott, Deputy Secy. of State, USA
H. E. Mr. Nguyen M.Cam, Deputy PM & FM of Socialist Republic of Vietnam

February 1999

13-18
23-26

H. E. Mr. Emeka Anyaoku, Secy.Genl, Commonwealth
H. E. Mr. Kamal Kharrazi, FM of Islamic Republic of Iran

May 1999

15-17

H. E. Mr. Sergei Prikhodko, Special Envoy of Russian President

June 1999

12
29 June-1 July

H. E. Mr. Sartaj Aziz, FM of Pakistan
H. E. Mr. Theo Ben Gurirab, FM of Namibia

July 1999

28-31

H. E. Mr.V. Khristenko, Deputy PM of Russia

August 1999

16-18

H. E. Mr. Kasimjomart K.Tokaev, FM of Kazakhstan

October 1999

20-23
30 Oct.-1 Nov.

H. E. Mr.Emeka Anyaoku, Secy.General,Commonwealth
H. E. Mr. Janos Martonyi, FM of Hungary

December 1999

8-12

H. E. Mr. Bonaya A Godana, FM of Republic of Kenya

113

Protocol

January 2000

7-11
14-15
29-2 February

H. E. Mr. Vollaback, Foreign Minister of Norway
H. E. Mr. Viktor Kristenko, Deputy Prime Minister of the Russian Federation
H. E. Mr. Kadirgamar, Foreign Minister of Sri Lanka

February 2000

17-19

H. E. Mr. Hubert Vedrine, Foreign Minister of France

Foreign Tours of the President, Vice President and Prime Minister
February 1999

7-14
8-9
20-21

Shri A. B. Vajpayee, Prime Minister to Trinidad & Tobago, Montego Bay (for G- 15 Summit) and Morocco
Shri Krishan Kant, Vice President to Jordan (for the funeral of King Hussain II)
Shri A. B. Vajpayee, Prime Minister to Pakistan (Lahore by bus)

March 1999

·

Shri Krishan Kant, Vice President to Bahrain (for the funeral of Emir)

June 1999

14-18
19-20

Shri Krishan Kant, Vice President to South Africa (swearing in ceremony of President Mbeki)
Shri A. B. Vajpayee, PM, to Bangladesh (Dhaka for inauguration of direct bus service)

July 1999

24-27

Shri Krishan Kant, Vice President to Morocco

August 1999

24-31

Shri Krishan Kant, Vice President to Mongolia and Kryghyzstan

October 1999

20-22

Shri Krishan Kant, Vice President to Tanzania (Dar-es-Salaam) (for the funeral of Dr. Julius K.Nyerere)

November 1999

6-10
11-16

Shri K. R. Narayanan, President, State Visit to Austria (Vienna) and Germany (Salzburg)
Sliri A. B. Vajpayee, PM, to South Africa (Durban) (for (CHOGM)
uu

114

Annual Report 1999-2000

15
Passport and Consular Services and Indians Overseas

T

he Passports for Indian nationals, visa for foreign nationals
and Consular services encompass the activity in which the
Ministry of External Affairs and its subsidiary organisation
‘Central Passport Organisation – (CPO)’ serve the public directly. In
this era of increased foreign travel and globalisation the issue of a
passport empowers the individual to become a global citizen. Through
its activities the Consular, Passport and Visa (CPV) Division facilitates
the export of Indian manpower, expertise and technology abroad.
The growing number of Non-Resident Indians and the People of
Indian Origin abroad constitute a vital and vibrant link between India
and the rest of the world. In the Nineties as the international scene
has witnessed momentous changes, the people of Indian Origin
abroad have matured politically, prospered economically and have
developed socially nurturing their roots and simultaneously integrating
fully with the societies of their countries of adoption. In the new
millennium communities of people of Indian Origin are well poised
to play a significant role in promoting India’s interests and in
contributing towards the strengthening of India’s political and
economic relations with their respective countries of residence.
Passport Services
The CPO was imbued with a new dynamism and concerted efforts

were made to fulfil the Government’s commitments under the
Citizens’ Charter through various innovative measures aimed at
providing efficient, prompt and transparent service at the 28 Passport
Offices. Two new Passport Collection Centres were opened at
Vijaywada and Mangalore during the year. The Passport Rules were
amended to allow for printing, distribution and sale at a nominal
price of passport application forms for convenience of the passport
applicants.
A website was launched which carries all the rules, regulations
etc. for passport, visa and PIO Cards and allows all kinds of
applications forms to be downloaded.
Concerted efforts were made to reduce the pendency of
applications in various Passport Offices for which procedures were
streamlined. A ‘Pendency Clearance Week’ was declared in the last
week of July and November and December were declared as ‘Pendency
Clearance Months.’ Annual Passport Officers Conference was held
on 9-10 November 1999 at which emphasis was placed on reforming
and revamping the procedures to make the system more productive
and efficient. There was special emphasis on the redressal of public
grievances and the practice of periodical ‘Passport Adalats’ was
initiated at eleven Passport Offices.
115

Passport and Consular Services and Indians Overseas

Several measures were initiated to simplify and streamline various
procedures for issuing passports and rendering other miscellaneous
services promptly and efficiently in keeping with the commitment
under the Citizen’ Charter. The Police verification system was
comprehensively revised to make it more responsive to public demand.
To meet the public demand a ‘Tatkaal’ Scheme for out of turn
issue of passports was launched. The fee for this scheme was set at a
higher level to meet the extra costs involved in interruption of the
normal chain and sequence of work in the issue of an out of turn
passport.
At most Passport Offices concrete measures were taken to
enhance the level of comfort to the applicants/visitors by increasing
the number of public counters, augmenting air-conditioning,
installation of water coolers, provision of chairs etc.
The computerisation of Passport Offices continued and four
more Passport Offices were computerised taking the total of
computerised Passport Office to 19. Other Passport Offices are also
in the process of being computerised. A proposal for a comprehensive
satellite based computerised networking and connectivity as well as
creation of a Central Processing Cell has been formulated. The process
of tenders for comprehensive computerisation of all Passport Offices
has been initiated to take advantage of the latest available technology.
Separately machine writing of passports is being started on an
experimental basis in the Delhi Passport Office.
It has been the endeavour of the Government of India to house
the Passport Office in Government owned properties. At present
Passport Offices buildings at four places (Mumbai, Cochin, Kozhikode
and Hyderabad) are owned by MEA, at five places are owned by the
Central Government/State Government and are rented in 19 places.
The Passport Office at Hyderabad was shifted to a new building owned
116

by MEA during the year. MEA has acquired plots of land/built-up
properties in various cities in India and construction work is in
progress at five places viz. Ahmedabad for office and residential
complex, Cochin (residential complex), Patna (Office complex), Panaji
and Kozhikode (residential complex). The process for purchase of
land and construction of buildings for Passport Offices has been
initiated at seven other places i.e. Bangalore, Lucknow, Jaipur,
Thiruvanathapuram, Chandigarh, Tiruchirappalli, Jammu and
Calcutta. In Chennai space in an office complex has been purchased
and possession would be taken over in a few months.
The number of applications received during the year for grant of
passports and other miscellaneous services like renewal, change of
name, additional booklets, fresh passports for minors etc. continued
to rise in keeping with the overall climate of liberalization and increased
travel of Indians overseas. A total number of 25.78 lakh passports
were issued and 24.30 lakh miscellaneous services were rendered.
During the year 1999, detailed figures of passports issued/ services
rendered, including the revenue and expenditure of Passport Offices
are at Appendix-IV
A conscious beginning was made to introduce modern
management practices in the passport issue system. Services of a
private consultancy firm and a management expert were mobilized
for a management and process study of Regional Passport Officer,
Delhi.
PIO Cards
The six million Indian Citizens and over twenty million People
of Indian Origin (PIO) resident abroad have collectively evolved into
a major instrument for the furtherance of India’s foreign policy.
Recognising their significant role in the shaping of the country’s
destiny, Government launched the PIO Card Scheme for Persons of

Annual Report 1999-2000

Indian Origin, settled in countries specified by the Government, which
has, besides introducing a visa free regime, also conferred some special
economic, educational, financial and cultural benefits. All preparations,
were completed in time for the issue of PIO Cards from Missions
and Posts abroad.
Consular Services
All Missions and Posts abroad were sensitised to the consular
needs of Overseas Indians and to render them efficient and timely
assistance on all days and at all hours. Problems encountered by NonResident Indians/workers especially in the Gulf countries, including
disputes with their employers/sponsors were sought to be promptly
redressed. Government maintained contacts with the Governments
of the Gulf countries, including through the institutional mechanism
of the Joint Commissions, with the objective of resolving consular
problems and ameliorating the conditions of Indian workers in those
countries. In cases of deaths of Indians abroad, assistance continued
to be arranged by our Missions and Posts for completing the
formalities for early dispatch of the mortal remains, maintaining liaison
with the local and Indian authorities and keeping the relatives of the
deceased informed.
During the year, 8945 Indians were arrested abroad and 3589
deaths of Indian abroad were reported to the Ministry. A summary
of the consular data for the year 1999 is at Appendix-V
Visas
India’s 157 Missions and Posts abroad provided visa services to
over a million foreigners in the period 1 January to 30 September
1999. Over the years the procedure for grant of visa by our Missions
and Posts has been streamlined. Many Missions and Posts give visas
either across the counter or the same day and most others grant visas
within 48 hours.

The Consular Wing at CGI, Birmingham was computerised
during the year. It is proposed to computerise the Consular Wings of
our Missions and Posts in the Gulf, West Europe and North America.
A number of software companies have been short-listed and the
process of evaluation of their technical proposals and commercial
offers is at an advanced stage. First those Missions and Posts would
be computerised where the volume of services rendered is high.
Bilateral Agreements
As part of the global endeavour to combat organized crime,
international terrorism and drug trafficking, and acknowledging the
growing international dimensions of financial and other crimes,
consular agreements are being negotiated with several countries to
provide legal and institutional framework. These consular agreements
include Extradition Treaties, Agreement on Mutual Legal Assistance
in Criminal Matters, Agreements on Mutual Legal Assistance in Civil
Matters and Consular Conventions.
During the visit of Kazakh Foreign Minister to India in October,
1999 an Agreement on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters
was signed. In November 1999, an Extradition Treaty, an Agreement
on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters and an Agreement
on Juridical and Judicial Cooperation in Civil and Commercial matters
were signed during the visit of the Minister of Justice and Aukaf of
the UAE. The Extradition Treaty signed with the USA in June 1997
was ratified and instruments of ratification were exchanged in July
1999. During the year, official and technical level consultations were
held with Tunisia, Oman, Poland and Mongolia and Extradition
Treaties were initialed with all these countries. An Agreement on
Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters and an Agreement on
Mutual Legal assistance in Civil Matters were also initialed with
Mongolia.
117

Passport and Consular Services and Indians Overseas

The Ministry is actively pursuing requests for extradition and
other legal assistance from foreign Governments both for criminal
and civil and commercial charges. The requests for extradition emanate
from our obligations under the Extradition Treaties or Extradition
Arrangements entered into with various countries. During the year
16 requests for extradition and 68 requests for legal assistance were
received in addition to the ongoing cases.
During the year, 2,47,731 documents were accorded consular
attestation in CPV Division of which 1,55,645 were commercial
documents. This service is rendered on the same day, is without any
charge and is prompt and efficient.
Renovation of Patiala House
The CPV Division located in Patiala House, visited by a large
number of persons who come for attestation of documents as well as
by diplomats and staff of foreign Missions in New Delhi. Over the
years the building had become dilapidated and shabby in appearance.
Comprehensive renovation of the exterior as well as interior of the
building was undertaken and completed during the year.
Central Passport Organisation
The personnel of the Central Passport Organisation (CPO) man

118

the 28 Passport Offices and 15 existing Passport Collection Centres.
The current strength of CPO Cadre is 1690 with 173 Officers and
1517 non-gazetted staff. One of the major demands of the employees
has been for a comprehensive Cadre Review as there is stagnation at
various levels. A proposal for Cadre Review-cum-Creation of Posts
was partially approved by the Ministry of Finance in June 1999. A
fresh proposal has been prepared for Cadre Review to enhance the
number of officials to deal with public grievances and to streamline
the supervisory system.
As the volume of work as well as the network of Passport Offices
and Passport Collection Centres has been growing over the years, the
Ministry is considering a proposal to create a Central Passport
Authority with a view to grant greater autonomy to Passport Offices
to achieve greater efficiency and higher productivity.
Vision
The Consular, Passport and Visa work constitutes an important
public service. The public rightly expects prompt and courteous
service with minimal delays. The mission of the Ministry is to meet
the public expectations and provide a level of satisfaction of which it
can be proud.
uu

Annual Report 1999-2000

16
Administration and Organisation

F

ollowing the General Elections in September-October 1999,
Shri Atal Behari Vajpayee assumed charge of the office of
Prime Minister on October 13, 1999. Shri Jaswant Singh took
over as Minister of External Affairs and Shri Ajit Kumar Panja
assumed charge as the Minister of State for External Affairs.

officials and pensioners, the Pension Section has been revamped and
computerised. All pension cases are being dealt with in a time bound
manner.

At present, the Government of India has 160 Resident Diplomatic
Missions/Posts and other offices.

The Establishment Division was provided an outlay of Rs.90
Crores in BE for 1999-2000 under the Capital Outlay Budget - Major
Heads 4059 and 4216 i.e. Capital Outlay for Public Works and Housing
respectively. The Establishment Division earmarked these funds
towards construction/renovation and purchase of properties abroad
and in India.

The total strength of the IFS(A), IFS(B), Interpreter and L&T
Cadres of the Ministry is 3588 (Appendix I).
A table indicating the appointments to various posts in the
Ministry made in 1999-2000, including vacancies filled against
reservations is at Appendix II.
The extent of language proficiency in the Ministry can be judged
from the list of officers proficient in various foreign languages at
Appendix III.
Administrative procedures have been streamlined during the
period under review. This includes publication of a Manual of External
Affairs Instructions, updating of the IFS (PLCA) Rules and publication
of a Compendium of important instructions governing movement
of personnel and provision of facilities, etc. Following the Pay
Commission recommendations refixing the pay and allowances of

Establishment

Accordingly, in keeping with the Comprehensive Plan for the
purchase/construction of properties abroad, purchase proposals were
pursued and as a result a Chancery building for the Consulate General
in Edinburgh (UK), a residential unit in Budapest and 5 residential
units in Seoul were acquired. Purchase proposals of properties in
Hong Kong, Tehran, Paramaribo and Toronto were followed up.
The on-going construction projects in Abu Dhabi, Mauritius and
Berlin were closely monitored and progress achieved. Civil work for
the Indira Gandhi Centre for Indian Culture (IGCIC) complex in
Mauritius is virtually complete and the Interior work is on. In Abu
Dhabi, the construction of a Chancery-cum-residential complex is to
119

Administration and Organisation

be completed in the first quarter of year 2000. Major construction
work for a Chancery-cum-residential complex in Berlin was awarded
in May 1999 and is scheduled to be completed by October, 2000.
Other projects on the anvil are Beijing Residential Project,
Moscow Residential/School Project, Cultural Centre in Trinidad and
Tobago and renovation/reconstruction of the Embassy Residence
in Singapore.
The projects which are also expected to be taken up on priority
basis include construction projects for our Missions in Doha, Dhaka,
Islamabad , Warsaw, Tashkent and Gaborone. These are to be taken
in a staggered manner keeping in view the Budgetary allocations.
The project for renovation of the Embassy Residence in Berlin
was completed on schedule, in October, 1999. Cabinet approval for
the renovation of the High Commissioner’s residence in London was
obtained and work has begun. The renovation work of the GOIowned property in Moscow was approved.
With regard to Construction projects of the Ministry of External
Affairs in India, financial approvals for the construction of the ICCR
complex in Calcutta and Foreign Service Institute in Delhi were
obtained during the year. Work on these is expected to start during
the year 2000. The Central Vista Committee has approved the urban
built form for Videsh Bhavan, New Delhi. The design competition,
selection of architect and preparation of preliminary design will follow.
Preliminary plans for the MEA sponsored Afro-Asian Legal
Consultative Committee (AALCC) construction Project were
approved for which cost estimates are being prepared by CPWD.
With a view to alleviating the accommodation problems for the
officers and staff of MEA, construction projects in Chankaya Puri
and Pappan Kalan had been undertaken. The CPWD is presently
preparing preliminary financial estimates in respect of the construction
of the Chankaya Puri residential quarters, while the construction work
for Pappan Kalan residential complex is in progress.
120

Regional Passport Office project in Hyderabad was completed
in July, 99 and Construction work in Cochin, Kozhikode, and Panaji
is in progress. The Passport office in Ahmedabad is nearing
completion. The interior works in Patna Passport Office is being
completed. The new building purchased for Chennai Passport Office
is expected to be ready by next year for occupation. Planning work in
respect of Passport Offices for Bhuvaneshwar, Bangalore, Calcutta,
Chandigarh, Lucknow and Pune is in progress. Foundation Stone for
Videsh Bhavan, Calcutta which would house the Branch Secretariat
and the RPO was laid by Shri A.K. Panja, MOS(EA) in Calcutta on
24 December, 1999. Proposals for purchase of land in Jaipur, Trichi
and Trivandrum are being examined.
The 2nd Review of Indexation of Foreign Allowance was carried
out and the system of rationalizing Foreign Allowance was
consolidated further. The Indexation of Representational Grant is
under active consideration.
In order to upgrade and modernize office facilities, computer
hardware in several Divisions of MEA was updated and E-Mail and
Internet facilities provided to reduce communication costs, access
the myriad websites for relevant information as well as to speed up
links within the Ministry and also between the Ministry and the
Missions. All out efforts were made to ensure Y2K compliance at the
Headquarters and Missions abroad with the help of the National
Informatic Centre (NIC).
Several works for maintenance, renovation and beautification of
Ministry buildings have been carried out and a system of maintenance
Committees for the various buildings owned by MEA was introduced,
resulting in overall improvement in office environment.
Procedures for monitoring the purchase and distribution of office
equipment were reviewed and further streamlined during the year.
uu

Annual Report 1999-2000

The Foreign Service Institute continued its activities during 19992000, as below:

in importance such as national security, management challenges in a
rapidly changing global scenario and investment promotion.

(1) Professional Course in Diplomacy and International Relations
for the Indian Foreign Service Probationers (1998 batch);

The training programme for the 1998 batch of Indian Foreign
Service Probationers comprised of 26 modules which dealt with
important areas of work related to foreign policy and diplomacy. The
most comprehensive module related to India’s foreign policy, covering
almost every aspect of our external relations.

(2) Professional Course for Foreign Diplomats;
(3) Familiarisation Programme for Resident Foreign Diplomats;
(4) Basic Professional Course for IFS(B) personnel posted
abroad;
(5) Orientation Course for Non-MEA officers.
The Professional Course on Diplomacy and International
Relations for the Probationers of the Indian Foreign Service - the
most important part of FSI’s work - was conducted for the 1998
batch of Indian Foreign Service Probationers, from January 1999 to
December 1999. The 1999 batch of Probationers commenced their
training in January 2000 after completing the Foundation Course at
the Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration.

In keeping with the special emphasis in recent years on economic
diplomacy, the module on ‘International Economic Relations and
Commercial Diplomacy’ was strengthened, with focus on India’s
economic reforms, the international economic missions abroad, role
of Commercial Counsellors in investment promotion, commercial
negotiations, management challenges in the changing global scenario
and the international finance and capital markets etc. A comprehensive
programme was arranged in collaboration with CII and eminent
speakers from CII & Indian Industry briefed the Probationers on
above matters. CII’s active participation was a new feature introduced

The basic objective of this Course was to provide comprehensive
training to the young Indian Foreign Service Officer-trainees in the
traditional areas of diplomacy, international relations, political
reporting and protocol and in several related fields that are growing
121

Foreign Service Institute

The module on “Defence & Security” apart from focusing on
vital security issues like nuclear non-proliferation, disarmament and
arms control, also covered India’s defence policy, the state of our
armed forces, developments in defence technology and the security
of our border areas.
An additional module on “Special Diplomatic Skills” emphasised
negotiating skills, communications skills, use of Information
Technology, development of leadership skills and “espirit de corps”.
Practical mock sessions on negotiation skills were held.
Apart from these modules, there was a good deal of emphasis on
field visits to acquaint the Probationers with the ground situation in
important areas of the country such as the North-East and Jammu &
Kashmir. The Probationers were also attached with the armed forces
for training.
The Indian Foreign Service Probationers were given extensive
briefing on the role of culture in diplomacy at the National Institute
of Advanced Studies, Bangalore. They also visited the National
Hydrographic Institute and the Survey of India establishments in
Dehradun for briefing on border demarcation on land and sea.
Continuing with the programme of visiting neighbouring
countries, Myanmar & Bangladesh were visited by the Indian Foreign
Service Probationers for a period of around one week each.
The Professional Course for Foreign Diplomats (PCFD) is one
of the most prestigious courses organized by the FSI. 22 PCFDs
have been held so far and 483 diplomats from over 94 countries (in
Central Europe, Africa, Central Asia, South East Asia, South and
West Asia and South and Central America) have participated in them.
The 23rd and 24th PCFDs are scheduled to be held in January and
March 2000 respectively. The objective of the Course is to provide a
122

professional orientation in the main categories of activities which
diplomats deal with in their professional life. Some of the basic areas
covered relate to diplomacy, international relations, international law
and international organizations, security, focus on specific regions,
diplomatic practice and protocol, representational and media skills.
The diplomats are also exposed to presentations on Indian polity,
India’s foreign and security policies, Indian economy, science and
technology and culture. During the course, PCFD participants are
taken on study tours to various centres of economic, industrial and
cultural importance to expose them to the diversity in the country
and to enable a first hand feel of India’s achievements, capabilities
and constraints in different fields of national development.
The FSI expanded its computer training facilities with 16 new
stand-alone HCL Pentium II PCs interconnected via a LAN network
for internet access. ‘Basic Beginners Courses’ in computers are now
on offer on a standing basis to all MEA officials. They are aimed at
enabling officials of all levels/ages to overcome hesitancy in using
computers and developing felicity in word processing, internet
exploring and working on e-mail. Next level courses on MS Word,
MS Excel and MS Access are ready and would be commenced once
sufficient number of officials are trained in the Basic Beginners
Courses.
Three Basic Professional Courses were held in 1999 for officials
in the Ministry of External Affairs upto the level of Section Officers
prior to their departure on posting to Indian Missions abroad.
Emphasis is given in this Course on preparing officials to function
effectively is a team in diplomatic environment in various capitals
abroad, besides exposure to administrative rules and procedures;
finance and accounts work relevant to Indian Missions and passport,
visas and consular work. The effort is to co-relate closely with the
expected job profile of each participant even while retaining an overall
perspective of the functions of each wing in our Missions abroad.

Annual Report 1999-2000

The Institute also organised brief Orientation Programmes for
officers from other Ministries of the Government of India proceeding
on posting to our Missions abroad on an on-going basis.
The 10th Familiarisation Programme entitled “Introduction to
India” for resident foreign diplomats was arranged from Nov. 1st to
5th, 1999. The Programme was designed to impart basic information
about India to the newly arrived diplomats and covered topics such
as the Constitution of India; organisation of MEA and Government
of India; India’s economic policy; historical legacy of India; Indian
art, music and culture, etc. Twenty two resident diplomats participated
in the Programme.

The Rector of the Diplomatic Academy of Russia visited the
Foreign Service Institute and an Agreement for institutional
cooperation between the Foreign Service Institute and the Diplomatic
Academy of Russia was signed on this occasion. An Agreement for
cooperation between the Foreign Service Institute and the Institute
of International Relations, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Vietnam
was signed during the visit of the President of Vietnam in December
1999. Similar Agreements are due to be signed with the Diplomatic
Academies of Uruguay and Croatia.
uu

123

18
Implementation of Official Language Policy and
Propagation of Hindi Abroad

E

fforts are being made by the Ministry for the progressive use
of Hindi and its propagation in India and abroad. Documents
like bilateral treaties, agreements, memorandum of
understanding, credentials, speeches of President, PAC paras, Annual
Report of the Ministry, Parliament questions and other documents
submitted to both the Houses of Parliament are being issued in Hindi
and English.
The VI World Hindi Conference was organized in the United
Kingdom, the principal venue being in London with some cultural
events also being organized in Manchester, Birmingham and York,
from September, 14 to 18, 1999. The Conference was organized in
association with the following organizations:
(i) Hindi Samiti, U.K., London
(ii) Gitanjali Bahubhashiya Sahityik Samudaya, Birmingham
(iii) Bhartiya Bhasha Sangam, York
(iv) Other collaborators like the Nehru Centre, London, Bhartiya
Vidya Bhavan, London and SAMPAD, Birmigham
The inauguration of the Conference coincided with the 50th
anniversary of declaration of Hindi as Raj Bhasha. This added a special

124

significance to the event. This was the biggest Conference so far
both in participation and scale of activities.
The extensive pre-event publicity both within the UK and in
India resulted in a record response in the number of participants and
over 700 people participated (350 from India, 150 from other countries
and 200 from UK). The above included foreign and Indian scholars
from 21 countries.
Apart from the number of participants, it is also significant that
the Conference received about 300 papers for the academic sessions.
20 foreign and 13 Indian scholars were honoured at the closing
ceremony for their valuable contribution to Hindi language and
literature.
The inaugural ceremony held in the prestigious Wembley
Conference Centre was inaugurated by the Minister of State for
External Affairs, Smt. Vasundhara Raje. Ms. Patricia Hewitt, Minister
of State in the Department of Trade and Industry, British Government
was the Chief Guest. Messages from the Prime Minister of India Shri
Atal Behari Vajpayee, British Prime Minister Tony Blair and the Prime
Ministers of Mauritius, Fiji and Nepal were received and read out at
the inaugural ceremony.

Annual Report 1999-2000

During the Conference, a book and photo exhibition by DAVP
and a computer exhibition by C-DAC and Centre for Computer
Learning were organized at the Nehru Centre. Several cultural events
including Kavi Sammelans in major UK cities, Hindi play ‘Kayakalp’
staged by Japanese students of Osaka University and Hindi film shows
were also organized to coincide with the Conference. Dance
performance by Ms Shovana Narayan and songs by Shri Jagjit Singh
and Bhupen Hazarika were the main attractions of the inaugural
function.
The discussions during the Conference stressed on the necessity
to give equal importance to Hindi Language along with literature so
as to make it more popular among the future generations.
The resolution adopted at the Conference congratulated the
Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India for implementing
the two resolutions passed in the last five World Hindi Conferences,
namely creation of Mahatma Gandhi International University at
Wardha and signing of the Memorandum of Understanding between
Mauritius and Indian Governments for the establishment of a World
Hindi Secretariat in Mauritius.
Standard Hindi literature, comprising books in Hindi on Indian
art, history, literature, language, religion and philosophy will be sent
to Indian Missions/Posts abroad for use in libraries and as gifts to
educational and voluntary organizations engaged in teaching of Hindi.

Missions/Posts have also been promoting Hindi through special Hindi
classes, Hindi film shows, seminars and competitions. Hindi text
books, audio cassettes and Hindi dictionaries have been sent to
selected Missions/Posts.
Hindi forms an integral part of the FSI training programme.
Intensive training about the Government’s Official Language Policy
and its implementation is given to the trainees.
The Ministry provides liberal financial grants and assistance to
the organizations engaged in the promotion and propagation of Hindi
abroad.
In accordance with the recommendations of the Hindi Advisory
Committee of the Ministry, two officials were detailed to New York
during the UNGA Session to assist those members of the Indian
delegation who wished to speak in Hindi.
50 slots were allocated to foreign nationals for learning Hindi at
Kendriya Hindi Sansthan, Agra this year. Hindi teachers were
appointed in Indian Missions abroad under a special Ministry scheme
to teach Hindi to the children of India-based Embassy and other
officials.
Special programmes are being worked for the Celebration of
Golden Jubilee Year of Declaration of Hindi as the Official Language.
uu

125

19

T

he Indian Council for Cultural Relations (hereinafter referred
to as the Council or ICCR) was formally set up in 1950, with
the primary objective of establishing, reviving and
strengthening cultural relations and mutual understanding between
India and other countries. The ICCR’s report of activities for the
month of December, 1999 alongwith the expected activities for the
period 1 January 2000 to 31 March 2000 are given below:
(i)

administration of scholarship schemes for overseas students
on behalf of the Government of India ;

(ii)

exchange of exhibitions;

(iii)

organisation of and participation in seminars and symposia;

(iv)

exchange of performing arts and groups;

(v)

establishing and maintaining Chairs and Professorships for
Indian Studies abroad;

126

Annual Report 1999-2000

summer and winter camps for foreign students and the publication
of the student newsletter “At Home in India”.
Indian Cultural Centres Abroad
One of the primary objectives of the Council is to promote greater
awareness of India’s composite cultural heritage abroad. Towards this
end the Council has set up and maintains 14 cultural centres in Cairo
(Egypt), Berlin (Germany), Port Louis (Mauritius), Paramaribo
(Surinam), Georgetown (Guyana), Jakarta (Indonesia), Moscow
(Russian Federation), London (UK), Almaty (Kazakhstan), Tashkent
(Uzbekistan), Durban and Johannesburg (South Africa), Port of Spain
(Trinidad and Tobago) and Colombo (Sri Lanka). All these cultural
centres are functioning under the administrative control of the Indian
Missions in the respective countries.
The activities of these Indian Cultural Centres can broadly be
classified under two categories. Several of the Centres have been set
up in countries having a sizeable Indian population, like the centres
in Trinidad & Tobago, Mauritius, Guyana, Surinam etc. The Centres’
activities there reflect the need of the local Indian population to keep
in touch with Indian traditions through activities such as regular
training in Indian Music, Dance and Yoga.
The Centres’ also organise programmes to observe important
dates and events in the Indian calendar. Other Centres like those in
London, Berlin and Moscow focus more on intellectual activities such
as organising lectures, talks, panel discussions and seminars on subjects
of contemporary and cultural interest, publications of newsletters
etc. These are mainly aimed at increasing an understanding of India
through mutual interaction.
Visiting Professors and Chairs of Indian Studies
Abroad
The Council deputes Visiting Professors abroad to teach Indian

languages and other related subjects. The deputation of Professors
abroad is carried out under Bilateral Cultural Exchange Programmes,
and the Scheme of Propagation of Hindi abroad. ICCR presently has
on deputation 19 Professors teaching Hindi, Sanskrit, Tamil,
Malayalam, Modern Indian History, Indian Civilization, in Helsinki
(Finland), Paramaribo (Surinam), Budapest (Hungary), Moscow
(Russia), Seoul (South Korea), two in Warsaw (Poland), Brussels
(Belgium), two in Port of Spain (Trinidad & Tobago), Sofia (Bulgaria),
Ankara (Turkey), Bucharest (Romania), Beijing (China), Bangkok
(Thailand), Paris (France), Osh (Kyrghystan), Moka (Mauritius) and
Tashkent (Uzbekistan).
Publications
The Council has a major publication programme which has been
growing over the years. The Council brings out seven quarterly journals
in different languages - “Indian Horizons” and “Africa Quarterly”
(both in English), “Gagananchal” (Hindi), “Papeles de la India”
(Spanish), “Rencontre Avec L’ Inde” (French), “Thaqaft-ul Hind”
(Arabic) and “Indien in der Gegenwart” (German).
In the current year, besides publishing theme-based special issues
of Indian Horizons (Literary India), Rencontre Avec L’ Inde (La
Diaspora Indienne a’ Maurice, in two volumes) and Indien in der
Gegenwart (on women’s issues), the Council also brought out a special
issue of Gagananchal on the occasion of theVI World Hindi
Conference held in London in September, 1999.
A revised and updated edition of the book entitled “The United
States and India 1976-1996” edited by Shri M.V. Kamath was
published by the Council and launched in New York in September,
1999 by Shri Jaswant Singh, Minister for External Affairs. A
commemorative volume on Dr. Zakir Husain, the third President of
India, in English, Hindi and Urdu is expected to come out shortly.
127

Cultural Relations

The Council participated in the Australian Book Fair from 2-4
June, 1999 through the National Book Trust.

Rs. 37.00 crores. Expected receipts of the Council are Rs.0.50 crores.

During the period 1 January 2000 to 31 March 2000 two
publications - “Rama Story in South East Asia” by Sh Satyavrat Shastri
and “A Treasury of Sanskrit Literature” by Sh A N D Haksar are
expected to be brought out by the Council.

The expenditure so far booked during the month of December
1999 is Rs.5.49 crores. However, the progressive expenditure so far
booked upto December 1999 is Rs.26.38 crores. The expenditure for
the month of January 2000 to March 2000 would approximately be
Rs.11.00 crores.

Library

Seminars / Symposia / Conferences

The personal collection of books and manuscripts bequeathed
by Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, the Founder - President of the Council,
forms the core of the ICCR Library.
Over the decades the library has grown and presently has
approximately 50,846 books, 195 manuscripts and 47 microfilm rolls.
For the period under review, the library has purchased around 259
titles in English, 223 in Hindi and 186 in Urdu. The library has received
around 55 publications (English, Hindi and Urdu) as gifts and also
subscribes to 18 Newspapers, 44 Magazines and 48 Journals.
A catalogue of the manuscripts and personal books of Maulana
Azad has been printed in book form in three language - Arabic, Urdu
and Persian - and put in circulation.
The Library has joined Delhi Library Network (DELNET) with
the prime objective to optimise resource sharing.
The Library has procured approximately eleven English titles,
hundred issues of Journals and News Magazines during December
1999. Approximately 155 visitors visited the library and one Interlibrary loan request was taken care of during the same period.
The book selection committee meeting is likely to be held during
February 2000.
Accounts
ICCR’s grant for the general activities for the year 1999-2000 is
128

ICCR collaborated and provided financial assistance to the
Jawaharlal Nehru University towards organising a three-day
International Seminar in October to commemorate the Bicentenary
of the Russian Poet, A.S. Pushkin.
On the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the establishment of
Indo-Austrian diplomatic relations, ICCR, in collaboration with
Austrian Embassy, organised a symposium “India-Austria : Yesterday
and Today” on 27 October, 1999 at IIC, New Delhi. Three scholars
from India and an equal number from Austria participated in the
Seminar.
The Council commissioned a 26-minute video film on various
Indian classical dance forms. The major objective is to telecast it
through international T.V. networks to explain the subtleties of Indian
dance forms to non-Indian viewers.
Agency Work on Behalf of Ministry of External
Affairs
The 54th Anniversary of the United Nations was celebrated on
25 October, 1999. Shri Ajit Panja, Minister of State for External Affairs
was the chief guest. The message of the UN Secretary-General was
read by Mr Feodor Starcevic, Director, United Nations Information
Centre (UNIC). Other speakers at the function were Shri H M Haleem,
President, World Federation of United Nations Association

Annual Report 1999-2000

(WFUNA)/Speaker, West Bengal Legislative Assembly and Shri Ram
Niwas Mirdha, President, Indian Federation of United Nations
Associations (IFUNA). The programme was followed by a Kathak
dance recital by Aditi Mangaldas.
A function was organised at Tagore Hall of ICCR to mark the
International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People on 7
December 1999. Sh Nareshwar Dayal, Secretary (E), MEA was the
Chief Guest at the function. His Excellency, Dr Khalid El Sheikh,
Ambassador of the State of Palestine was present on the occasion.
Sh Abdul Halim, Speaker, West Bengal Legislative Assembly and
President, World Federation of United Nations Association
(WFUNA) also spoke on the occasion.
Release of TV Film titled “When the Soul Glows”
A function was organised at the residence of Hon’ble VicePresident of India/President, ICCR on 14 January 2000, at which Sh
Krishan Kant, Vice President of India released a film produced by
the Council and directed by Ms Anita Pratap titled “When the Soul
Glows.” The function was attended by eminent artistes, journalists
and public figures.

by these groups included theatre, folk dance & music, western classical
music and ballet. The performances were arranged in various cities,
viz. Mumbai, Bangalore, Ahmedabad, Dehradun, Mussoorie, Shimla,
Lucknow, Pune, Goa, Kullu, Chandigarh and Bhopal. A major visiting
group was the 25-member Gansu Acrobatic Group from China.
Performances of this group were organised in Calcutta, Delhi and
Mumbai.
Under its prestigious series of Indian art forms viz. “Horizon”
and “Retrospectives”, the Council continued to present performances
by emerging and outstanding artistes in Delhi and other cities. Some
of the eminent artistes who performed under the “Retrospectives”
series were Ustad Allauddin Khan (Esraj), Madhavi Mudgal (Odissi),
Shovana Narayan (Kathak), Ustad Shamim Ahmed Khan (Sitar), Guru
Kelucharan Mohapatra (Odissi), Dr. Mustafa Raza (Vichitra Veena),
Guru Singhajit Singh, and Charu Mathur (Manipuri), Pt. Rajan &
Sajan Mishra (Bhakti Sangeet) and Geeta Chandran (Bharatanatyam).

Performing Arts

The Council sponsored visits of 50 cultural groups to 57 countries
covering all continents of the world. Some of these group participated
in major events/festival, e.g., “Asia in Helsinki” – Festival in Finland;
“Marrakesh” - Festival in Morocco;, “Tyagaraja” – Festival in South
Africa; “Plovdiv” - Festival in Bulgaria; “Bangkok’s International
Festival of Dance” in Thailand; “Islamia” – Festival in Egypt;
“Edinburgh Festival of India” in the UK; “Bosra International
Festival” in Syria; “Cervantes” – Festival in Mexico and the Music
Utsav” in Bangladesh. While sponsoring these visits, special emphasis
was given to holding workshops and lecture-demonstrations with local
artistes in addition to performances. Special emphasis was also given
to sponsoring groups to neighbouring countries.

During the period April-December, 1999 the Council organised
visits to India of 17 cultural delegations from various countries viz.
Myanmar, China, Bulgaria, Uganda, Namibia, Bangladesh, Nepal, Sri
Lanka, Germany, France, Austria, Italy and Egypt. The presentations

Eminent artistes sponsored to various countries during the period
included – Geeta Chandran and Malavika Sarukkai (Bharatanatyam);
Pt. Jasraj, Pt. Rajan & Sajan Mishra, Shubha Mudgal and Wasifuddin
Dagar (Hindustani Vocal); Guru Kelucharan Mohapatra (Odissi);

Maulana Azad Essay Competition 1997-98
The Awardees for the year 1997-98 for the Maulana Azad Essay
Competition in Urdu, Hindi and English have been selected by the
respective juries.

129

Cultural Relations

Amala Shankar (Modern Dance); Ila Arun (Popular / Folk Music);
Shovana Narayan (Kathak); Aruna Sayeeram (Carnatic Music);
Ramayana Group of Shriram Bharatiya Kala Kendra; Theatre Group
of United Players Guild; Seraikela Chhau Group of Ashish Kar and
Pung & Dhol Cholam Group of Manipur.
During the month of December 1999, the Council hosted five
cultural delegations in the field of dance, music and theatre from
Nepal, Sri Lanka, Vietnam, France and Singapore. During the period
January-March 2000 cultural groups from the Netherlands, Japan,
Austria, South Africa, Israel, Greece, Portugal and the UK are likely
to be hosted by the Council. These groups include the 103-member
Vienna Symphony Orchestra from Austria, the Gulbenkian Ballet
from Portugal and theatre groups from South Africa, Greece and the
UK.
Under its prestigious series for Indian art for ms viz
“Retrospectives”, the Council presented a performance by Shubha
Mudgal in December. In January a performance (attended by the
Vice-President of India/President, ICCR) by Ustad Amjad Ali Khan
was arranged in the lawns of Teen Murti House. Retrospectives
presentations during February and March are scheduled to include
Kanaka Srinivasan (Bharatanatyam Choreographic presentation), Pt
Ram Narayan (Sarangi recital) and Pt Bhajan Sopori (Santoor).
During December 1999, the Council sponsored the visit of eleven
cultural groups to five countries. The major events/festivals in which
these groups participated were “Sanskrit Theatre Symposium Natyotsav” in Bangladesh, “China International Year of Ethnic
Culture” in China, and “24-hours Raga Concert of Mandapa” in
France. Pt. Birju Maharaj (Kathak), Pung & Dhol Cholam (Manipuri),
Sh K N Panicker (Theatre) are some of the eminent artistes who
participated in the above festivals.
During the period 1 January 2000 to 31 March 2000, following
groups are scheduled to be sponsored:
130

1-2

6- member Composite Dance and Music group of Ms Chitra
Visweswaran (Bharatanatyam) and Sh R Visweswaran
(Santoor) to Germany and UK (20 January - 20 February
2000)

3

5-member Kuchipudi Group led by Ms Vanaja Uday to Sri
Lanka (22-30 January 2000).

4

10-member Rajasthani Folk Dance Group of Sh Kalu Nath
Kalbelia to UAE and Turkey (22 January - 8 February 2000).

5-6

11-member Composite Dance and Music group of Sh Raja
Radha Reddy (Kuchipudi) x 7 and Pt Bhajan Sopori (Santoor)
x 4 will be visiting Japan for the concerts arranged by the
Min-on Organisation. Thereafter, the Dance group will
proceed to Republic of Korea, Malaysia, Philippines and
Thailand (26 January - 19 February 2000); The Music group
will visit Republic of Korea, Malaysia and Singapore (26
January - 16 February 2000).

7-8

5-member Carnatic Vocal group of Dr Balamurali Krishna
and 6-member Bharatanatyam Dance group of Ms Alarmel
Valli will be visiting Sri Lanka (30 January - 2 February 2000).

9

4-member Music group of Sh Dhrubo Ghosh (Sarangi) to
visit Bangladesh in February 2000 to participate in Dance
and Music Festival (17-20 February 2000).

Distinguished Visitors Programme
As part of its efforts to foster and strengthen cultural relations
and mutual understanding between India and other countries, the
Council facilitates exchanges of scholars, intellectuals, academicians
and artists under its Distinguished Visitors Programme. Under this
programme, ICCR hosts eminent musicians, dancers, writers,
intellectuals, scholars and other eminent personalities from all over

Annual Report 1999-2000

the world. Reciprocally, distinguished Indians from diverse fields of
culture are sent to other countries to interact with their counterparts
and to participate in international seminars, conferences and
workshops or to lecture on various subjects.
During the period, the Council hosted visits of 29 distinguished
visitors/experts in different fields from the UK, Argentina, the USA,
Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Japan, South Africa, Spain, Venezuela,
Indonesia, Turkmenistan, Bangladesh, Jordan and Romania. Some
of the important visiting personalities were - Mr Antonio T Mendez
(renowned sculptor from the USA), Prof. Ana Agud (Sanskritist from
the University of Salamanca, Spain) and Justice Kemaluddin Hossain
(former Chief Justice of Bangladesh). In addition, the Council on
behalf of the Government of India, organised the visit of 10-member
team from World Monlam Tshokehem, Bhutan to India to enable
them to visit Buddhist shrines in connection with publishing of a
book on the subject.
During this period, the Council sponsored visits of 55 eminent
personalities from India to various countries. These included - Prof.
Zafar Imam (School of International Studies, JNU), Dr Vidya Niwas
Mishra (eminent Sanskrit scholar), Prof Sachidanandan Sahai
(Department of Ancient Indian & Asian Studies, Magadh University,
Bihar), Smt Maya Krishna Rao (Kathakali Dancer), Shri Jatin Das
(painter), Shri Kanhaiya Lal Nandan (writer) and Shri Kartar Singh
Duggal (scholar and MP [Rajya Sabha]).
Under its Orientation Grant Scheme for foreign scholars/
researchers, the Council assisted scholars from Venezuela, the USA
and the UK.
During December 1999, the Council hosted the visit to India of
6 distinguished visitors. The eminent personalities among these were
Dr George Anca, President of the Indo-Romanian Cultural
Association from Romania, Mr A Z M Obaidullah Khan, Chairman
of the Bangladesh Centre for Advanced Studies.

The Council is also scheduled to host another fifteen eminent
personalities under the Programme during the period 1 January 2000
to 31 March 2000. These include Ms Bapsi Sidhwa, eminent writer
from Pakistan, Sh Sat Maharaj, Secretary General of Sanatan Dharam
Mahasabha from Trinidad & Tobago, Prof Mumtaz Soysal, Former
Foreign Minister/Scholar from Turkey, Mr Harold N Clapham, Head
of the International Exchanges Division of the Cultural Ministry of
Germany, Dr Forrest McGill of Asian Art Museum from San
Francisco, USA, Prof Crompton Bourne, Pro Vice Chancellor and
Principal of the University of the West Indies from Trinidad & Tobago.
During the month of December, 1999, the Council sponsored
visits abroad of eight distinguished personalities from India. Among
them were Prof Kapila Vatsyayan, Academic Director, IGNCA and
Dr Ram Gopal Bajaj, Director the National School of Drama to
Bangladesh, Prof Veer Bhadra Mishra, Professor & Head, Institute
of Technology and Adyaksh of Sankat Mochan Foundation, Varanasi
to Sweden.
The Council has also approved the sponsorship of visits of seven
eminent Indian scholars/artistes under this programme during the
period 1 January 2000 to 31 March 2000. These include: Sh Raghu
Rai, eminent photographer to Bangladesh; Smt Sonal Mansingh, artiste
to the UK for lectures on Indian dance; and Dr Satyadev Tripathi,
Dr Prakash Udai, Dr Aunesh Neerun and Smt Malini Awasthi to
Mauritius (to attend a Bhojpuri Convention).
Presentations
Under its Scheme of Presentation of Books and Art Objects, the
Council gifted books on Indian art, culture, architecture, cuisine, dance
and music to various visiting foreign dignitaries, libraries, institutions
and schools in various countries. Additionally, the Council, through
its Missions abroad, also gifted Indian music instruments, art objects,
131

Cultural Relations

video/audio cassettes, CD-ROMs and CDs (on Indian classical dances
and music).
Exhibitions
During the period, exhibitions mounted by the Council in India
were the Contemporary Photographic Exhibition of the Indian
International Photographic Council; French Avant Garde - The
Vollard Collection from Leon Dierx Museum, Reunion Island (France)
and works by artists from Brazil and Venezuela.
During the period, the Council commissioned special exhibitions,
viz “Contemporary Graphic of India” to Cuba, Trinidad and Tobago,
Guyana and Peru; “Indian Dolls” to Malaysia, Indonesia, Vietnam
and Thailand and a “Photo Exhibition” on India to Qatar, UAE and
Uganda.
The Council also sent five bronze busts and a statue of Mahatma
Gandhi for installation in Kyrghyzstan, Myanmar, Brazil, Canada,
Italy and the USA.
In the month of December 1999, the Council sent a photo
exhibition entitled “My Land, My People” to Tanzania. It also sent a
bust of Mahatma Gandhi and a Replica of the Ashoka Capital to
Myanmar and a bust of Mother Teresa to San Salvador.

132

During the period January-March 2000, the Council is scheduled
to send five exhibitions viz (i) “Contemporary Prints” to Colombia,
Panama & Venezuela (ii) “Indian Dolls” to Cambodia (iii) “Photo
Exhibition on India” to Sudan & Kenya (iv) “Madhubani Paintings”
to Mauritius, Madagascar, Seychelles and the Reunion Islands and (v)
“Cartoons” to Tanzania, Mauritius and Sri Lanka. Busts of
Rabindranath Tagore, Mahatma Gandhi and Kasturba Gandhi are
being sent to the Czech Republic, Canada and the USA.
The Council On-Line
The Council maintains three websites on the Internet, which
feature extensive archives about the Council’s activities as well as a
spectrum of links to topics on Indian Culture and hyperlinks to the
websites of several empanelled artistes of the Council :
http://education.vsnl.com/iccr
http://members.tripod.com/~iccr
http://iccr.culture.webjump.com
The first ICCR website has been adjusted “Editor’s Choice” by
‘Rediffusion on-the-Net’.
uu

Contents
Chapter
Page No.
Introduction and Synopsis

i-xv

1.

India's Neighbours

1

2.

South-East Asia and the Pacific

15

3.

East Asia

26

4.

Central Asia

31

5.

The Gulf, West Asia & North Africa

35

6.

Africa (South of Sahara)

47

7.

Europe
Eastern Europe
Western Europe

52
57

8.

The Americas
USA
Canada
Latin America and the Caribbean

65
67
67

9.

United Nations and International Organisations
Political Issues in the UN
Disarmament and International Security
Environment and Sustainable Development Issues
Social, Human Rights and Humanitarian Issues
Specialised Agencies
Elections and Appointments
International Law: Developments and Activities

72
72
78
82
83
85
86
86

10.

Foreign Economic Relations

90

11.

Trade and Investment Promotion

100

12.

Policy Planning and Research

103

13.

External Publicity

106

14.

Protocol

110

15.

Passport and Consular Services and Indians Overseas

115

16.

Administration and Organisation

119

17.

Foreign Service Institute

121

18.

Implementation of Official Language Policy and
Propagation of Hindi Abroad

124

19.

Cultural Relations

126

Appendices

133

Annual Report 1999-2000

1
India’s Neighbours

Section 1
Afghanistan

I

ndia remained deeply concerned with the situation in
Afghanistan, which directly impacts on our national interests,
including our security concerns. The ebb and flow of the civil
conflict between the Taliban which was supported and encouraged
by Pakistan and the Government of President Rabbani, which we
recognise as the legitimate government of Afghanistan was closely
monitored by us. The continuation of the civil war principally on
account of the intransigence of the Taliban and its foreign mentor,
Pakistan, continued to bring great suffering for a people with whom
we have historical ties of friendship and cooperation.
The Taliban launched three major campaigns against the forces
of the Government of Afghanistan, especially those of Commander
Ahmad Shah Masood. These campaigns sought to drive Masood
out of Afghanistan. However, Ahmad Shah Masood was able to hold
his ground in the Shumali plains as well as north of the Hindukush.
During these operations, the Taliban targetted the civilian population,
displacing women and children and destroying infrastructure. Such
activities can only be completely condemned.
The Taliban controlled areas in Afghanistan emerged as the
breeding ground for terrorists and extremist groups and the largest

source of opium production and illegal flow of narcotics in the world,
posing a serious threat to the peace and stability of the whole region.
For return to peace, normalcy and stable government in Afghanistan
which would also help in eliminating these negatives emanating from
Afghanistan, it was essential that foreign interference, principally from
Afghanistan’s southern borders must cease. India remained firm in
its belief that there can be no military solution to the Afghan problem
and that Afghanistan’s independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity must be preserved.
India kept in close touch with many countries that have influence
and interest in Afghan affairs. It supported the efforts of the UN to
bring peace to Afghanistan. However, it was our feeling that the 6+2
format relied upon by the UN as the principal mechanism to bring
peace to Afghanistan is inherently flawed on account of its narrow
and constricted base.
Notwithstanding our lack of recognition of the Taliban, our
strong reservations about its obscurantist ideologies and our
opposition to the manner in which it has permitted itself to be
manipulated by Pakistan, we established direct contact with the
Taliban during the hijacking of Indian Airlines flight IC-814. The
role played by the Taliban during this crisis was noted but we made it
clear that the fundamentals of our Afghan policy would not change.
1

India's Neighbours

As in previous years, India continued to send humanitarian
assistance to Afghanistan both bilaterally and through the UN. To
ameliorate the suffering of thousands of Afghan people displaced
from the Shumali plains and Takhar province, 1000 tents, 25,500
blankets, 140 tonnes of food items and 15 tonnes of medicines, medical
supplies and medical equipment were despatched by eight chartered
flights. More consignments of medicines, shelter material and food
items will be sent in the coming months.
Iran

India’s multifaceted relations with Iran continued to grow. As a
part of continuing high-level interaction between the two countries,
Minister of External Affairs had a fruitful meeting with Dr. Seyed
Kamal Kharrazi, Foreign Minister of the Islamic Republic of Iran at
New York on 23 September, 1999 during which all bilateral, regional
and international issues of mutual interest were discussed. Foreign
Secretary Shri K. Raghunath paid a visit to Tehran from 31 July-1
August, 1999 to review with his counterpart all bilateral, political,
commercial, economic, technical, cultural and consular cooperation.
He also exchanged views on regional matters and international issues
of common concern.
It was decided that for a more regular and structured consultations
between the Foreign Ministries of the two countries, four Working
Groups be formed for a more focussed attention on (i) Bilateral,
Political and Economic issues; (ii) International & Multilateral Issues;
(iii) Research & Sectoral Studies; and (iv) Cultural Cooperation.

2

Annual Report 1999-2000

was vacated. This was a fact that was well understood by the
international community.
The Indian armed forces began Operation Vijay on 26 May 1999
with the objective of completely evicting Pakistan’s armed intrusion
and aggression. While the Operation was on, the External Affairs
Minister also received the Foreign Minister of Pakistan for talks in
New Delhi (12 June ‘99). The Pakistan Foreign Minister was told
clearly that Pakistan’s armed intrusion and aggression was completely
unacceptable, that it constituted a blatant violation of the Line of
Control and the Simla Agreement and that there was no question of
any talks on this issue without Pakistan first addressing itself to
vacating its aggression against India and restoring status quo ante on
the LOC. India’s outrage at the inhuman and barbaric treatment meted
out to our soldiers in Pakistani custody was also conveyed to him. We
demanded that those guilty of these atrocities be brought to justice.
The Pakistan Foreign Minister was also told that Pakistan’s aggression
was a grave breach of trust and while its territorial aggression against
India would be evicted, it would be extremely difficult to restore the
trust and confidence that had been damaged by Pakistan’s betrayal.

approbation. It also needs to be emphasised that the importance of
the inviolability and sanctity of the LOC for maintaining peace and
tranquillity was totally accepted by the international community.
Pakistan was held as having violated this line and its efforts at terming
it as imprecise also failed. The international community also concurred
with our assertion that Kargil was a manifestation of the medieval
malevolence spilling over from Afghanistan and that there was a need
to confront and defeat such impulses, in the interest of not only our
region but also of the larger global community.
Throughout its military operations, India acted with unparalleled
restraint and scrupulously observed the sanctity of the LOC. In doing
so, our armed forces took unusually high casualties, which are a tribute
to their discipline and valour. In view of the relentless progress of
Indian forces on the ground, Pakistan had no option but to come to
an arrangement for withdrawing its troops to its own side of the
LOC. In exactly two months’ time from the day it had started,
Operation Vijay marked one of the great successes in the Indian
military history.
Violation of Indian Airspace by Pakistani Aircraft

The international community, while appreciating India’s position,
also pointed to the irresponsibility of Pakistan’s military action and
called for the immediate restoration of the LOC. India too emphasised
that the LOC was an essential confidence building measure and
indispensable for peace and security. Attempts by Pakistan to create
doubts about its clarity and validity were not only mischievous, but
also extremely dangerous and totally unacceptable to us. We also
pointed out that in the 27 years since the LOC had been demarcated
and marked on authenticated maps signed by senior military
commanders of both India and Pakistan, there had not been single
instance of its having been called into question.

During the year, Pakistan maintained its pattern of brazen
violations of the 1991 Agreement between India and Pakistan on
Prevention of Airspace Violations. On 10 August 1999, a Pakistan
Navy maritime surveillance-cum-combat Atlantique aircraft intruded
repeatedly and deep into Indian territory in the Rann of Kutch area
and was shot down by the Indian Air Force fighters when it failed to
heed to their signals to land. Part of the wreckage of the aircraft was
found inside Indian territory. Pakistan also used missiles on 11 August
1999 to target three Indian helicopters that were ferrying journalists
to the crash site. All of these actions are in keeping with Pakistan’s
wilful violation of confidence building measures.

The international community was kept continuously briefed of
India’s position during Operation Vijay. It was a measure of the
justness of India’s cause that our position found virtually universal

IC-814 Hijacking

An Indian Airlines aircraft was hijacked to Kandahar by five
persons on 24 December, 1999. Government secured the safe release
3

India's Neighbours

of passengers, crew and the aircraft in exchange for three terrorists,
including a Pakistani national. The hijacking was an example of
international terrorism at its worst. There is firm evidence that it was
engineered by Pakistan and fundamentalist groups that are based in
Pakistan and outside under its command and control. The Indian
authorities have also been able to identify the hijackers who are all
Pakistanis. Further, the majority of the terrorists whose release was
earlier sought by the hijackers were also Pakistanis. The destination
of the hijackers as well as of the three released terrorists was Pakistan.
Outlook for Future Relations

It was India that had initiated the composite dialogue process.
The Prime Minister’s visit to Lahore was a path-breaking attempt to
reach out to Pakistan and permanently transform our relations. It
was also a manifestation of our desire to take them in a positive and
constructive direction. Pakistan embarked on a venture that
constituted betrayal of trust and revealed abiding hostility. It would,
therefore, be idle to pretend that this experience has not set back
India-Pakistan relations. The damage this action has done to mutual
relations is compounded by Pakistan’s continuing sponsorship of
terrorism against India as a matter of state policy.
Pakistan is now effectively under what amounts to martial law
following the military coup of 12 October 1999. The coup has
implications for our security interests and we have to take this into
account. Pakistan needs to restore mutual trust and confidence
through concrete and tangible action including the cessation of crossborder terrorism and hostile propaganda against India. The
sponsorship and instigation of cross-border terrorism by Pakistan in
Jammu & Kashmir and elsewhere in India constitutes a violation not
only of the LOC but also of the Simla Agreement. It is incumbent
upon Pakistan to abjure this brazen encouragement and abetment of
terrorism and dismantle the entire network that is set up in Pakistani
territory for this purpose. Continuous calls for “jehad” against India
can hardly be interpreted as messages for dialogue and peace. The

4

high-pitched propaganda against India, instances of which are rife in
the daily life of Pakistan, do not inspire confidence in Pakistan’s interest
in dialogue.
These are not preconditions but the very ingredients to foster
proper environment for a meaningful interaction between the two
countries.
The international community also recognises that all outstanding
issues between India and Pakistan should be settled bilaterally in a
peaceful manner. There is no place whatsoever for any third-party
mediation in this process.
Section2
Relations with our Eastern and Southern neighbours continued
to remain warm and friendly. The thrust of our policy towards this
region was to encourage mutually beneficial economic cooperation
and contacts at people’s level. Several new initiatives were launched
to achieve these objectives. Regular contacts were maintained at the
political level with a view to strengthening cooperative relations with
these countries and to sensitising them on the threat posed to the
democratic and social fabric of the region by forces of terrorism and
religious extremism.
Bangladesh

India continued to pursue a policy of further expanding and
deepening its traditionally close and friendly ties with Bangladesh.
There was a regular exchange of high level visits which contributed
to the promotion of mutual understanding and goodwill, with an
emphasis on economic cooperation.
The Prime Minister, Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee, accompanied by a
delegation which included the External Affairs Minister, Minister for
Railways and Surface Transport and Chief Minister of West Bengal
visited Dhaka on 19 and 20 June, 1999 on the occasion of the inaugural
run of the bus service from Calcutta to Dhaka. The bus service has

Annual Report 1999-2000

been welcomed by the people of the two countries with great joy. It
heralds a new dimension in bilateral relations and represents a
significant step in facilitating people-to-people interaction between
the two countries.
During the visit, Prime Minister held wide ranging discussions
with the President and Prime Minister of Bangladesh; the discussions
covered bilateral, regional and international issues. An Agreement to
extend a credit line of Rs.200 crore to Bangladesh, spread over three
years was signed. With a view to further enhancing trade, India has
agreed in principle to the Bangladeshi request for non-reciprocal dutyfree access for select items of export interest to Bangladesh. Both
sides also agreed upon the restoration of multi-modal communication
links between the two countries which should go a long way in
providing the infrastructure necessary to enable economic interaction
between India and Bangladesh attain its true potential. Both sides
also focussed on the need to provide a framework for border trade.
A proposal for the transshipment of Indian goods across Bangladesh
by Bangladesh carriers is under the active consideration of the
Government of Bangladesh. These issues will be examined by a Joint
Group of Experts.
The two Prime Ministers met again on 13 November 1999 on
the sidelines of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting
in Durban.
The Bangladesh Minister for Water Resources, Mr Abdur Razzak,
visited India in April 1999 in connection with the 33rd Session of the
Joint Rivers Commission. The Joint Committee of Experts on Sharing
of Waters of Common Rivers met twice during the year when
discussions were held on sharing of Teesta Waters. The Minister for
Commerce and Industries of Bangladesh , Mr Tofail Ahmed visited
India for bilateral talks on trade issues from 19-24 May 1999. The
Speaker of the Bangladesh Parliament, Mr Humayun Rasheed
Choudhury, visited India from 9-15 August 1999.

Minister of State for External Affairs, Mr. Ajit Kumar Panja,
visited Dhaka from 20-22 January 2000, when he called on the Prime
Minister of Bangladesh and held fruitful discussions with the Ministers
of Foreign Affairs, Finance and Agriculture. His talks with the Minister
of State for Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh covered the entire range
of bilateral interactions, with a view to identifying areas for focussed
attention in the coming months. An MOU on Agriculture was signed
during the visit. An important outcome of the discussions was the
decision to start a bus service between Agartala and Dhaka.
Interaction between the armed forces of India and Bangladesh
continued with the exchange of a number of high level delegations
between the two countries. The Bangladesh Defence Secretary, Mr
Mohammed Idris Ali visited India from 12-16 October 1999 along
with the Director General (Artillery ) of the Bangladesh Army and
Assistant Chief of Naval Staff on the occasion of Defexpo-99. The
Bangladesh Navy participated in the multilateral exercise MILAN-99
held at Port Blair from 30 March - 4 April 1999. Three Indian Navy
ships commanded by Rear Admiral V Bharatan made a goodwill visit
to Chittagong from 1-4 November 1999 and carried out a joint exercise
for the first time with three Bangladesh Navy ships on 4 November,
1999. As in previous years, a number of armed forces personnel of
Bangladesh also received training in India.
As part of the institutional dialogue on various issues relating to
border management, the Director General level meeting between the
Border Security Force and the Bangladesh Rifles took place in Dhaka
from 24-28 October 1999. The Joint Working Group from the
respective Home Ministries also met in Dhaka in January 2000.
Secretary level talks on renewal of the India-Bangladesh Protocol
on Inland Transit & Trade was held in Dhaka from 26-28 October
1999. The Protocol was renewed upto 3 October 2001. The new
Protocol puts in place a framework which will facilitate movement of
cargo to the north eastern states. Under the new Protocol, Calcutta,
5

India's Neighbours

Haldia, Pandu and Karimganj on the Indian side and Narayanganj,
Sirajganj, Khulana and Mongla on the Bangladesh side have been
designated as Ports of Call. The Protocol also provides for steps to
ensure equal sharing of inter-country and transit cargo by the ships
of the two countries to and from ports of call/customs stations
including extended places of loading and unloading.
Maintaining the tradition of close and active interaction in the
field of education, India provided training facilities and scholarships
to Bangladeshi candidates under various schemes. A series of cultural
programmes by Indian artistes were also organized in Bangladesh. A
number of cultural programmes including film shows, art-exhibitions,
music concerts etc. were also organised by the Indian High
Commission in Dhaka with the participation of local artistes from
Bangladesh.
Sri Lanka

India’s relations with Sri Lanka continued to be cordial and
friendly. India expressed its consistent support for a peaceful
settlement of the ethnic conflict within the framework of Sri Lanka’s
unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity. India views the ethnic issue
as complicated and best be resolved by Sri Lanka itself.
The Minister of State (EA), Shri A.K. Panja, led an Indian
delegation to Colombo in November 1999 to represent India at the
State sponsored funeral of late Mr. S. Thondaman, CWC Leader and
Minister of Livestock Development and Estate Infrastructure. Mr.
Thondaman was the leader of the Ceylon Workers Congress and was
held in high regard by the Indian Tamil Community in Sri Lanka.
As a follow up to the signing of India-Sri Lanka Free Trade
Agreement in December, 1998, an Indian delegation led by the
Commerce Secretary visited Colombo in May, 1999 and held
discussions with the Sri Lankan delegation led by Secretary to the
Treasury. The talks were inconclusive. After a further round of talks
in New Delhi in February 2000, letters were exchanged by which all

6

pending matters were resolved. The operationalisation of the FTA
will take place on March 1, 2000.
The Sri Lankan Defence Secretary visited India in August, 1999
and had detailed discussions with the Defence Secretary and the
Foreign Secretary. The discussions were focussed on security related
matters including training of Sri Lankan defence personnel in India
and the problems faced by Indian fishermen in the Palk Straits area.
Lt. Gen. Chandra Sekhar, PVSM, AVSM, ADC, Vice Chief of
Army Staff, represented India at the Golden Jubilee celebrations of
the Sri Lankan Army held in Colombo from 9-12 October, 1999.
The India-Sri Lanka Foundation was inaugurated by the Sri
Lankan Foreign Minister Mr. Lakshman Kadirgamar in Colombo on
19 November 1999, in pursuance of the MOU establishing the IndiaSri Lanka Foundation signed during the visit of the Sri Lankan
President to India in December, 1998. The Foundation would focus
on promotion of cultural and educational ties between the two
countries.
Maldives

India-Maldives relations have been close and friendly. India
attaches the highest importance to its relations with the Maldives and
is committed to cooperate with the Maldives in its developmental
efforts especially in the human resource development and health
sectors. During the year 1999, a number of visits were exchanged
between the two countries to strengthen cooperation in various areas
including medicine, meteorology and customs cooperation.
A Tripartite Agreement between India, Maldives and Indira
Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) was signed on
22.12.1999, under which IGNOU will launch Distance Education
programmes in the Maldives. Another Tripartite Agreement between
India, Maldives and the Educational Consultants India Limited has
been signed to facilitate tailor-made courses in India for Maldivian
students.

Annual Report 1999-2000

A two-member delegation from the Indian Meteorological
Department visited Male from 22 - 30 June 1999 in connection with
the upgradation of the Meteorological Data Reception Centre at Male.
The Centre was commissioned by Hon’ble Abdulla Majeed, Deputy
Minister for Home Affairs, Housing and Environment of the
Government of Maldives from June 28, 1999.
The Fourth Joint Indo-Maldives Coast Guard Exercises under
the Dosti series was conducted from October 4-8, 1999.
Mr. Ahmed Abdullah, Minister of Health of Maldives visited India
from 22-24 April 1999. During his stay in India, he was called on by
the Health Secretary and Foreign Secretary, when ongoing bilateral
cooperation in the health sector was discussed.
Myanmar

India continued to pursue a policy of constructive engagement
with Myanmar with a view to strengthening the existing ties and broadbasing and diversifying areas of contact and cooperation. General
Maunge Aye, Vice Chairman, State Peace and Development Council,
Deputy Commander-in-Chief of Myanmar Defence Forces and
Commander-in-Chief of Myanmar Army, visited Shillong from 7-8
January 2000, at the invitation of our Chief of Army Staff, who visited
Myanmar from 6-7 January 2000. He led a high level delegation
comprising of Ministers and senior officials. The visit provided an
opportunity to discuss a wide range of bilateral issues including control
of cross border insurgency, threat posed by religious fundamentalism,
trade and economic relations, travel linkages, tourism and cross border
projects in areas such as power, mining, etc. The Indian delegation
for the talks with General Maunge Aye was led by the Minister of
Commerce and Industry, Mr. Murasoli Maran and included the
Minister for Power, Shri R. Kumaramangalam. The two sides have
agreed upon specific steps to strengthen economic and security
cooperation.
Following a series of exchanges between the scientific

communities of the two countries, an Agreement on Cooperation in
the fields of Science & Technology was concluded during the visit of
the Myanmar Minister for Science and Technology to India in June
1999. The Heads of Survey Departments of India and Myanmar met
in Yangon (10-13 November), when, besides issues pertaining to
maintenance of boundary pillars along the 1643 Km international
border between India and Myanmar, the possibilities of cooperation
in the field of cartography were also discussed. The first ever visit to
India by a Naval Chief from Myanmar (14-20 November) laid the
foundation for closer interaction between the Navies of the two
countries.
India continued to cooperate with the Government of Myanmar
in its developmental efforts, including human resource development.
Technical teams from India visited Myanmar to assess the potential
for cooperation in areas such as power and to determine road and
riverine linkages between the North East and Myanmar. A sustained
dialogue on issues relating to border management was maintained
between senior civilian and army officials through established
institutional mechanisms. The 6th India-Myanmar National Level
Meeting, at the level of Home Secretaries was held in New Delhi
(July 28-30), and the 9th India-Myanmar Sectoral Level Meeting, at
the level of Joint Secretaries, was held in Kohima (11-13, November).
These meetings addressed issues such as border management,
promotion of trade and travel through land route, etc.
Section 3
India’s traditional friendship and cooperation with its northern
neighbours, Bhutan and Nepal, has continued to grow over the years.
Bhutan and Nepal are our closest neighbours, and this closeness is
evident in our common social values, traditions, extensive people to
people contacts, and wide ranging economic linkages. Our focus over
the year has been on mutually beneficial economic development, which
would help to improve the living conditions of people in the three
7

India's Neighbours

countries, and particularly of the people living on both sides of the
open India-Nepal and India-Bhutan border.
Nepal

Several initiatives were taken to further strengthen our interaction
with Nepal, and to consolidate the close and multifaceted cooperation
between the two countries.
The Foreign Minister of Nepal, Dr. Ram Sharan Mahat, paid an
official visit to India from 17-19 August 1999. During the visit, Dr.
Mahat called on the President and Prime Minister of India, besides
meeting his counterpart, the External Affairs Minister of India.
Although the visit was primarily for consultations on matters relating
to SAARC, it also provided an opportunity for exchange of views on
bilateral issues of mutual interest.
At the invitation of the Foreign Minister of Nepal, the External
Affairs Minister, Shri Jaswant Singh paid an official visit to Nepal
from 8-11 September 1999. The Foreign Ministers reaffirmed the
commitment of their respective governments not to allow their
respective territories to be used for activities prejudicial to the security
of the other. They directed their Survey Officials to complete the
demarcation of the Boundary in a time bound manner. The visit
provided an opportunity to review the entire gamut of bilateral
relations between Nepal and India. A Joint Press Statement was issued
at the conclusion of the visit, announcing the various decisions taken
to further strengthen cooperation between the two countries. A
decision was taken to revive the India-Nepal Joint Commission and
expand cooperation in development of infrastructure, including
transportation and communications in the adjoining border districts
of Nepal and India, exchange information and experience in the field
of socioeconomic development between the Planning Commissions
of the two countries, and set up a Joint Task Force on Flood Control
and Flood Forecasting.
Two prestigious Government of India-assisted projects in the

8

health sector in Nepal, the B. P. Koirala Institute of Health Sciences
(BPKIHS) at Dharan and the Maternity & Neo-natal Intensive Care
Units at Paropkar Hospital in Kathmandu were inaugurated and
formally handed over to the Nepalese authorities.
Other high level visits during the period under review include,
the visit of a 6-member Nepalese delegation led by, Mr. Bishwa Man
Shrestha, the Election Commissioner of Nepal, from September 29
to October 7, 1999, to observe the last phase of the 13th Lok Sabha
elections and meet the Chief Election Commissioner and other senior
officials in the Election Commission of India.
The Nepalese Minister of State for Science & Technology of
Nepal, Mr. Surendra Prasad Chowdhury visited India from 17-21
November 1999 to attend the 2nd Ministerial Meeting on Space
Application for Sustainable Development in Asia and the Pacific held
in New Delhi. His visit, and meetings with our Minister for Human
Resource Development and Science & Technology and Minister of
State for Science & Technology of India, has paved the way for bilateral
cooperation in the field of Science and Technology.
The Nepalese Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Chakra Prasad Bastola
visited New Delhi from 22-24 November, 1999. The visit provided
an opportunity to discuss possibilities of mutual cooperation in the
field of Agriculture in pursuance of the Bilateral MOU on Cooperation
in the field of Agriculture.
The 12th Meeting of the Joint Group of Experts on the
Pancheshwar Multi-Purpose Project was held in New Delhi from 35 August 1999 to finalise the modalities for setting up of a Joint Project
Office (JPO) in Kathmandu and other field offices and preparation
of the Detailed Project Report (DPR) within a timeframe of two
years from the date of opening of the JPO. Both Governments have
approved the modalities worked out and the Joint Project Office and
field offices are expected to commence work shortly.

Annual Report 1999-2000

The 10th Meeting of the Standing Committee on Inundation
Problems between Nepal and India was held in Kathmandu from 15 November 1999. The two sides discussed measures to expedite
solutions to the recurring problems of inundation along the IndiaNepal border. Both sides agreed to expedite the construction of
embankments on Lalbakeya, Bagmati, Kamia and Khando rivers and
cooperate on preparation of a “Master Plan for Basin- Wise
Management of Flood and Inundation Problems” in respect of Kosi
and other river basins in Eastern Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, which
originate in Nepal.
The 22nd Meeting of the Joint Technical Level India-Nepal
Boundary Committee (JTC) was held in Kathmandu from 2-4
November 1998. At the Meeting, the two sides reviewed the progress
in the implementation of the decisions taken at the 21st JTC Meeting
and finalised the work plan for expeditious completion of reidentification of the India - Nepal Boundary, in a time bound manner,
by 2002. Final preparation of strip-maps and finalization of modalities
for periodic inspection and maintenance of the India Nepal Boundary
would be completed by 2003.
The 4th Director General level talks on Customs Cooperation
were held in New Delhi from December 1-3, 1999. The two sides
reviewed the implementation of decisions taken at the 3rd DG level
meeting and agreed to further enhance the ongoing bilateral
cooperation to monitor and effectively combat unauthorised trade
across the open India-Nepal Border.
A Joint India Nepal Coordination meeting was held, in
Kathmandu from December 9-10, 1999, to finalise the technical
modalities for energising the 132 KV Tanakpur-Mahendranagar line
to supply 70 million units of energy per annum, free of cost, to Nepal,
in accordance with India’s commitment under the Mahakali Treaty.
It was agreed to commence the power supply with effect from
January 1, 2000.

The Commerce Secretary Level Inter-Governmental Committee
Meeting, to review the implementation of the India-Nepal Treaty of
Trade, and India -Nepal Treaty of Transit was held from December
9-11, 1999 in New Delhi. The meeting enabled both sides to review
the entire gamut of bilateral trade relations and take appropriate
measures to ensure smooth implementation of the two Treaties.
India attaches high priority to the development of economic and
commercial ties with Nepal. Engagement in Nepal’s economic
development in diverse areas has increased over the years. Major
projects being funded by the Government of India in Nepal include
the construction of 22 bridges on the Kohalpur-Mahakali sector of
the East-West Highway, construction of an Emergency and Trauma
Centre at Bir Hospital in Kathmandu, construction of Raxaul-Sirsiya
Rail Link, construction of Tanakpur-Mahendranagar Link Road and
several other projects that form part of lndia’s commitment under
the Mahakali Treaty. A High Level Tasks Force (HLTF) monitors the
progress in bilateral relations and oversees Indian assisted projects in
Nepal.
Initiatives taken by the Government of India to liberalise the
trade and investment regime with Nepal have imparted considerable
momentum to bilateral economic exchanges in the recent years.
Nepal’s exports to India have tripled in the last three years, since the
conclusion of the renewed Treaty of Trade in 1996, and are expected
to touch the Rs. 1000 Crores per annum mark in the near future.
Indian investments account for over 40% of the total foreign
investments in Nepal. Bilateral trade during 1998-99 amounted to
Rs. 1225.56 Crores. During the period April-July 1999, the two-way
trade was Rs. 461.24 crores, while the figure for the corresponding
period in the previous year was Rs. 304.26 Crores.
A large number of Nepalese students continued to avail of
academic and training facilities in India. Several scholarship schemes,
such as the Silver Jubilee Scholarship, ITEC Scholarships and the
9

India's Neighbours

B P Koirala Foundation Scholarships supplemented normal
scholarships being provided under ‘Aid to Nepal’ and TCS of
Colombo Plan besides the self-financing opportunities for studies in
India offered by the Government of India to Nepalese students in
diverse fields, notably engineering, medicine and in the field of
advanced and modern technology. Specific professional training and
orientation programmes were also conducted for select candidates
from Nepal under the Nepal Aid Scheme. A large number of Nepalese
students were also admitted to schools and colleges in India as a
special concession.
An Indian Airlines flight IC-814 with 178 passengers and 11 crew
members on board, which took off from Kathmandu for Delhi on
24th December, was hijacked by 5 armed men at 17.10 hrs. while
over-flying Lucknow. All the hostages were released on 31st December
in exchange of three jailed militants. There was one casualty during
the hijacking. The two countries are in touch with each other to fully
investigate the hijacking.
The Third Meeting of the India-Nepal Joint Working Group on
Border Management (JWG) was held in Kathmandu from 1-3 Feb,
2000. The two sides reiterated their determination not to permit the
use of their respective territories for activities directed against the
other. They reviewed the developments since the last meeting of the
JWG and had an exchange of views on modalities for more effective
management and regulation of the India-Nepal border. They agreed
to strenghthen cooperation to control undesirable activities and the
movement of terrorists, criminals and other undesirable elements
accross the border. It was reiterated that the previlege of unimpeded
access accross the open border enjoyed by the nationals of the two
countries should not be allowed to be misused by anyone, including
third country nationals.
Bhutan

The relations between India and Bhutan are marked by mutual

10

understanding and respect and warm friendship. The mutually
beneficial economic cooperation between the two countries has been
steadily growing and continues to provide a firm basis to bilateral
relationship.
As part of our close bilateral cooperation, India has been
extending assistance to Bhutan’s Five-Year Plans since 1961. The VIII
Five-Year Plan (1997 - 2002) is under implementation. The
Government of India approved Rs. 900 Crores as lndia’s commitment
towards Bhutan’s VIII Plan. Of this total commitment, Rs.500 Crores
is for project-tied assistance and the remaining Rs. 400 Crores would
be provided as development subsidy to Bhutan. Separately, besides
the regular assistance under the Five-Year Plan, India is also funding
three Mega Projects i.e. the Tala Hydroelectric Project (THEP), the
Kurichu Hydroelectric Project (KHEP) and the Dungsum Cement
Project (DCP). The financing pattern for both the Tala and Kurichu
Projects is 60% as grant and 40% as loan.
The last round of bilateral cooperation talks was held in May
1999 in Thimpu. At the conclusion of the bilateral talks, an indicative
shelf of projects for disbursal of funds for the year 1999-2000 was
formulated. Out of the total Indian assistance of Rs.190 Crores under
the Non-Plan category for the year 1999-2000, an amount of Rs. 136
Crores had been released by the end of October.
During the year, various high level visits have marked the
continuing close interaction and friendship between India and Bhutan.

Annual Report 1999-2000

Army Staff visited Bhutan in September and met with his counterparts
in Bhutan. The 7th Joint Technical Level Meeting on the Bilateral
Survey Collaboration Project was held in Thimpu in June 1999. Shri
Opak Amang, Minister of State for Tourism visited Bhutan from
June 19-25, 1999. Bhutan's Minister of Trade and Industry visited
India from October 11-14, 1999 to attend the project authorities
meetings held in New Delhi. The Foreign Secretary of Bhutan, Dasho
Ugyen Tshering visited India from January 22-27, 2000 to attend an
international seminar. Thje Chief Justice of Bhutan, Lyonpo Sonam
Tobgye visited India from January 25-31, 2000 to participate in the
Golden Jubilee celebrations of Supreme Court of India. These regular
and high level interactions between the two countries continue to
reflect the special and friendly ties between the two countries.
A notable and important internal development during the period
under review was that at the instance of His Majesty, the King of
Bhutan, the Seventy Seventh Session of the National Assembly of
Bhutan re-empowered the King of Bhutan to take all necessary
measure to tackle the ULFA-BODO insurgency problem in South
Bhutan.

held, and a SAARC Joint Statement issued. The Terms of Reference
for a Treaty on the establishment of a South Asian Free Trade Area
(SAFTA) were finalised by the Committee of Experts set up at the
10th SAARC Summit at Colombo. This initiative was in addition to
the tariff concessions granted under the Third Round of the South
Asian Preferential Trading Arrangement (SAPTA), which covered
3456 tariff lines under concessional tariffs, with India offering more
than half the concessions. SAARC also began work on harmonizing
Quality and Measurement Standards, which will facilitate intra-regional
trade flows. India accords priority to the objectives and ideals of
SAARC – promoting and accelerating cooperation in social and
economic areas. The quickening of the pace of economic cooperation
constitutes a major advance for SAARC and is expected to contribute
to the operationalisation of the SAARC Free Trade Area.
India took initiative in offering Distance education scholarships
to students from the SAARC countries. NGOs were increasingly
involved in undertaking activities in diverse fields under the overall
SAARC umbrella, and were supported by the Ministry.

SAARC

However, events in the second half of the year cast a shadow
over the gathering momentum in regional cooperation. The military
coup in Pakistan on October 12, 1999 necessitated postponement of
the 11th SAARC Summit (scheduled for November 26-28, 1999 in
Kathmandu), as SAARC countries expressed their concern at the
prospect of holding the Summit after the overthrow of the
democratically elected Government of a Member State.

Overview

SAARC Foreign Ministers Meeting

The Indian community in Bhutan is estimated to be around 15000.
Many officials from both public and private sector are on deputation
to Bhutan and engaged in various development projects. India also
extends various facilities to Bhutan in the field of higher education,
survey, training and technical assistance.

Regional Cooperation, particularly economic cooperation under
the SAARC framework, gained momentum in the first half of the
year. Several initiatives, crucial for the success of any regional
organisation, were taken in regional economic cooperation. For the
first time, intensive consultations amongst the SAARC countries to
evolve a common strategy prior to the WTO Meeting in Seattle were

SAARC Foreign Ministers met on the margins of the 54th Session
of the UNGA in New York on September 28, 1999 and discussed
the Report of the Group of Eminent Persons (GEP), set up at the
Ninth SAARC Summit at Male, in May 1997 to review the functioning
of SAARC institutions and provide a Perspective Plan upto the year
2020. These were followed by Ministerial level dialogues with the
11

India's Neighbours

EU-Troika and ASEAN where areas for possible cooperation were
considered.
SAARC Conference on Intellectual Property Rights

A SAARC Conference on Intellectual Property Rights, held in
New Delhi from April 20-21, 1999, discussed regional cooperation
in promoting awareness among the SAARC countries of issues relating
to the protection of Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs). The
Conference agreed on setting up a Technological Information
Network to streamline and improve procedures for disposing of patent
applications, and called for the development of model regional IPR
regimes and traditional-knowledge databases, and for enhanced
protection for traditional knowledge. It also recommended developing

12

Annual Report 1999-2000

agriculture and food products, should be accorded priority in regional
harmonisation of standards. The Quality Council of India was
mandated to prepare a draft common format for a Mutual Recognition
Agreement for Conformity Assessment, for the consideration of
SAARC Member States. The National Physical Laboratory of India
would prepare a status report on the Testing, Measurement and
Calibration facilities in the region. A draft Regional Action Plan for
furthering cooperation was also adopted, to be considered at the next
meeting of the SAARC Commerce Secretaries.
Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement

The First SAARC Meeting on an Agreement on Avoidance of
Double Taxation was held in Islamabad from August 5-7, 1999. The
Meeting discussed tax laws of member countries, different variants
of Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements and possible areas for
regional cooperation.

South Asian Development Fund

The Fourth Meeting of the Governing Board of the South Asian
Development Fund (SADF) took place in Thimpu from May 18-19,
1999. India is the current Chairman of the Fund. The Fund consists
of 3 Windows for funding techno-economic feasibility studies, Human
Resources Development, and infrastructure sectors. The Meeting
discussed mobilisation of funds from regional and multilateral agencies
for augmenting the Fund’s core capital. The Meeting also established
a Technical Committee to examine the proposal for setting up a
permanent Secretariat for the SADF. The Fifth Governing Board
Meeting of the SADF, which met from September 8-9, 1999 approved
the report of the Technical Committee, which has recommended that
a Permanent Secretariat would be desirable. Both these proposals –
for augmenting the funds and for a permanent Secretariat would now
be considered by the higher bodies of SAARC.

Technical Committee Meetings

Communications
The Sixth Meeting of the SAARC Technical Committee on

Communications was held in Islamabad from 4-5 May, 1999, and
reviewed implementation of the Plan of Action on
Telecommunications adopted by the First Meeting of the SAARC
Communication Ministers in May, 1998. A Focus Group for
consideration of tariffs, accounting rates, traffic patterns, etc. was
constituted. The Meeting strongly recommended laying of optical
fiber lines for digitalisation and increased band-width. A regional
directory of training institutions, course outlines, experts and
consultants in the field of telecommunications is to be prepared. India
offered to organise a Regional Workshop on Induction of Technology
in Postal Services during the current year.
Health, Population Activities and Child Welfare
The 17th Meeting of the SAARC Technical Committee on Health,
Population Activities and Child Welfare, held in Colombo, Sri Lanka
from August 12-14, 1999, discussed a Draft Convention for Children.
The National Institute of Communicable Diseases in India would
collate and disseminate information about institutions dealing with
communicable and non-communicable diseases. India also offered
to circulate a list of our Institutes and the courses they offer in dealing
with Disaster Management.
SAARC Convention on Suppression of Terrorism

A meeting of Legal Officers on the SAARC Convention on
Suppression of Terrorism held in Kandy, Sri Lanka from June 17-18,
1999, reviewed the implementation of the Convention. Under its
provisions, Member States are committed to extradite or prosecute
alleged terrorists, thus preventing them from enjoying safe havens. It
was agreed that those Member States which have not yet done so
should enact legislation at an early date to give comprehensive effect
to the Convention. The Meeting also agreed on the Draft Guidelines
for the Annual Liaison Officers’ Meeting to review issues relating to
the Convention.
13

India's Neighbours

Workshop on Follow up Action on the Fourth World
Conference on Women

A Workshop on Follow up Action on the Fourth World
Conference on Women (Beijing Platform For Action) was held in
New Delhi from September 28-29, 1999. The Member countries
presented their country position on the areas identified by the Beijing
Platform for Action, discussed the situation of the Girl Child and
gender related inputs for the proposed SAARC Social Charter, and
adopted recommendations for regional cooperation.

Y2K Conference

A two-day Meeting of Senior Officials dealing with Y2K Issues
was held in Dhaka, Bangladesh from September 25-26, 1999. The
Meeting recommended that those members who were prepared for
the Y2K problem, especially in the critical area of Power, should offer
technical assistance for mitigation of the Y2K impact.

Meeting of the Heads of National TV & Radio Organisations

The First Meeting of the Heads of National TV & Radio
organisations of SAARC countries was held on October 14, 1999 in
New Delhi against the background of plummeting audience interest
in the SAARC Audio Visual Exchange Committee (SAVE)
Programmes. The Meeting recommended the introduction of ‘shorts’
on radio ( 90 second messages on radio ) and ‘spots’ (20 second
messages on TV) in addition to the existing SAVE format. India
offered to host a workshop on the issue. Environment, Social
Development, Women’s Empowerment, Health and Education have
been chosen as themes for the spots/shorts. It was also agreed to set
up a mechanism for daily exchange of news items for both Radio and
TV. India had informally offered to prepare a proposal for the
Mechanism.

Meeting of SAARC Audio Visual Exchange Committee

The 18th Meeting of the SAARC Audio Visual Exchange

14

Committee, held in New Delhi from October 15-16, 1999 selected
Radio and TV Programmes for SAVE broad/telecasts. The
Committee previewed the documentary on SAARC to be telecast
simultaneously in all countries on the eve of the 11th Summit prepared
by the External Publicity Division of the Ministry of External Affairs,
India, decided to hold a SAARC Radio Music Festival, and also decided
to intensify cooperation in the field of electronic media.
NGO Meetings

A Meeting of South Asian Countries on Tea Cooperation, held
in New Delhi from May 6-7, 1999, discussed marketing and production
issues, and decided to launch a generic regional tea promotion and to
form the Tea Association of South Asia (TASA). The Tea Board of
India will host the secretariat of TASA temporarily till permanent
arrangements are made.
Workshop on International Conventions on Land
Transport Facilitation

A Workshop on “International Conventions on Land Transport
Facilitation” was organised by the Asian Institute of Transport
Development from May 19 - 21, 1999 in New Delhi. The Workshop
deliberated on – the various international, regional and bilateral
conventions in the transport sector, the legal framework for transport
facilitation, and regional rail logistics. It also considered the various
non-physical barriers and issues in cross-border movement of goods
and passengers – like customs, visa formalities, regulation of
transshipment of goods and vehicles in transit. ESCAP had also
submitted a proposal for conducting studies in the Transportation
sector for SAARC, including the holding of workshops to sensitize
the SAARC member countries about the benefits of acceding to
International Conventions. India has acceded to two such conventions.
uu

Annual Report 1999-2000

2
South East Asia and the Pacific

I

ndia’s relations with the countries of South East Asia have
traditionally been close and warm as we share a common historical
and cultural legacy. After the end of the cold war and since the
introduction of economic reforms in India, there has been a renewed
vigour in our relationship with the countries of the South East Asian
region. India’s “Look East” policy and country’s potential as a major
market have contributed significantly towards expanding and
diversifying India’s relations with the ASEAN region. The closeness
of the relationship is reflected in regular exchanges of high level visits,
like the recent visit of the President of Vietnam (December 1-5 1999),
the visit of the PM of Singapore (January 2000), the President of
Indonesia (February 2000) and the PM of Cambodia (February 2000)
to India, Joint Commission meetings with Vietnam and Laos, and
Foreign Office Consultations with the Philippines, Indonesia and
Australia etc.
India became ASEAN’s Sectoral Dialogue Partner in 1992 and
Full Dialogue Partner as well as a member of the ASEAN Regional
Forum (ARF) in 1996. The growing ties with the ASEAN have further
developed in the recent years. The dialogue partnership with the
ASEAN has enabled India to significantly broaden and diversify its
relationship with the ASEAN member countries. The ASEAN
countries have recognised the positive role that India can play in
maintaining peace and stability in the region.

India has a fundamental interest in the regional security issues as
we share maritime boundaries with several ASEAN countries and
land and maritime boundary with Myanmar. India sought to promote
a wider and deeper contact with the ASEAN countries in the ASEAN
and ARF framework, to promote peace, development and security in
the region. Shri Jaswant Singh, External Affairs Minister led an Indian
delegation to the 32nd ASEAN Post Ministerial Conference (PMC)
and the 6th ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) meetings held in
Singapore in July 1999, and held bilateral meetings with his
counterparts from the ASEAN and the ARF member countries.
Currently, India is closely collaborating with the South East Asian
countries in various fields such as trade and investment, science and
technolog y, tourism, human resources and infrastructure
development. Such linkages are expected to intensify in the coming
years. Through the institution of dialogue partnership with ASEAN,
attempts are being made to identify areas for focussed interaction,
including formulation of concrete work programmes and action plans.
The total bilateral trade between India and the ASEAN countries
has increased from about US$ 2.5 billion in 1993-94 to US$ 5.98 bn.
in 1997-98 and $ 5.36 bn in 1998-99. With the regional economic
crisis having bottomed out, India hopes to increase trade both in
terms of quantity and value with the ASEAN countries and also
enhance mutual investments.
15

South East Asia and the Pacific

Malaysia
India-Malaysia relations were further strengthened with high level
political exchanges and initiatives in the defence, commercial economic
and cultural fields.
A delegation led by Shri M. Karunanidhi, Chief Minister of Tamil
Nadu visited Malaysia (7-10 January, 1999) and called on the Malaysian
Prime Minister. A delegation led by Shri Ananth Kumar, Minister of
Civil Aviation & Tourism visited Malysia from 8-10 February 1999.
Dr. (Mrs.) Najma Heptullah, Dy. Chairperson, Rajya Sabha, met the
Speaker of the Malaysian Parliament and Head of Senate during her
visit to Malaysia (August 4-5). The Speakers of West Bengal Legislative
Assembly and Punjab Legislative Assembly visited Malaysia from 810 August and 3-6 October 1999 respectively. Justice S.B. Majumdar,
Judge of Supreme Court and Shri Soli Sorabjee, Attorney General of
India participated in the 12th Commonwealth Law Conference (1316 September).
INS ‘Krishna’ and INS ‘Tir’ arrived at Penang Port (26-30 March)
on a goodwill visit to Malaysia. India participated in the Langkawi
International Maritime and Aerospace Exhibition held in the Island
of Langkawi from 30 November - 5 December, 1999.
The economic & commercial cooperation between the two
countries has been growing. Malaysia has emerged as India’s largest
trading partner (over US $ 1891 million two-way trade during 199899) among the ASEAN countries as well as a significant foreign direct
investor country in India (first among ASEAN countries and eighth
globally, in terms of approvals as on 31.12.1998- total approvals from
1991-98 Rs. 54444.74 millions).
An Indian company IRCON was awarded US $ 121 mn Rail
Link Project to Pelbuhan Tanjung Pelepas Johar in July, 99. Another
major development (June 1999) was an agreement for purchase by
16

India of 50,000 barrels per day of crude oil signed between the Indian
Oil Corporation and Malaysian company Petronas.
From the Malaysian side, Dato Seri Samy Vellu, Minister for works
visited India (19-21 April) at the invitation of the Govt. of Punjab
and again in December 1999 to participate in INFRANET 99. Dr.
Lim Keng Yaik, Malaysian Primary Industries Minister led an
economic and technical mission to India (April, 99)
Singapore
India’s existing close and friendly relations with Singapore were
further strengthened during the year. External Affairs Minister Shri
Jaswant Singh had a bilateral meeting with his counterpart Prof. S.
Jayakumar in Singapore in July when he led the Indian delegation to
the 6th ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) and Post Ministerial
Conference. Deputy Chairperson of Rajya Sabha, Dr. Najma
Heptullah visited Singapore in August and had meetings with
Singapore Parliament Speaker, Mr. Tan Soo Khoon and Senior
Parliamentary Secretary in the Ministry of Information and Arts, Mr.
Yatiman Yusof. Minister of Power, Shri PR Kumaramangalam
attended the World Economic Forum’s East Asia Summit held in
Singapore from 18-20 October, 1999. Singapore PM Goh Chok Tong
had a meeting with our PM on 15th November, 1999 at Durban,
South Africa on the margins of CHOGM.
Official level visits included that of Secretary (ER) Shri S.T. Devare
who visited Singapore in May to attend the 6th ARF Senior Officials
meeting, the visit of Shri Deepak Chatterjee, Secretary, Ministry of
Chemicals and Petrochemicals (May), to discuss with the Jurong Town
corporation the structure and operations of the petrochemical
complex set up by them on Jurong Island.
Visits from State Governments included that of the Minister for
Municipal Affairs of Manipur, Shri I. Hemochandra Singh (April) to
attend the World Conference of Model Cities, a business delegation

Annual Report 1999-2000

from Andhra Pradesh led by Shri P. Chandrasekhar, Minister of Major
Industries, Commerce & Export Promotion (April) and accompanied
by Shri GSS Sivaji, Minister for Tourism, Shri H.D. Revenna, Minister
for Housing, Government of Karnataka and Chairman, Karnataka
Milk Federation (June).
A Singapore-India Colloquium titled “the Management of
Globalisation” was organised in Singapore from August 19-20 by the
newly established South Asian Studies Programme of the National
University of Singapore in collaboration with India International
Centre, New Delhi.
From the Singapore side, the National Science and Technology
Board of Singapore sent a delegation to India in September 1999.
During their stay in India, the delegation members had useful meetings
with various colleges and universities regarding possibilities of longterm collaboration between the Singaporean and Indian companies
and institutions.
During the year 1998-99, India-Singapore bilateral trade amounted
to US$ 1884.42 million with a decline of 4.7% over the previous year.
Our exports at US $ 520 million during this period declined by about
33.3% while imports grew by 13.9%. Trends during April-August
(1999) indicate a growth of 40.29 per cent in our exports at US $
266.64 million whereas imports during this period amounted to US $
619.47 million with a marginal decline of 1.26%.
There were also some Defence related visits to Singapore which
included the visit of the Chief of Naval Staff, Admiral Sushil Kumar
(16-19 October, 1999), the Vice Chief of Naval Staff to participate in
the international Maritime Defence Expo (3-8 May, 99) and the ViceChief of Army Staff Lt. Gen. Chandra Shekhar to attend the first
Pacific Army Chiefs Conference co-hosted by Singapore and the US,
5-9 September, 1999).
Singapore Prime Minister Mr. Goh Chok Tong visited India from
Jan. 17-22, 2000. This was his third visit to India. He had meetings

with the President and the Prime Minister, and addressed a CII meeting
in New Delhi. He visited Hyderabad to see the Hitech city, inaugurated
the IT Park in Bangalore and also visited Chennai. During the meetings
of the Minister of Finance as well as the Minister of Information
Technology with PM GCT it was agreed to set up two Joint Task
Forces for Finance and IT sectors. Singapore PM’s visit to India after
five years underlined the renewed interest that Singapore attaches to
cooperation with India and it should provide the necessary impetus
to further expand India-Singapore relations.
Brunei
Bilateral relations with Brunei Darussalam continued to be cordial
and friendly.
Ongoing efforts were sustained for further upgradation of
bilateral relations and cooperation. Our External Affairs Minister held
a bilateral meeting with the Foreign Minister of Brunei during ARF/
ASEAN PMC meetings in Singapore in July 1999. Brunei’s Minister
for Education & Health, who is also the Chairperson of the Brunei
Investment Agency (BIA), visited India in July. A first ever high
technical level visit from the Royal Brunei Armed Forces to India, in
November 1999, may lead to initiating tangible bilateral cooperation
in the defence field, particularly training.
Bilateral trade remained low, but not insignificant, with US$ 3.31
million as Brunei’s imports from India during 1998-99. In areas like
software and IT, civil and electrical projects for construction, supply
and consultancy, and in the important petrochemicals sector reputed
Indian companies made some further progress towards forging
economic and commercial ties with Brunei.
Philippines
The relations between India and the Philippines continued to be
cordial and friendly.
17

South East Asia and the Pacific

The 4th round of the Indo-Philippines Foreign Office
consultations were held in New Delhi on 29th June 1999. The
Philippine delegation was led by Undersecretary Lauro L. Baja and
the Indian delegation was led by Shri S.T. Devare, Secretary (ER).
The consultations covered the whole range of bilateral relations
besides regional and international issues.
India participated in the CINEMAILA International Film Festival
held from July 3-10, 1999. Seven Indian films were screened during
the Festival. The Tamil Film “The terrorist” was awarded the grant
jury prize. Shri Adoor Gopalakrishnan, the noted film director from
India, was a guest of the Festival authorities.
The Defence Secretary (Minister) Mr. Orlando Mercado visited
India from October 11-13, 1999. He led the Philippine delegation to
DEFEXPO INDIA 1999.
India-Philippines trade continued to show a downward trend
during the year. India’s exports to the Philippines at US $ 76.61 million
from January to July, 1999 represented a decline of 15.01% in
comparison to exports during the same period last year. The decrease
is mainly attributed to effects of the regional financial crisis on the
Philippines economy.
The India Trade Promotion Organisation (ITPO) in conjunction
with the Embassy organised (October 15-November 15, 1999) a
promotion of Indian goods at the Rustan’s department store and
supermarket. A wide variety of Indian goods ranging from handicrafts
to processed food had been displayed.
On January 28, 2000 India and the Philippines signed in Manila,
a Bilateral Agreement on Promotion and Protection of Investments.
MOS (Finance/Revenue) signed the Agreement, on behalf of India.
The Agreement would help in promotion of bilateral investments in
the two countries.
18

Thailand
During the year, relations between India and Thailand were
marked by traditional warmth and friendliness. Bilateral cooperation
continued at a normal pace in all fields. Besides, relations developed
within the framework of India-ASEAN dialogue partnership, India’s
membership of the ASEAN Regional Forum as well as in the
framework of BIMST-EC.
The declining trend seen in the last two years in bilateral trade
seemed to have been arrested in 1999 as exports from India during
the period January to July already reached a figure of US $ 253 million
and imports from Thailand during the period were in order of US $
234 million.
Minister of State for External Affairs Smt. Vasundhara Raje paid
an official visit to Thailand from July 6-9, 1999. During her stay, the
MOS (VR) held discussions on bilateral as well as other matters of
mutual concern, with Dr. Sukhumbhand Paribatra, Deputy Minister
of Foreign Affairs. She also paid a courtesy call on PM Chuan Leekpai.
Deputy Chairperson of Rajya Sabha Dr.(Mrs.) Najma Heputullah
also visited Bangkok in July 1999 to seek Thai support for her
candidature as the President of the International Parliament Union
(IPU).
Vice President of India and his delegation was in transit for a day
in Bangkok on its way to Mongolia having arrived in Bangkok on
August 24, 1999. During his stay in Bangkok, the Vice-president had
a meeting with the Crown Prince of Thailand, at his Palace.
Dr. Gautam Arya, a member of the Election Commission of
Thailand visited India from September 1-6, 1999 to see the elections
and the work of the Election Commission of India.
HE Dr. Arthit Qurairat, Minister Science, Technology and
Environment of Thailand visited India from November 15-20, 1999

Annual Report 1999-2000

to participate in the second Ministerial conference on Space
Applications in New Delhi. During his stay, he also held bilateral
discussions with the Ministry of Science & Technology, Government
of India, for strengthening cooperation in this field.

President by the new Parliament in October and Megawati
Soekarnoputri was elected as the Vice-President.

A 9-member delegation including five Members of Parliament
led by Dr. GMC Balyogi, Hon’ble Speaker of Lok Sabha visited
Thailand from November 19-24, 1999 to attend the 7th General
Assembly of Asia Pacific Parliamentarians Conference on
Environment and Development (APPCED) at Chiangmai.

The people of East Timor in a popular consultation, held on 30
August, rejected the autonomy proposal of the Government of
Indonesia, thereby indicating their preference for independence. The
Indonesian Parliament in October repealed the law incorporating East
Timor in Indonesia, thereby initiating the process of its independence.
India donated 500 MT of rice to the Government of Indonesia for
the East Timorese people who had moved to West Timor in Indonesia.
On the East Timor issue, India’s principled position and assistance
has been appreciated in Indonesia.

Shri I.K. Gujral, former PM, visited Thailand (25-27 December
1999) in connection with launching of the Thailand Chapter of World
Punjabi Organisation and met the Thai Foreign Minister. Indian
participation has been organised in a number of cultural activities
held in Thailand during the year including Annual Heritage Festival
of Thailand in Buri Ram province in January 1999, First Asian Film
Festival in March 1999, Bangkok’s First International Festival of music
& Dance in August 1999, Second International Bangkok Film Festival
in September 1999, and the 44th Asia-Pacific Film Festival in
November 1999. The Embassy also organised an exhibition of Indian
dolls in Bangkok during November 1999 in cooperation with Office
of the National Culture Commission of Thailand.
India also provided training to Thai nationals under ITEC,
Colombo Plan, Cultural Exchange Programme and General Cultural
Scholarship schemes. India continued to maintain a Chair of a Sanskrit
Professor at the Sanskrit Study Centre, Silpakorn University.
Indonesia
This period saw major political developments in Indonesia. In
the general elections held in June, around 100 million Indonesians
exercised their franchise.
Abdurrahman Wahid, popularly known Gus Dur was elected

President Abdurrahman Wahid publicly expressed a desire to
forge closer relations with India.

Bilateral relations between India and Indonesia which have been
traditionally close and cordial continued to progress satisfactorily.
As part of the ongoing effort in that direction, the First meeting
of the India-Indonesia Joint Consultative Forum was held in New
Delhi from 12-13 November.
In September Dr. Najma Heptullah, Deputy Chairperson, Rajya
Sabha visited Indonesia for a workshop sponsored by the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) on Rules of Procedures
in the House of Representatives. The Rector of the University of
Udayana, Prof Ketut Sukardika visited India for strengthening
cooperation between Educational institutions of the two countries.
The Deputy Naval Chief of Indonesia visited India for the Defexpo 99.
Bilateral trade between the two countries during 1998-99
amounted to Rs. 5211/- crores as compared to Rs.4322/- crores
during 1997-98. With a view to strengthening trade relations with
Indonesia, various steps were taken. A trade delegation from
CHEMEXCIL visited Indonesia in April for increasing the exports
of chemical and pharmaceutical items to Indonesia. The Director19

South East Asia and the Pacific

General of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture, Government of
Indonesia visited India in October with a large business delegation.
As a part of promotion of bilateral cultural relations many cultural
programs were organised in Indonesia. In August an Indian Food
Festival was organised. In September, a Ramayana Ballet team visited
Indonesia.
Over 72 Indonesian candidates received training in India under
Colombo Plan, ITEC and other schemes. The Minister of State for
Research and Technology of Indonesia, Dr. A.S. Hikam visited India
to participate in the Conference on Space Applications for Sustainable
Development in Asia and the Pacific in New Delhi from 15-20
November.
Mr. Abdurrahman Wahid, Indonesian President visited India from
February 8-9, 2000 along with a delegation which included Indonesian
Ministers of Mines and Energy, Industry and Trade and Research
and Technology. The President held talks with our President, Vice
President, Prime Minister, Speaker of Lok Sabha, EAM, MOS for
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises.
After the delegation level talks, an MOU on Cooperation in the
Field of Tourism was signed. FICCI hosted a luncheon meeting where
the Indonesian businessmen (about 70) had interaction with the Indian
businessmen. Two Agreements were signed – (1) on Counter trade
between MMTC and KADIN (the Indonesian Chamber of
Commerce) and (2) on a Railway Project between IRCON
International (of India) and Mitra Jaya Group (of Indonesia).
At the bilateral talk between EAM and the Indonesian FM,
prospects of (a) establishing a Joint Commission, (b) joint exploitation
of gas in Indonesia and transporting it to India, (c) supply of electric
locomotives from India and (d) setting up of a vocational training
centre in Indonesia were discussed.
20

Laos
India and Laos continued to enjoy friendly and cordial relations.
Dr. Siene Saphantong, Lao Minister of Agriculture and Forestry, in
his capacity as the President of the Lao-India Friendship Association,
along with a four-member delegation visited India from 23-30 May,
1999. During the visit, the delegation met the Minister of Agriculture
of India Shri Som Pal. The delegation also visited the Indian
Agricultural Research Institute (IARI), National Dairy Institute and
private companies.
Mr. Soubhan Srithirath, Minister in President’s Office attended
the India-ASEAN Lecture Series from November 21 to 24, 1999.
In pursuance of a Credit Agreement signed in January, 1999 with
Lao PDR, for a soft credit of US $ 2 million to Laos, the State Bank
of India and the Bank of Lao PDR executed a Banking Agreement to
establish channels for utilisation of Indian credit.
The Lao-India Friendship Association in cooperation with the
Mission, organised a Lecture-Seminar on June 24 on the theme
“Prospects of growth in Lao-India Economic Cooperation particularly
in the field of Agriculture.” It was attended by over 200 people. The
keynote address was delivered by the Lao Minister for Agriculture
and Forestry, Dr. Siene Saphanthong.
For the period April-October 1999, 25 officials from the Lao
Government came to India under ITEC and Colombo Plan to attend
various training programmes. In addition, five Lao students were sent
to India-after a gap of many years, to pursue higher studies under the
GCSS of ICCR.
Dr. Ashok Kumar Srivastava, Senior Scientist, Indian Institute
of Sugarcane Research, Lucknow was deputed under the ITEC
programme for a period of one month to assist the Lao Ministry of
Agriculture and Forestry to draw up a framework and a plan to enlarge
sugarcane production in the country.

Annual Report 1999-2000

Dr. Ramanathan, an Indian expert in Animal Husbandry, would
be visiting Laos soon, on a three month deputation under the ITEC
programme. An Indian medical team is also likely to be deputed on a
three-month assignment to Laos.

tobacco, chemicals, cotton yarn, fabrics & made-ups, submersible
water pumps, farm implementation, silk, bicycles and parts, generator
sets, etc. India imported gems and precious stones, wood and wood
products and cashew nuts from Cambodia.

An Indian food festival was organised in Vientiane from May
25-28, 1999.

Vietnam

Cambodia
Cambodia consolidated its position at home and abroad with
donor countries pledging half a billion dollar in aid to Cambodia in
1999. The World Bank, IMF and other lending institutions, e.g., ADB
and bilateral donor countries, resumed loans and grants to Cambodia
to improve infrastructure, e.g., roads, power generation, port
development, etc. Review meetings were held with international donor
agencies to monitor aid and evaluate reforms. On April 30, 1999
Cambodia became a full member of ASEAN.
India continued to maintain friendly, warm and close relations
with Cambodia. Cambodia supported India’s candidatures to various
international bodies. Under the ITEC Programme, 30 seats allotted
to Cambodia were fully utilised by them. India also made available
the services of two legal experts for two weeks in November this
year to Cambodia, to advise on drafting laws to deal with cases of
genocide. Cambodia was represented by the Under Secretary of State,
Ministry of Telecommunications in the Space Applications
Conference held in New Delhi in November. Cambodian PM Hun
Sen is expected to pay an official visit to India from the 17th to the
19th of February, 2000. Two important agreements; one on setting
up of a Joint Commission on Trade and the second on Cultural
Exchange Programme are likely to be signed during the visit.
Our bilateral trade during 1998-99 amounted to US $ 8 million.
The major items of our Exports were drugs and pharmaceuticals,

The Indian Business Chamber in Vietnam (INCHAM) received
an Associate Membership Card from the Vietnam Chamber of
Commerce and Industry (VCCI), Ho Chi Minh City branch on July
23, 1999.
ONGC Videsh Ltd (OVL), the overseas exploration wing of Oil
and Natural Gas Corporation, on April 29, 1999 signed two
agreements marking the take off of the $ 1.5 billion Vietnam Gas
production project. Other partners in this projects are BP AMOCO
and Statoil. On September 29, 1999 an agreement was signed between
ONGC Videsh Ltd and PETROVIETNAM. As per the agreement
ONGC Videsh Ltd has assigned 10% of its participation interest to
PETROVIETNAM, for off shore gas discovered at Lan Tay and
Lan Do coast fields.
In May, medicines worth $ 12000/- were donated by us to the
Red Cross of Vietnam for disaster relief.
Formal presentation of the textile machinery (worth half a million
dollars) supplied by Lakshmi Machine Works Coimbatore to the
Textile Research Institute, Hanoi took place on 21st of August 1999,
under the ITEC programme.
APTECH of India and FPT of Vietnam embarked upon Joint
establishment of a series of education centres to train Vietnamese
software professionals. The FPT-APTECH Education Centres will
train a new generation of software programmers of international
standards, making them capable of leading Vietnam’s effort to leap
21

South East Asia and the Pacific

into the information age. Two centres, one each at Ho Chi Minh City
and Hanoi were inaugurated in October..
President of Vietnam, H.E. Mr. Tran Duc Luong paid a State
visit to India from 1st to 5th December. He was accompanied by Mr.
Pham Gia Khiem, Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Pham Van Tra,
Defence Minister, Mr. Do Nguyen Phuong, Health Minister and Vice
Ministers from the Departments of Commerce, Finance, Education,
Science & Technology, Environment and Foreign Affairs. During his
visit, he held talks with our President, Vice-President and Prime
Minister, Minister of Human Resource Development & Science &
Technology, Finance Minister and External Affairs Minister, Leader
of Opposition and other political leaders. In his discussions, India’s
consistent support for Vietnam in the past was acknowledged by
Vietnam’s President, with evident gratitude. In delegation talks with
PM, the two sides exchanged views on bilateral, regional and global
issues of cooperation in various fields, and agreed to enhance it further.
South-South cooperation was reiterated as a major plank of our foreign
policy. The Vietnamese reaffirmed support to India’s candidature as
a permanent member in an expanded Security Council and also offered
support for our membership of ASEM. Instruments of Ratification
of the Bilateral Investment Promotion and Protection Agreement
signed in 1997, were exchanged, an MOU on setting up Software
Human Resource Development Centres in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh
City and an Agreement on Cooperation between the Foreign Service
Institute of India and the Institute of Foreign Relations of Vietnam
were signed. A soft credit of US $ 15 million (Rs.600 million) was
extended to Vietnam.
Australia
There was less criticism of our nuclear tests, during the above
period, as compared to the harsh Australian reaction that followed
immediately after Pokhran II. FM Downer acknowledged that
22

Australia had made some strong statements and had taken some
measures, in response to the tests. There was, however, recognition
of the fact that it was not a convenient time for signing the CTBT as
the election campaign was going on but there was hope that India
would sign the CTBT in the not too distant future. There was also
appreciation of the current positive signals emanating from the Indian
leadership on the CTBT.
On Agni II, there was an expression of regret that India’s
development of a ballistic missile capability was disturbing to the
region and to the world and that this development would have negative
reverberations for the strategic environments in South Asia. Australia
once again urged India to comply with the conditions laid down in
the UN Security Council Resolution 1172 and to ratify the CTBT.
On the Kargil intrusion by Pakistan, Australia at first made no
statements. On 1st July, FM Downer said that India had demonstrated
admirable restraint in the face of considerable provocation and that
it looked to both India and Pakistan to resume the stalled bilateral
dialogue, in an effort to secure a resolution of the Kashmir problem,
as was agreed to in the Lahore Declaration.
On April 13, 1999 the Rajiv Gandhi Chair of South Asian
Economics in the Australia-South Asia Research Centre (ASARC)
within the Asia Pacific School of Economics and Management,
Australian National University, was inaugurated by the Australian
Deputy Prime Minister & Minister of Trade, Mr. Tim Fischer. The
Chair honoured Mr. Rajiv Gandhi’s contribution to India’s economic
reforms and his vision of the international role of South Asia and
links with Australia. The launching of the Chair was the most
important recent initiative undertaken in the field of South Asian
studies in Australia and will play a key role in strengthening Australia’s
linkages with the countries of South Asia. It will also act as a catalyst
for interactive discussions among academics, business people and
bureaucratic communities in Australia and the countries of South

Annual Report 1999-2000

Asia and will assist in the spread of awareness and knowledge of
South Asia amongst the wider Australian community.
The 1999 K. R. Narayanan Oration was delivered by Mr. P.
Chidambaram, Former Finance Minister, during his visit to Australia
from May 23 to June 2, 1999 under DFAT’s special visitor’s
programme. The Oration organised by Dr. Ric Shand, Director of
Australia-South Asia Research Centre (ASARC), ANU, was held on
1st June 1999 on the theme “Stronger Branches, Deeper Roots: The
Democratization of India’s Economic Reforms”. President K.R.
Narayanan also sent a message of felicitations on the occasion.
On 19 April 1999, a MOU was signed between the two
Governments on Exchange of Statistics. Another MOU to foster
ties between Universities in the areas of information sharing, staff
and student exchanges, mutual recognition of qualification, staff
development, research exchange programmes and University
Management was signed in June 1999.
A major conference, “Midnight to Millennium - Australia-India
Interconnections” was held from 1st to 3rd July 1999. The conference
was organised by the University of Canberra along with High
Commission of India and other sponsors. It was the most important
event of the year 1999 in the India-Australia bilateral relations and
was inaugurated by Foreign Minister Alexander Downer. More than
40 speakers, including ten from India, participated in the conference.
The deliberations were divided into sections to cover diverse topics
such as economic, social, political and cultural topics. One of the
most critical sessions was on the nuclear issue. The academics
displayed in-depth understanding of India’s security concerns and
were overwhelmingly critical of Australia’s official reaction to our
nuclear tests. Tremendous goodwill towards India was also displayed
at various sessions.
A bilateral meeting between EAM Shri Jaswant Singh and
Australian Foreign Minister Alexander Downer took place on July

27, 1999 on the sidelines of the ASEAN PMC meetings in Singapore.
They discussed India-Australia relations, the next official level talks
and the EAM also invited Mr. Downer to visit India.
The Chairperson and the Board Members of Australia - India
Council visited India from 15-20 November, 1999 and the Joint
Council Meeting between India-Australia Council was held on 15th
November 1999 in New Delhi. The council called for improving
bilateral relations.
Lok Sabha Speaker, Deputy Chairperson Rajya Sabha, Secretary
General Lok Sabha and Secretary General Rajya Sabha attended the
15th Conference of the Commonwealth Speakers and Presiding
Officers in Canberra in January 2000.
Mr. Brereton, MP, Labour Party’s Shadow Foreign Minister visited
India (8-10, Feb) and called on EAM and MOS(EA). Mr. Hendy
Cowan, Dy. Premier of Western Australia and Minister for Commerce,
Trade and Regional Development accompanied by a business
delegation of ten persons also visited India (8-12 Feb) to promote
trade with India.
India-Australia Senior Officials Meeting (SOM) was held from
22-23 Feb in New Delhi.
Papua New Guinea
India and Papua New Guinea continued to maintain close and
friendly relations. To give a further fillip to the relationship, the Prime
Minister of Papua New Guinea, Sir Mekere Morauta and Prime
Minister Shri Atal Behari Vajpayee met, during the retreat at the
CHOGM in Durban and discussed bilateral and international matters.
At the 32nd Asean Ministerial Meeting (AMM), at Singapore, on
23rd and 24th July, 1999, Papua New Guinea was given a Special
Observer Status. PNG continued to support India’s candidature to
23

South East Asia and the Pacific

various international organisations including the candidature of Smt.
Najma Heptulla, Deputy Chairperson, Rajya Sabha for the post of
the President of the International Parliamentary Union and Shri V.K.
Shunglu, comptroller and Auditor Government of India for external
auditorship of World Health Organisation.
India offered five slots under ITEC and six under Colombo Plan
for training of PNG nationals in Indian institutions of which all 11
slots have been utilised. Courses utilised related to the fields of
agriculture, small scale industries, Foreign Service training and
accounts.
The two way trade was to the tune of 12 million US dollars, over
half of which was routed through third countries.
About 225 Indian nationals, mostly professionals, continued to
be employed in Papua New Guinea.
Fiji
After a gap of nearly nine years, the Indian High Commission
was reopened in Suva on 2nd March, 1999. High Commissioner Prof.
I.S. Chauhan arrived in the country in the middle of May and presented
his credentials to the President Sir Ratu Kamisese Mara on 3rd June,
1999.
General elections were held in Fiji from 8 to 15 May. The previous
government led by Sitiveni Rabuka of Soqosoqo ni Vakavulewa ni
Taukei (SVT) lost the elections. A people’s coalition led by the Fiji
Labour Party (FLP) swept the polls. FLP by itself obtained a simple
majority in the House of Representative and its leader Mahendra Pal
Chaudhry was sworn in as the new Prime Minister. It is the first time
in the history of independent Fiji that the Prime Minister is of ethnic
Indian origin. His cabinet consists of members from other constituent
parties of the coalition.
24

The new Fiji Government announced its decision to open a
resident diplomatic mission in New Delhi and allocated funds for it
in the budget for the next year.
The Government of India is desirous of strengthening bilateral
relations between India and Fiji and is looking at a number of options
to extend areas of assistance to Fiji.
Prof. I.S. Chauhan, our High Commissioner to Fiji presented his
credentials for Tonga in February 2000.
New Zealand
Despite its small size and remote geographic location, a number
of significant events relating to New Zealand took place during the
year.
The Second Protocol to the Double Taxation Avoidance
Convention (DTAC) between India and New Zealand was signed in
New Delhi on 21st June, 1999. The 2nd Protocol seeks to provide a
fresh impetus to the mutual flow of investment, technology, trade
and services between the two countries.
The APEC Summit, which was attended among others by the
US President Bill Clinton and the Chinese President Jiang Jemin, was
successfully concluded in Auckland from September 9-12, 1999. The
declaration issued on the occasion called upon the world to match
the organization’s free trade commitment and adopted a unified
position to include industrial tariffs and agriculture in the next WTO
negotiations. To take into account the organization’s own slow pace
for realizing its trade liberalization objectives, the Summit confirmed
the shift in the forum’s approach to include trade facilitation measures.
New Zealand’s commitment of 800 troops to be part of the UN
peace keeping force in East Timor constituted its largest overseas
defence involvement since World War II. Furthermore, the election

Annual Report 1999-2000

of Mike Moore as WTO’s Director General, (as part of a powersharing compromise with the Thai candidate Dr. Supachai
Panitchpakdi), further raised the country’s international profile.
Bilateral relations were consolidated following New Zealand’s
strong reaction to Pokhran-II. The country’s reaction to the Pakistansponsored armed incursion in the Kargil sector demonstrated
understanding of India’s position in the matter. While New Zealand
did not issue any official statement on this subject, it acknowledged
in briefings that India had suffered armed incursion and called for
restoration of the sanctity of the Line of Control.
While a scheduled visit of NZ Foreign Minister Don McKinnon
to India was postponed due to elections in India, Shri H.D. Revanna,
Housing Minister of Karnataka Government visited New Zealand
from June 1-5, 1999 with a view to enhancing cooperation in the
dairy sector.
Rt. Hon. Helen Clark was sworn in as the new Prime Minister of
New Zealand on December 10, 1999 [In a coalition of Labour and

Alliance with 59 seats in the 120 member house]. The elections were
held on 27th November 1999.
South Pacific Countries
Bilateral relations with Pacific-Islands have been cordial and
friendly though there have been minimal contacts. India had cosponsored the General Assembly resolution admitting Tonga to the
membership of the United Nations. A resolution on the admission
of Kiribati to the UN was adopted unanimously on 25th June by the
UN Security Council. Kiribati became the 186th member and Nauru
the 187th member of the United Nations after the General Assembly
endorsed the Security Council recommendation. On the reopening
of our High Commission in Suva, Fiji, the Administration Division
reviewed and shifted the concurrent accreditation of the Cook Islands,
Tuvalu and the Kingdom of Tonga to our High Commission in Suva
from HCI, New Zealand, and the concurrent accreditation of
Solomon Islands and Vanuatu to our High Commission in Port
Moresby (Papua New Guinea) from our High Commission in
Canberra (Australia).
uu

25

3
East Asia

China

W

e seek friendly, cooperative, good-neighbourly and mutually
beneficial relations with China on the basis of the Five
Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, jointly enunciated by
India and China. We seek a long-term, stable relationship in which
both sides are responsive to each other’s concerns. We remain
committed to the process of dialogue to resolve outstanding
differences and to build a constructive cooperative relationship
oriented towards the 21st century.
The External Affairs Minister (EAM) visited China on June 1415, 1999 at the invitation of the Chinese Foreign Minister (FM), Tang
Jiaxuan. This was the first visit at the EAM level in eight years. The
EAM met Prime Minister Zhu Rongji and had constructive and useful
talks with FM Tang. He interacted with a cross-section of the Chinese
society. The two sides agreed to jointly celebrate the forthcoming
50th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations (April
1, 2000). There was agreement on promoting CBMs, commencing a
security dialogue and expanding economic and trade relations. The
two Foreign Minister subsequently met on July 25, 1999, during the
ASEAN Regional Forum - Post-Ministerial Conference (ARF-PMC)
in Singapore.
The Eleventh Meeting of the Joint Working Group on Boundary

26

Question was held in Beijing from April 26-27, 1999. Apart from
boundary-related issues, the two sides also reviewed bilateral relations
and exchanged views on regional and international developments of
mutual interest. The Seventh Meeting of the India-China Expert
Group of Diplomatic & Military Officials, a subgroup of the JWG,
was held in New Delhi on November 24, 1999. At these meetings,
both sides reiterated their commitment to the maintenance of peace
and tranquillity in accordance with the Agreement on the Maintenance
Peace & Tranquillity along the Line of Actual Control in the IndiaChina Border Areas (1993) and the Agreement on Confidence
Building Measures in the Military Field along the Line of Actual
Control in the India-China Border Areas (1996). Both sides noted,
during these meetings, that the India-China border areas have
remained generally peaceful.
Exchanges at the governmental, parliamentary, nongovernmental, people-to-people and other levels continued during
the year. Functional exchanges in trade & commerce, environment,
industries, power, iron & steel, science & technology, aeronautics,
medicine, media, culture and sports took place during the year.
High-level exchanges between the two sides in 1999-2000
include:
u Visit of Minister for Commerce and Industry to China for the

Annual Report 1999-2000

6th meeting of the Ministerial-level Joint Economic Group (JEG)
scheduled to be held from February 21-22, 2000;
u

Visit of Mme. He Luli, Vice Chairperson of the Standing
Committee of China’s National People’s Congress (NPC) to India
from November 18-22, 1999 at the invitation of the Indira Gandhi
Memorial Trust.

Functional exchanges between the two sides include:
u The fourth meeting of India-China Sub-Committee on Scientific
& Technological Cooperation in Beijing (23-31, May 1999);
u

Visits of Secretary, Department of Steel (September 13-17, 1999),
Secretary, Ministry of Industry, (September 20-24, 1999) and
Secretary, Ministry of Power, (October 28-30, 1999);

u

Visit of a delegation of the Chinese State Administration for
Metallurgical Industry led by its Vice Director General (November
22-26, 1999);

u

Visit of a delegation from the Chinese Ministry of Finance led by
its Vice Minister (December 22-26, 2000).

Exchanges in the cultural field included:
u Visit of an Indian cultural troupe led by Pt. Birju Maharaj to
China from December 29, 1999-January 8, 2000;
u

Visit of an acrobatic troupe from Gansu Province in China to
India from October 17-30, 1999 at the invitation of the Indian
Council for Cultural Relations. The First Lady, Smt. Usha
Narayanan, and the Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri
Ajit Panja attended the inaugural performance in New Delhi.

Exchanges between political parties in India and the Chinese
Communist Party continued. A CPI (M) delegation, led by its General
Secretary, Shri Sitaram Yechuri, visited China from March 30-April 9,
1999. A Congress (I) Party delegation, led by Shri K. Natwar Singh,
visited China from April 7-15 1999.

India-China trade relations have continued to grow in the recent
years. The bilateral trade in 1999 amounted to US$ 1.987 billion, an
increase of 3.4% over 1998. India’s exports to China decreased by
8.82%. Chinese exports to India increased by 14.29%. In 1999, the
border trade across the Lipulekh Pass and the Shipki Pass amounted
to Rs. 36.9 lakh and Rs. 27 lakhs respectively.
The India-China Joint Business Council (JBC), a nongovernmental association of entrepreneurs of the two sides, is meeting
in Beijing on February 22, 2000. The meetings of JEG and JBC
contributed to diversification of trade and promotion of investments
and joint ventures.
Hong Kong & Macao
EAM visited Hong Kong from November 22-23, 1999. During
the visit, EAM interacted with business and media persons and
members of the Indian community.
At the joint invitation of the Governments of China and Portugal,
the Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Ajit Panja, visited Macao
to represent India at the Macao Handover Ceremonies from
December 19-20, 1999 which marked the resumption of Chinese
sovereignty over Macao. Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee sent a
congratulatory message to the Chinese Premier on the occasion.
India’s trade with Hong Kong increased by 28% during JanuaryNovember 1999 over the corresponding period last year. Indian
exports to Hong Kong increased by 17.5% to US$ 2.044 billion while
imports from Hong Kong jumped by 59% to US$ 976 million. To
give further impetus to bilateral trade, the India Trade Promotion
Organisation (ITPO) and the Consulate General of India, Hong Kong
are organising a comprehensive trade promotion event, “India into
the New Millennium” in Hong Kong from February 23-27, 2000.
27

East Asia

Mongolia
India and Mongolia have traditionally had close spiritual, religious
and cultural ties. This year marks the 45th year of the establishment
of diplomatic relations between the two countries (December 24). In
the past 45 years, our relations have diversified and expanded into
new areas further cementing the age-old friendship between the two
countries.
Vice President Shri Krishan Kant visited Mongolia from August
25-29, 1999 at the invitation of the Mongolian President, N.
Bagabandi. He met President N. Bagabandi, Prime Minister R.
Amarjargal, Chairperson of the Mongolian Parliament, Mr.
R.Gonchigdorj, Foreign Minister, Mme. N. Tuya, and other state and
party leaders. The visit afforded an opportunity to renew the traditional
historic and friendly relations between the two countries. During the
visit, the two sides agreed to further expand and diversify the relations
into new areas of cooperation. The Vice President inaugurated two
new faculties - Computer Centre and Gemstone Cutting and Polishing
- in the Rajiv Gandhi Vocational Training Centre (RGVTC) and a
Monastic Teaching Institute.
The Minister for Agriculture and Industry of Mongolia, Mr. Ch.
Sodnomtseren visited India on January 25-30, 2000. Mr.
Sodnomtseren called on the Vice President. During the visit, the two
sides signed a Work Programme for cooperation in the field of
agriculture for year 2000.
Japan
We remain committed to friendly, cooperative, and mutually
beneficial relations with Japan with whom we have shared cultural
links and values of human freedom, commitment to peace, stability
and economic development of the people in Asia and the world.
External Affairs Minister Shri Jaswant Singh visited Japan from
28

November 23 - 26, 1999. He met Prime Minister K. Obuchi and held
talks with Japanese FM Yohei Kono, MITI Minister Takashi Fukaya

Annual Report 1999-2000

Exchanges of scientists, engineers and research scholars,
collaboration between science institutions and cultural interaction
continued.

Bengal, (October 10-16, 1999) to participate in the International
Conference of NGOs.
u

A joint ROK-India Seminar, sponsored by the Institute of Foreign
Affairs & National Security (IFANS) and India AP-21, was held
from November 21-24 to discuss ways to improve regional
cooperation in Asia-Pacific region and bilateral relations.

u

Foreign Office Consultations were held in Seoul from January
24-25, 2000. The Indian delegation was led by Joint Secretary
(East Asia) and the Korean delegation by Director General (Asia).

u

A business & cultural delegation led by the Mayor of Kimhae is
scheduled to visit India in the last week of February 2000. The
delegation is to visit Ayodhya-Faizabad, Lucknow and Greater
Noida to promote cultural and business ties.

Functional exchanges during the period included:
u Investment Promotion Talks (New Delhi, 9-11 August, 1999)
u

u

Sixth Science & Technology Committee meeting (Tokyo, 6-7
September, 1999).
The 30th meeting of the India-Japan Business Cooperation
Committees (New Delhi, January 30-February 1, 2000). The
Japanese delegation was led by Mr. N. Kawamoto and the Indian
delegation by Shri Vikram Thapar. The delegation called on
External Affairs Minister Shri Jaswant Singh and Deputy
Chairperson of Planning Commission Shri K.C. Pant.

From January - October, 1999, our trade with Japan was US $
3883 million (exports: US $ 1882 million & imports: US $ 2001
million). From January 1999 - August 1999, Japanese investments in
India amounted to Rs.13027.7 million or US $ 310.2 million.
Republic of Korea (ROK)
Relations with the Republic of Korea (ROK) continued to be
marked with cordiality and understanding.
High level exchanges/and other important events during
the year included:
u Dr. Najma Heptulla, Deputy Chairperson of the Rajya Sabha
visited Seoul in July 1999 in connection with her candidature for
the presidency of the IPU.
u

Smt. Veena Nayyar, Member National Commission for SC/STs
and Shri Prabodh Chandra Sinha, Minister-in-charge, Deptt of
Parliamentary Affairs and Vice- President of the West Bengal
Federation of United Nations Association, Government of West

During the period January - August 1999, the total volume of
trade was US $ 1.425 billion, registering a growth of 1.11%. Exports
were US $ 539.632 million and imports US $ 886.319 million. In the
period January - June 1999, total investment approvals were of
Rs.31,224.26 million (approx. US $ 726 million).
Exchanges of cultural delegations, students and research scholars
continued.
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK)
India’s relations with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
(DPRK) continue to be friendly.
Dr. Kim Su Hak, Minister of Public Health, visited India from
September 24-28, 1999 at the invitation of WHO to discuss InterCountry Cooperation in priority areas such as primary health care
and health sector reform.
Prof. (Dr.) Ri Kwang Ho, President, Academy of Sciences of
29

East Asia

DPRK (Cabinet rank minister) visited New Delhi to attend the
ESCAP Ministerial Conference on Space Applications for Sustainable
Development in Asia and the Pacific from November 15-20, 1999.
He also had consultations with the Department of Science &
Technology.
On June 25, 1999 a North Korean ship Ku-Wol San was detained
in Kandla. It was found to be carrying machinery parts and blueprints

30

for manufacture of missiles. The DPRK government sent a Special
Envoy Mr. Jong Thae Hwa (Vice Foreign Minister level) to India
(July 20-August 8, 1999) for discussion on this issue. Appropriate
action is being taken under our laws.
Under the Cultural Exchange Programme, a ten-member Kathak
group sponsored by ICCR, visited Pyongyang to participate in the
Annual Spring Friendship Art Festival in April, 1999.
uu

Annual Report 1999-2000

4
Central Asia

Section 1

S

trategic and economic factors establish the importance and
relevance of the Central Asian States (CAS) to India. Their
geo-strategic location, both as an ‘Eurasian bridge’ and a close
proximity to a number of regional hot spots; abundance of natural
resources including hydrocarbons; intense rivalries of, external players
over these resources; secularist state policy; close approximation of
national security interests and concerns of the CAS and India;
attraction of the CAS markets etc., are among these factors.
India’s political relations with the CAS are excellent, underpinned
by historic and cultural bonds and, since the independence of these
countries, marked by regular high level contacts. The recent incidents
of manifestation of cross-border terrorism in a number of these
countries illustrated the commonalty of the threat faced by both sides
as well as the need for coordinated action to combat the menace.
In the economic sphere, while there is natural justification for,
and expectation of, cooperation, given the economic resources of
these countries and India’s technological capabilities, transitional
difficulties have persisted in the CAS to date, negatively impacting on
two-way trade, which remains modest. Efforts are currently being
made to encourage Indian investors to enter the manufacturing sector

in these countries through joint ventures, commensurate with their
preferred policy. There is ample awareness in the CAS of India’s
strength in a number of niche areas, including small and medium
industries, and in human resource development. Slots under the ITEC
programme have been eagerly sought and utilized by these countries.
Drawing upon each other’s areas of expertise, scientific cooperation
has been an on-going feature of bilateral relations.
Interactions in the cultural sphere are strong. Apart from events
at the two Indian cultural centres in Tashkent and Almaty, as well as
activities under the CEP, including reciprocal ‘days of culture’, scholarly
exchanges have taken the form of frequent visits, seminars etc.
Section 2
Azerbaijan

Efforts to strengthen relations with Azerbaijan were continued.
A resident Indian Mission in Baku started functioning w.e.f. 1st March,
1999 and Shri Dinkar Khullar assumed charge on 8th October, 1999,
as the first resident Ambassador. Consular, passport and visa services
were started w.e.f., May, 1999. On the economic and commercial side,
Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd. (BHEL) entered Azerbaijan in
September, 1999 by bagging a contract for supply of power generators
to Azerenergy. A delegation from RITES visited Baku in October,
31

Central Asia

1999 for exploring prospects of entry into the, railways and engineering
sectors. The Minister for External Affairs Shri Jaswant Singh had a
meeting with the Foreign Minister of Azerbaijan in September, 1999
in Almaty during the CICA ministerial conference.
Kazakhstan

Traditionally warm and cordial relations with Kazakhstan
progressed smoothly. Indo-Kazakh Joint Commission meeting was
held in Almaty in March/April, 1999 for which Shri K. Ramamoorthy,
Minister of Petroleum, visited Kazakhstan. Mr. Karibzhanov, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister of Agriculture of Kazakhstan, visited
New Delhi in March, 1999 in connection with a Kazakh Investment
Conference. K. Tokaev, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of
Foreign Affairs, came on a bilateral visit in August, 1999. A treaty on
mutual legal assistance in criminal matters and a protocol on visa free
regime for diplomatic and official passports were signed during the
visit., Shri Jaswant Singh, Minister for External Affairs, visited Almaty
in September, 1999 to attend the CICA ministerial conference. Kazakh
intellectuals participated in various international seminars/conferences
on Central Asia in New Delhi.
Experts from Kazakhstan participated in the international
seminar on ‘Asian Security in the 21st Century’ being organised by
the Institute of Defence Studies and Analysis (IDSA) in New Delhi
from 24-25 January, 2000.

Kyrgyzstan

Indo-Kyrgyz relations witnessed positive developments. The
Kyrgyz President, Askar Akaev paid a state visit to India in April,
1999. An agreement on avoidance of double taxation, treaty on mutual
legal assistance in criminal matters, cultural exchange programme for
the years 1998-2000 and a memorandum of understanding on civil
aviation matters were signed during the visit. Vice President, Shri
Krishan Kant visited Kyrgyzstan in August/September, 1999 and
32

also participated as Chief Guest in the Kyrgyz independence
celebrations. The Minister for External Affairs, Shri Jaswant Singh
wrote a letter to his Kyrgyz counterpart in September, 1999 conveying
Government., of India’s support and solidarity on the issue of
combating terrorist activities in southern Kyrgyzstan. Educational
and cultural contacts remained good. Kyrgyz scholars participated in
various international seminars/conferences in India. Ten Indian
children from Delhi Public School participated in the international
festival “Young Talents, 1999” in Kyrgyzstan. In recognition of
considerable potential of tourism for increased cooperation between
the two countries, a group of Indian tour operators visited Kyrgyzstan
in June, 1999 followed by the visit of Additional Director General of
Tourism in October, 1999. Kyrgyzstan fully utilised its slots under
the ITEC programme.
Kyrgyzstan condemned the hijacking of the Indian aircraft in
December, 1999, in a message that President Askar Akaev sent to
the Indian President.
A team of scientists led by Mr. T. Meimanaliev, Kyrgyz Minister
of Health, visited India in December, 1999 under the bio-medical
research programme between the Defence Institute of Physiology
and Allied Sciences (DIPAS), New Delhi and the National Centre of
Cardiology and Internal Medicine (NCCIM), Bishkek. A study team
of tour operators led by Deputy Director of the State Agency for
Tourism and Sports of the Kyrgyz Republic is scheduled to visit New
Delhi in the latter half of January, 2000 under the ITEC programme.
Director of International Institute of Strategic Research of the Kyrgyz
Republic participated in the international seminar on ‘Asian Security
in the 21st Century in January, 2000.
Tajikistan

Joint Secretary (CA) visited Dushanbe in February, 1999 for
foreign office consultations. Foreign Secretary of Tajikistan visited

Annual Report 1999-2000

New Delhi for consultations with Secretary (East) in April, 1999. An
Indian company Cosmopolitan Hotels Ltd., is establishing a five star
hotel in Dushanbe, the foundation stone of which was laid by
President Rakhmanov in September, 1999. India extended
humanitarian assistance to Tajikistan. Tajikistan benefited from the
ITEC programme by sending nominees for short term technical
courses.

Turkey

H.E. Mr. Korkmaz Haktanir, Under Secretary, Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Turkey visited New Delhi in November, 1999 for foreign

Turkmenistan

Relations with Turkmenistan progressed well. The Minister for
External Affairs, Shri Jaswant Singh visited Turkmenistan in May,
1999. During the visit, a protocol on development of cooperation
between the Ministry of External Affairs of India and the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of Turkmenistan was signed. It was also agreed to set
up a joint working group for the energy sector. A national committee
for 500th anniversary celebrations of Bairam Khan Turkmen headed
by the Vice President of India has been set up. A delegation led by
Joint Secretary, Department of Culture, visited Ashgabat in May, 1999
to discuss and chalk out the programme for the celebrations. A joint
MEA-MOD team visited Turkmenistan in September to explore
opportunities for co-operation in the defence training sector; following
which Deputy Minister of Defence of Turkmenistan visited India in
October, 1999 to participate in the Defence Expo. A 3-member
delegation from the Ministry of Textiles of Turkmenistan visited India
in November, 1999. Under the Distinguished Visitors Programme
of the ICCR, Grand Mufti of Turkimenist ‘ an and President of the
Ganga Club visited India in November, 1999. Turkmenistan utilised
training slots under the ITEC programme.
Experts from Turkmenistan participated in the international
seminar on ‘Asian Security in the 21st Century’ being organised by
the Institute of Defence Studies and Analysis (IDSA) in New Delhi
from 24-25 January, 2000.
33

Central Asia

Scientific and technological cooperation with Uzbekistan remained
very good. Uzbekistan gifted a 1.5 kw solar furnace in the framework
of S &,.T cooperation and a four member team of Uzbek scientists
visited India in July, 1999 to install the solar furnace. Uzbek scholars
participated in various international seminars/conferences on Central
Asia in India. The Rector of the Namangan Engineering Institute

visited India in April, 1999 at the invitation of Indira Gandhi National
Open University.
Experts from Uzbekistan participated in the international seminar
on ‘Asian Security in the 21st Century’ being organised by the Institute
of Defence Studies and Analysis (IDSA) in New Delhi from 24-25
January, 2000.
uu

34

Annual Report 1999-2000

5

The Gulf, West Asia & North Africa

Section 1

I

ndia deeply values its close historical ties and traditional cultural
affinities, with the Gulf countries. Over the years, the mutuallybeneficial relations between India and the countries of the Gulf
region have become multi-dimensional. The presence of a sizeable
Indian community in the Gulf constitutes an important link between
the peoples of India and the Gulf.
The tradition of high-level visits was continued, which contributed
substantially to further expanding and consolidating bilateral relations
particularly in the political, economic and cultural fields. A number
of important agreements, aimed at strengthening cooperation in
several areas of mutual interest, were concluded during the year.

of Commerce and Industry (BCCI). The delegation’s visit was aimed
at exploring the possibilities of investment from India to Bahrain.
Chief Manager, Business Development, Indian Oil Corporation,
visited Bahrain on 26 May 1999 to negotiate a $ 50-70 trillion deal for
supply of kerosene. Two high-level representatives of the Punjab
National Bank visited Bahrain to study the financial market and
explore the prospects of setting up a permanent base in the country.
The Birla Institute of Technology has established its first overseas
branch in Bahrain. The Institute has generated wide response and
interest locally as well as from students in the neighbouring Gulf
countries.
Iraq

Bahrain

India’s traditional ties with Iraq witnessed an upswing during the
year, particularly in the commercial, economic and cultural fields. The
13th Session of the Indo-Iraq Joint Commission was held in Baghdad
from 27-29 July 1999. The Indian side was led by Shri V K
Ramamurthy, Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas.

A delegation of the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) visited
Bahrain in April 1999 and met the Labour and Social Affairs Minister,
the Commerce Minister and senior officials of the Bahrain Chamber

A 4-member team of medical specialists covering oncology,
orthopaedics, plastic and neuro surgery visited Iraq for 15 days during
July 1999 under the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation
(ITEC) Programme of the Ministry of External Affairs to assist Iraqi
doctors in handling critical cases.

Section II
The warm and cordial relations between India and Bahrain were
further strengthened and diversified, particularly in the economic field.

35

The Gulf, West Asia & North Africa

An 8-member Manipuri dance troupe “Pung/Dhoi Choiam
Martial Art” participated in the Babylon International festival held in
Iraq in September 1999.
Dr R S Paroda, Secretary Ministry of Agriculture and Director
General, Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), visited Iraq,
leading a 3-member delegation from 30 September to 5 October 1999
and held extensive discussions with the Iraqi Minister of Agriculture
on strengthening cooperation in the field of agriculture. At the end
of the visit, Agreed Minutes, providing for training of Iraqi experts in
India, and exchange of visits, publications and periodicals on modern
agriculture, were signed.
Dr Ilaseeb Y A D Bashi. Director General in the Iraqi Ministry
of Higher Education, visited India from 25-30 October 1999 finder
the ITEC Programme.
The number of ITEC slots for training of nominees from Iraq
has been increased to 60.
The public sector undertaking, Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited
(BHEL) was awarded by the Government of Iraq a contract worth
(about) 101 million for supply of gas turbines, in the framework of
the UN approved ‘Oil for Food Programme’.
India Trade Promotion Organisation (ITPO) participated in the
Baghdad International Fair (BIF) with an enhanced display of products
which included cars, pick-tip vans, IEEPS, in addition to a wide variety
of engineering goods.
Kuwait

India’s relations with Kuwait continued to be marked by warmth
and closeness. Shri Saleem Iqbal Sherwani, Member of Parliament
and ex-Minister of State for External Affairs visited Kuwait from 36 April 1999, when he met several Kuwaiti dignitaries, including the

36

Speaker of the National Assembly. Shri E K Nayanar, Chief Minister
of Kerala, visited Kuwait for two days from 30 April 1999. The Finance
Minister of Kerala, accompanied by a financial delegation visited
Kuwait on 6 August 1999, and met Kuwait’s Minister for Social Affairs
and Labour. A Kuwaiti delegation, representing the National
Committee for Missing Persons and POWS Affairs, headed by Dr
Sultan AI-Khalaf Deputy Director General, Animal and Fish
Resources, visited India from 10-13 August 1999, and called on the
Minister of External Affairs, Shri Jaswant Singh and Shri Nareshwar
Dayal, Secretary (East) in the Ministry of External Affairs. The
delegation also met a number of prominent political and social figures,
including the Deputy Chairperson of the Rajya Sabha, Dr (Mrs) Najma
Heptullah.
Lt General S K Jaitley, Deputy Chief of Army Staff, visited the
UNIKOM in Kuwait from 19-21 December 1999, which includes 7
Indian army officers.
An Executive Programme for Cultural Exchanges between India
and Kuwait was signed in Kuwait on 22.12.99 by the Indian
Ambassador and the Secretary General of the Kuwaiti National
Council for Culture, Arts and Letters.
Oman

India and Oman have close historical ties and deep cultural
affinities. The Extradition Treaty between India and Oman was
finalised and initialled on 13 April 1999 in Muscat. Also, the
Instruments of Ratification in respect of the Agreement to Combat
Terrorism and Organised Crime were exchanged between the two
countries in Muscat in May 1999.
Shri E.K. Nayanar, Chief Minister of Kerala, visited Oman on 28
April 1999. A team from the National Remote Sensing Agency visited
Oman from 28 April 1999 in connection with a project involving

Annual Report 1999-2000

aerial photography for the AI-Masarrat Water Supply Project in Oman.
A 35-member group of travel agents, representing the Travel Agents
Association of India (TAAI), paid a 3-day visit to Oman on 1-3 May
1999 to familiarise themselves with the tourism potential of the
country. A high-level delegation from the Government of Pondicherry
led by the Health Minister, Shri A M H Nazeem, including the Chief
Secretary (Industries) and the Managing Director of Pondicherry
Industrial Development and Investment Corporation, visited Muscat
on 27 May 1999. Also the Secretary (Fertiliser), Government of India,
visited Oman from 5-6 June 1999 to discuss issues pertaining to the
Indo-Oman Fertiliser Project.
Defence cooperation between India and Oman entered into a
new phase with the official visit of Major General Ali bin Rashid
Alkalbani, Commander of the Royal Army of Oman, and his sixmember delegation to India for five days commencing from 20 June
1999. The Omani Commander met the Minister of Defence, the chief
of Naval Staff and other senior military officers. A defence team
comprising, 33 members from the Command and Staff College of
Oman came to lndia from 8-15 July 1999 and visited a number of
defence establishments in the country.
The public sector company Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited
(BHEL) won a power station extension projecting Oman worth about
US $ 27 million.
The Sultanate and India signed on 10th October, 1999, a bilateral
agreement for Oman's accession to the WTO. During the 54th session
of the UNGA, Smt. Vasundhara Raje, Minister of State for External
Affairs met the Oman Minister Responsible for Foreign Affairs and
exchanged views on bilateral, regional and international issues.
Shri I K Gujral, former Prime Minister, paid a three-day visit to
the Sultanate from 31 October to 2 November 1999 in response to

an invitation from the Omani Govt. During the visit, Shri Gujral
paid courtesy calls on Sayyid Fahd bin Mohmoud Al Said, Deputy
Prime Minister for the Council of Ministers and Mr Yousuf Alawi,
Minister Responsible for Foreign Affairs, and reviewed bilateral
relations and exchanged views on regional & international issues. He
also addressed Omani diplomats at the Diplomatic Institute.
Shri Suresh P Prabhu Minister for Chemicals and Fertilisers,
visited Omani from 21-24 November 1999 at the invitation of the
Oman Oil Company, and met Dr Mohammed bin Hamad Al Rumhy,
Minister of Oil and Gas, and Mr Ahmed bin Abdul Nabi Al Macki,
Minister of National Economy, and discussed bilateral relations
especially cooperation in the proposed Indo-Omani joint venture
Fertiliser Project and the Bharat-Oman Refinery Project.
A high-level sports delegation from Kerala visited the Sultanate
from 19-20 November 1999 to promote India’s first professional
football club, FC Kochin.
For the first time, three Omani companies participated in the
two-week long India International ‘Trade Fair ’99 (IITF), which began
on 14 November in New Delhi.
The Union Minister for Chemicals and Fertilisers, Shri Suresh
Prabhu, visited Oman from 21-25 November 1999. He reviewed with
the senior Omani authorities concerning the on-going developments
regarding the proposed joint venture fertiliser project to be set up in
Oman. He held meetings with the Ministers of Commerce and
Industry, National Economy and Oil and Gas.
The MOS for External Affairs is likely to visit Muscat in the
second half of February 2000 as leader of the Indian delegation for
Annual Political Consultations between India and Oman. Omani
Minister of Commerce and Industry, Mr Maqbool Ali Sultan is
37

The Gulf, West Asia & North Africa

expected to visit India in February/March 2000 as leader of the Omani
delegation to the third session of the India-Oman Joint Commission.
EAM visited Oman from 21-23 January to participate in the
Extra-Ordinary Meeting of the Council of Ministers of IOR-ARC.
During his stay in Muscat, the EAM called on the Deputy Prime
Minister of Oman, Sayyid Fahd bin Mahmoud bin Mohammed Al
Said. He also held discussions with Oman’s Minister Responsible for
Foreign Affairs Yousuf bin Alawi bin Abdullah and Minister of
Commerce & Industry Maqbool Ali Sultan.
Qatar

The traditionally warm and friendly relations between India and
Qatar were given a new dynamism by the State visit of the Emir of
Qatar to India from 6-8 April 1999. The Emir’s delegation included
the Deputy Prime Minister, Foreign Minister, Minister of Energy,
Industry, Water & Electricity, health Minister and senior officials from
the various ministries. His meetings with the President, Prime Minister,
Vice President. External Affairs Minister, Finance Minister and
Industry Minister focused oil bilateral relations. During the visit, six
bilateral agreements/MOUs were signed which included Bilateral
Investment Promotion and Protection Agreement (BIPPA), Double
Taxation Avoidance Agreement (DTFAA), MOU on Foreign Office
Consultations, MOU oil Cooperation ill the fields of Youth & Sports,
Joint Business Council Agreement between FICCI/ASSOCHAM,
and the Qatar Chamber of Commerce and Industry, and MOU oil
Cooperation between the National Small Industries Corporation and
the Qatar Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
The Chief of Army Staff, General V P Malik, paid an official
visit to Qatar from April 3-6, 1999. This was the first visit of the
Indian Army Chief to Qatar. He held discussions with the Chief of
Staff of the Qatari Armed Forces and also met the Chief of the Qatar
Air Force and Navy.

38

All Indian Cultural Week was organised in Dolia by the Indian
Embassy from 21-30 April in cooperation with the Indian Council
for Cultural Relations (ICCR) and local Indian cultural organisations.
The Minister of Health of Pondicherry accompanied by the Chief
Secretary, visited Dolia on 25 and 26 May 1999. Shri Krishnan
Kaniyam Parambil, Kerala’s Minister for Agriculture, visited Dolia
oil 5-9 July 1999 to attend the Silver Jubilee celebrations of the MES
Indian School and to explore the possibility for export of agricultural
products from Kerala to Qatar. Shri T. Sivadasa Menon, Kerala’s
Minister of Finance & Excise, visited Dolia from 2-4 August, 1999.
On 31 July, 1999 Ras Gas of Qatar and Petronet of India signed
the final Sale & Purchase Agreement in London for supply of 7.5
metric tons per annum (MTPA) of Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) to
India over a period of 25 years starting from 2003.
The Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC)
concluded a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with Mannai
Corporation QSC on 13 October 1999 to cooperate and jointly
explore business opportunities in the petroleum industry in the Gulf
States in areas such as petroleum exploration, development,
production and O&M projects. The MOU was signed by Mr. Subhash
C. Jetly, Executive Director (Joint Ventures), on behalf of ONGC
and Mr Ahmed Mannai, Chairman of the Mannai Corporation.
A three-member Qatari defence delegation, led by Brig Abdullah
al- Hajri, attended the DEFEXPO INDIA ’99 field in New Delhi
from 28-30 October 1999. A high-level delegation from the Qatar
National University, headed by the Vice President for Academic
Affairs, Prof. Abdur Rehman visited Delhi and Mumbai in October
1999, to discuss the possibility of selecting faculty members for the
University.
Secretary (East) in the Ministry of External Affairs, Shri

Annual Report 1999-2000

Nareshwar Dayal, accompanied by Shri Talmiz Ahmad, Joint Secretary
(Gulf/Haj), visited Dolia from 19-20 November 1999. During his
meeting with the Qatari Foreign Minister, Sheikh Hamad bin Jassem
bin Jabor AI-Thani, Shri Dayal handed over to him a letter from the
External Affairs Minister. Shri Dayal also had wide ranging discussions
with Permanent Under Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Mr
Abdulrahman bin Hamad AI-Attiyah. The two sides discussed the
situation in the region as well as bilateral relations.

The Indian delegation visited Riyadh, Jeddah and Dammam where it
held meetings with prominent members of Saudi Chambers of
Commerce and Industry. The delegation demonstrated India’s
technological and industrial capabilities, ranging from production of
computer chips to automobiles, railways, cars, aircraft and capital
goods. There are more than 25 Indo-Saudi joint ventures in different
fields in the Kingdom, and Saudi companies are showing interest in
seeking partnerships with reputed Indian companies.

The Permanent Under Secretary of the Qatari Ministry of Foreign
Affairs is likely to visit India in February 2000 for attending the first
meeting under the MOU on Foreign Office Consultations signed
during the State visit of the Emir of Qatar to India. A meeting of the
Joint Higher Committee between India and Qatar is expected to be
held in March 2000.

Shri V K Ramamurthy, Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas,
inaugurated a seminar “Saudi Arabia in 100 years” organised on 12
May 1999 by the Saudi Embassy in New Delhi.

Saudi Arabia

India’s traditional relations with Saudi Arabia continued to grow
steadily. Saudi Arabia showed understanding of India’s viewpoint oil
a number of issues and signalled a desire to intensify the bilateral
relationship.
The Kingdom remained one of the major suppliers of crude oil
to India, meeting about 23% of India’s import requirements. The
Bilateral trade between the two countries during 1998-99 amounted
to US $ 2.6 billion. India’s exports to Saudi Arabia during die year
were worth US $ 766 million, an increase of 9% over the previous
year.
A 13-member Indian Industrial delegation led by the Managing
Director of Tata Iron & Steel Company Ltd., Dr J J Irani, visited tile
Kingdom from 4-11 April 1999. The Indian delegation was invited
by the Council of the Saudi Chambers of Commerce and Industry,
with the aim of promoting joint ventures between the two countries.

Owing to the saturation of Saudi labour market for unskilled/
semi-skilled workers, the slump in the construction industry, and
competition from other countries providing cheap labour, there was
a fall in the number of fresh workers recruited from India during
1999-2000 as compared to the previous years. The total Indian
population in the Kingdom, however, continues to be in the vicinity
of 12 lakhs and remittances of the Indian work-force retained at
around $ 2 billion per annum.
Haj

A total of 98,072 Indian pilgrims performed Haj in March 1999,
out of which 62,107 went under the aegis of Haj Committee, Mumbai.
The Government deputed 362 deputationists (218 Doctors and
Paramedical staff and 144 Administrative staff) to Saudi Arabia to
look after the general welfare and medical needs of the Indian pilgrims.
Also 13 State Haj committees sent 98 Haj Volunteers to guide and
assist Haj pilgrims from their States particularly with regard to living
conditions, transport to pilgrimage centres and Haj rituals. A 30member Haj Goodwill Delegation visited Saudi Arabia during the
Haj period.
39

The Gulf, West Asia & North Africa

In connection with Haj-2000, a Government of India delegation
visited Saudi Arabia and held a meeting with the Haj Minister on 3
November 1999. The delegation took tip the issue of increase in the
Indian Haj quota from the present 91,000 to 125,000 on the basis of
the present Muslim population in India. (The Government of Saudi
Arabia allows one pilgrim per one thousand Muslims in a country.)
Following the meeting, India’s quota for Haj-2000 has now been fixed
by the Saudi Government at 120,000.
Preparations for Haj-2000 are under way. Accommodation is
being rented in Makkah and Madinah, while global lenders have been
floated for the Air Charter Contract to ferry pilgrims to and from
Saudi Arabia. For tile first time, a comprehensive Orientation and
Training Programme is being organised all over India to educate
pilgrims about all aspects of Haj, including religious rituals, living
conditions in Saudi Arabia and safety measures.
The Haj Committee, Mumbai was reconstituted by the
Government and the new Committee took office and became
operational on 16 June 1999.
The preparation of a new Haj Committee Act to replace the Haj
Committee Act of 1959 has been taken up by the Ministry. It is
expected that a draft Bill will be ready for presentation before
Parliament in early 2000.
United Arab Emirates (UAE)

Bilateral cooperation between India and the UAE, in various fields
was further strengthened. India’s Minister of External Affairs, Shri
Jaswant Singh, visited the UAE on 5 April 1999 and met the UAE
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, Sheikh Hamdan Bin Zayed AI
Nahyan, in Abu Dhabi. The two ministers discussed issues of mutual
interest and stressed the importance of joint efforts to maintain
security and stability in the Gulf and the Indian Ocean. Shri Jaswant
Singh welcomed the proposed entry of the UAE into the IOR-ARC.

40

A delegation of the National Association of Software and Services
Companies (NASSCOM) visited the UAE from 1 May 1999 to
promote Indian capabilities in the Information Technology (IT) and
Software Sectors. NASSCOM organised a seminar which was
addressed by the UAE Minister for Higher Education & Scientific
Research, Shaikh Nahyan Bin Mubarak AI Nahyan lie stressed the
importance of partnership between the Indian software industry and
the UAE business, industrial and technical institutions. NASSCOM
also undertook to submit a proposal to the Dubai Government for
setting up UAE’s first IT Park.
The first group of five UAE students from the Higher College
of Technical Education of Abu Dhabi came to India on 26 June 1999
to participate in a job-oriented on-line training programme. This
programme is a pilot project emphasising bilateral. cooperation. The
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) is the nodal agency to monitor
the training programme in India.
Voltas International Limited was awarded an electrical contract
worth Rs.750 million for the Abu Dhabi Trade Centre Project on 15
July 1999.
A 9-member delegation from the Dubai Chamber of Commerce
and Industry, led by Mr Ahmed Saif Belhasa, Chairman, UAE
Contractor’s Association, visited New Delhi and Bombay for seven
days from 27 October 1999 at the invitation of the Confederation of
Indian Industry (CII). The delegation called on the Minister of State
for Commerce’ and Industry and participated in a business seminar
inaugurated by the Minister. The delegation also met Shri Talmiz
Ahmad, Joint Secretary (Gulf & Haj) in the Ministry of External
Affairs, who spoke to them on the Government of India’s policy
initiatives to build a long-standing political and economic ties with
the UAE. At Mumbai, the delegation visited the Godrej Industrial
Complex and held meetings with the EXIM Batik, Indian Merchant’s

Annual Report 1999-2000

Chamber and called on the Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank
of India (RBI).
The Minerals and Metals Trading Corporation organised in
October 1999 a jewellery exhibition i Dubai in collaboration with
Siroya Jewellers of Dubai. The India Trade Promotion Organisation
(IITO) participated in the Arab Jewellery and Watch Show held in
Abu Dhabi in October 1999.
The UAE Minister for Justice, Islamic Affairs and Awqaf, Mr.
Mohammed Bin Nakhira Al Dhaheri, accompanied by an official
delegation, visited India from 25-26 October 1999. During the visit,
three Treaties, namely Extradition Treaty, Treaty on Mutual Legal
Assistance in Criminal Matters and Treaty on Juridical and Judicial
Cooperation in Civil and Commercial Matters were signed. The UAE
Minister called on the External Affairs Minister and the Minister of
Law, Justice and Company Affairs.
During his transit halt in UAE on 21 January, External Affairs
Minister called on Crown Prince of Dubai and UAE Minister of
Defence H.H. Sheikh Mohammed Bin Rashid Al Maktoum and UAE
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs H.H. Sheikh Hamadan Bin Zayed
Al Nahyan.
Minister of State of Information & Broadcasting Shri Arun Jaitley
visited UAE from 31 January - 1 February. He exchanged views with
Minister of Information and Culture of UAE H.H. Sheikh Abdullah
Bin Zayed Al Nahyan.
Yemen

The ties of friendship and cooperation between India and Yemen
continued to grow further during the year. Mr Mohammed AlKhadem AI-Wajeeh, Yemeni Minister of Oil and Mineral Resources
led an oil and gas delegation to India in June 1999. The delegation

met the Indian Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas, and the two
sides discussed the possibility of signing an agreement for exporting
oil and natural gas to India from Yemen.
The third session of the Indo-Yemen Joint Committee for
Economic, Scientific and Technical Cooperation took place in Sana’a
from 18-20 July 1999. The Indian delegation was leaded by Shri
Nareshwar Dayal, Secretary (East) in the Ministry of External Affairs,
and the Yemeni delegation was led by Mr Abdul Rehman Taramoum,
Vice Minister of Planning and Development. A number of areas were
identified for cooperation between the two countries. Besides the
Agreed Minutes of the Joint Committee, two agreements, namely the
Cultural Agreement and the Air Services Agreement were signed Shri
Dayal called on Prime Minister Dr. Abdul Karim Al-Iryani and the
Ministers of Planning, Oil, Trade, Communications, Alwqaf and
Culture and the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs.
Around 3500 pilgrims from the Bohra community, led by its
spiritual leader, Dr Burhanuddin TUS, visited Yemen during August
1999 and held a special function at Haraz. The pilgrims included a
medical team consisting of 25 doctors from various fields of
specialisation who provided free service to patients at the Republican
Hospital in Sana’a and the Manakha Hospital.
Special Kuwait Cell
The Special Kuwait Cell has been working since 1991 on the task
of obtaining compensation for the Indians who were adversely
affected by the Gulf War of 1990-91. After a considerable time, funds
are now being transferred by the United Nations Compensation
Commission (UNCC), Geneva. Transfer of funds is taking place at
almost regular intervals, depending on availability of the same with
UNCC.
41

The Gulf, West Asia & North Africa

Disbursement of the compensation money to successful claimants
is being done by four designated nationalised Banks. The four Banks,
with the active cooperation and guidance of the Special Kuwait Cell,
are carrying out the task of locating the successful claimants (many

42

Annual Report 1999-2000

accompanied by a 26-member delegation visited India from 15-19
June 1999 at the invitation of the Minister of Petroleum & Natural
Gas. A joint working group to oversee cooperation in the hydrocarbon
sector was constituted during the visit. The Minister also called on
the Prime Minister and the Minister of State for External Affairs.
The Algerian Minister of Trade and Commerce, Mr Bakhti Belaib,
visited India from 17-18 August 1999 to participate in the G-15 Trade
Ministers’ Conference in Bangalore. An eight-member Algerian
Defence delegation led by General Bendimerad Mohamed visited
India from 14 - 23 November 1999 to explore possibilities of
cooperation in defence field. During its stay, the delegation called on
the Defence Minister and visited the headquarters of the Indian Space
Research Organization and the Antariksh Corporation in Bangalore,
the Defence Research and Development Organization units in Pune
and Mumbai, the Ordnance Factory Board in Calcutta and held
discussions with the Confederation of Indian Industry representatives
in New Delhi.
Egypt

Bilateral relations with Egypt were further diversified and
strengthened. The first session of the Indo-Egyptian Joint Business
Group was held on 17 May 1999 in Cairo. The Egyptian and Indian
delegations comprising businessmen from the private and public
sector of both the countries identified several areas for further
cooperation. Egypt’s Minister of Trade and Supply Dr Ahmed Goweli
led the Egyptian delegation to the G-15 Ministerial meeting held in
Bangalore from 16-18 August 1999. Minister of External Affairs Shri
Jaswant Singh met Egypt’s Minister of Foreign Affairs Amre Moussa
on the margins of the 54th United Nations General Assembly on 20
September 1999 in New York. They exchanged views on global and
regional issues. An 8-member Egyptian delegation led by Major
General Mohammed Khalifa Farghaly visited India in connection with
DEFEXPO held in New Delhi from 12-16 October 1999. Two Indian

Army Officers participated as Observers in the Exercise ‘Bright Star’
in Egypt from 26 October to 2 November 1999.
Israel

Relations with Israel continued to grow satisfactorily. Pricipal
Secretary to the Prime Minister Shri Brajesh Mishra visited Israel
from 2-4 September 1999, at the invitation of the Israeli Government.
During his stay in Israel, Shri Mishra called on the Prime Minister
Mr. Ehud Barak. His visit was part of the ongoing diplomatic dialogue
between India and israel. Deputy Speaker of the Knesset Ms Naomi
Chazan visited New Delhi on 23 and 24 November 1999.

Jordan

Relations with Jordan continued to be close and friendly. The
Vice President Shri Krishan Kant represented India at the funeral of
King Hussein in Amman on 8 February 1999. During his stay in
Amman, the Vice President called on King Abdullah II. A Double
Taxation Avoidance Agreement was signed between India and Jordan
on 20 April 1999. Former Foreign Minister of Jordan Dr Kamel Abu
Jaber visited India from 22-27 November 1999 under the Indian
Council for Cultural Relations distinguished visitor’s programme.
During his stay, Dr Jaber called on Minister of State for External
Affairs Shri Ajit Panja.

Lebanon

Bilateral relations with Lebanon continued to remain cordial. India
stands for the restoration of sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity
of Lebanon and for extension of the authority of Lebanese State
over the entire territory of Lebanon in consonance with the United
Nations Security Council Resolution 425. An Indian delegation visited
Beirut from 9-12 August 1999 to participate in the meeting of the
Asian Group of G-77.

Libya

Relations with Libya continued to be marked by understanding
43

The Gulf, West Asia & North Africa

and cooperation. Former Prime Minister Shri Inder Kumar Gujral
visited Libya from 10-14 November 1999 at the invitation of the
Government of Libya. During his stay in Libya, Shri Gujral called on
President Col Muammar Al-Qathafi and Foreign Minister Mr Omar
Mustafa Muntassir.
Morocco

Bilateral relations with Morocco were further strengthened and
consolidated. Dr Abid Hussain, who is a member of the Moroccan
Royal Academy, visited Rabat from 6-9 May 1999 for the spring session
of the Academy. During the visit of an 11-member Confederation of
Indian Industry mission to Morocco from 23-26 May 1999 a
Memorandum of Understanding between the Confederation of Indian
Industry and its Moroccan counterpart organisation for creation of a
Joint Business Council was initialled. Vice President Shri Krishan
Kant visited Morocco from 25-26 July 1999 to represent India at the
funeral of late King Hassan II. During his stay in Rabat, Vice President
called on King Mohammed VI and conveyed a message of condolence
from the President. Deputy Chairperson of Rajya Sabha, Dr Najma
Heptulla visited Morocco from 8-11 September 1999 to attend the
Second Preparatory Committee of the Presiding Officers Conference
of the Inter-Parliamentary Union. Secretary (Economic Relations),
Shri S T Devare led the Indian delegation to the 9th G-77 Ministerial
meeting held at Marrakesh from 12-16 September 1999. IndoMoroccan joint venture fertilizer project, one of India’s largest joint
venture projects abroad, commenced production in August 1999.
Minister of State for External Affairs Ms Vasundhara Raje met the
Foreign Minister of Morocco Mr Mohamed Benaissa on 29 September
1999 on the sidelines of the 54th United Nations General Assembly
and discussed matters of mutual interest. A Memorandum of
Understanding has been finalised between the Indian Institute of
Technology, Delhi and Akhawayn University of Morocco.
44

Prime Minister of Morocco Abderrahmane El Youssoufi paid a
State visit to India from 21-25 February. Number of Agreements
were signed during his visit. These include – Agreement on Merchant
Shipping and Related Maritime Matters, Memorandum of
Understanding in the field of Geology and Mining and Agreement
between Prasar Bharti, Doordarshan and Radiodiffusion Television
Marocaine (RTM). In addition an agreement was initialled between
the Confederation of Indian Industry and its Moroccan counterpart
organisation to form a Joint Business Council.
Palestine

India continued to extend its consistent and unwavering support
to the Palestinian cause. India also continued with its moral, material
and technical support to the Palestinian people. Training slots for
specialised training courses to Palestinian personnel were provided
during the year. High-level political contacts between the Indian and
Palestinian leadership were maintained. President Yassir Arafat came
to India on a working visit from 9-10 April 1999. He was accompanied
by Palestine National Authority Minister for Planning and
International Cooperation, Dr Nabeel Sha’ath, Chief Palestinian
negotiator Mr Sa’eb Ereket and Advisor to the President Mr Nabeel
Abu Radneih. During the visit, President Yassir Arafat called on
President and held detailed discussions with the Prime Minister.
Additional Secretary (FA) and Joint Secretary (WANA) visited Gaza
in May 1999 for a review meeting of Indian aided projects. Advisor
to President on Human Rights, Advocate Ibrahim Abu Dagga, visited
India from 2-7 November 1999 in connection with an International
Conference on Human Rights “Union International Des Advocats”.
He had a meeting with Member, National Human Rights Commission
Shri Virendra Dayal.
Western Sahara/Somalia/Djibouti

On Western Sahara issue, India continues to support “UN

Annual Report 1999-2000

efforts”. India continued its support to United Nations efforts to
restore peace and normalcy in Somalia. Former President of Djibouti
Mr Hassan Gouled Aptiden transited through New Delhi on 24 May
1999, 16 December 1999 and 23 December 1999. Foreign Minister
of Djibouti Mr Ali Abdi Farah called on the External Affairs Minister
on the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly in New
York on 21 September 1999. It was followed by External Affairs
Minister’s meeting with President of Djibouti Mr Ismail Omar Guelleh
who also happened to be in New York at that time. “Sindhuvir” a
submarine of the Indian Navy called on Djibouti Port from 4 - 7
October 1999. The Commander of Indian Naval Ship called on the
Djibouti Naval Chief Capt Abourahman Adeb Cher.
Sudan

Relations with Sudan were strengthened. India reiterated its
support for Sudan’s territorial integrity and sovereignty over the whole
of Sudan. President of Sudan, Lt Gen Omar Hassan Ahmed Al Bashir
transitted through Mumbai on 22 July 1999. Registrar of Political
Associations of Sudan, Mr Mohammed Ahmed Salim, visited India
from 18-23 September 1999 and held discussions with the officials
of the Election Commission and Parliament. UN Special Rapporteur
on Freedom of Opinion and Expression Dr Abid Hussain visited
Sudan from 20-26 September 1999. Amongst others, Dr Abid Hussain
met Speaker of National Assembly Mr Hassan Al Turabi. Minister of
State for External Affairs Ms Vasundhara Raje met Foreign Minister
of Sudan Dr Mustafa Osman Ismail on 29 September 1999 on the
sidelines of the 54th United Nations General Assembly and discussed
matters of mutual interest during the meeting.

Syria

Relations with Syria continued to remain friendly and warm. Three
member Syrian defence delegation led by the Deputy Chief of Army
Staff Lt General Abdul Rahman Sayad, participated in DEFEXPO
INDIA’99 held in New Delhi from 12 - 16 October 1999.

Minister of State for Information & Broadcasting, Shri Arun
Jaitley visited Syria from 28-30 January 2000. Besides meeting his
counterpart, Shri Jaitley exchanged views with the Prime Minister
and the Foreign Minister of Syria.
Tunisia

Bilateral relations with Tunisia continued to progress satisfactorily.
A 25-member Tunisian delegation of the Chamber of Commerce &
Industry, Sfax visited India from 20-27 April 1999 to explore avenues
for enhancing economic and industrial cooperation. In return, a 10member Confederation of Indian Industry industrial mission visited
Tunisia from 20-23 May 1999. At the invitation of Deputy Minister
for Women and Family Affairs Ms Neziha Zarrouk, Deputy
Chairperson of Rajya Sabha, Dr Najma Heptulla visited Tunisia from
11-14 August 1999 to participate in the celebrations to mark Tunisia’s
Women’s Day. External Affairs Minister Shri Jaswant Singh met
Foreign Minister of Tunisia Mr Said Ben Mustapha on 24 September
1999 on the margins of the 54th United Nations General Assembly
and exchanged views on bilateral, regional and global issues. Former
Prime Minister Shri Inder Kumar Gujral visited Tunisia from 3-10
November 1999 to attend an International Symposium on the theme
“Third Way: The Emerging Countries”, at the invitation of the
Rassemblement Constitutional Democratic, the ruling party of
Tunisia. During his stay in Tunisia, Shri Gujral had meetings with
Prime Minister Dr Hamed Karoui, Secretary General of
Rassemblement Constitutional Democratic, Mr Adelaziz ben Dhia,
Speaker of Tunisian Parliament Mr Foued Mbazaa. President of the
Council for Competition of Tunisia Mr Mohamed Chatti visited Delhi
from 15-23 November 1999 to represent Tunisia at the India
International Trade Fair 1999. The Tunisian Minister of International
Cooperation & Foreign Investment, Mr Fethi Merdassi, was in India
from 5 - 8 November 1999 to lead a 9-member Tunisian delegation
to participate in the India Economic Summit organised jointly by the
45

The Gulf, West Asia & North Africa

Confederation of Indian Industry and World Economic Forum
During his stay in Delhi, the Minister called on the Vice-President,
Minister of Finance, Minister of Heavy Industry & Public Enterprises,
Minister of State for External Affairs, Minister of State for Commerce
& Industry and the Chief Minister of Delhi. Before concluding the
visit, the Tunisian Minister and his delegation visited Bombay on 8
November 1999 where the Export-Import Bank of India signed a
memorandum of Understanding with two Tunisian Banks viz. Societe
Tunisiene de Banque and Banque International Arabe de Tunisia to

46

jointly promote trade and industrial collaboration between Tunisian
and Indian companies. Shri Abid Hussain visited Tunisia from 5 - 11
December 1999 as a Special Rapporteur to the United Nations on
Human Rights and Freedom of Expression.
League of Arab States

The regular dialogue with League of Arab States was maintained
in Cairo and in New Delhi.
uu

Annual Report 1999-2000

6
Africa (South of Sahara)

Introduction

T

he Government of India continued its policy of consolidating
the gains of almost five decades of close ties of friendship with
the countries in the Sub-Saharan Africa. Most of the countries
in this region are currently engaged in the simultaneous processes of
economic reform and political democratization. These processes,
being in line with India’s own national priorities, have strengthened
our capacity to identify ourselves with the aspirations of the people
of Africa and to engage with them in a constructive programme of
mutually beneficial cooperation.
Bilateral
Indo-Mauritian relations continued to be excellent, as in the past.
Cooperation in the sectors of education, science and technology,
defence, commerce and industry was further intensified. There were
also several visits of cultural troupes from India. Trade between the
two countries grew steadily and India is now the third largest supplier
of goods to Mauritius. The India Trade Promotion Organization
organized a successful exhibition of Indian products - INDEXPO which coincided with the Indian Independence Day celebrations. Mr.
Sikander Bakht, Minister of Industry, was the chief guest during the
exposition.

During this period Telecommunications Consultants (India) Ltd.
successfully completed their projects in Madagascar for installation
of optic fibre and radio transmission network. The Government of
India donated medicines worth Rs. 10 lakhs to check the cholera
epidemic in different parts of Madagascar. Two Indian Naval ships,
INS Krishna and Sujata, called on Malagasy port of Diego Suarez on
a goodwill visit from 20th October to 23rd October 1999.
The close friendship between India and Seychelles saw visible
manifestation during the year by the visits by two Naval Ships from
India on two occasions in October and November 1999 and a visit to
India by a 7-member delegation from the Association of Small
Businessmen of Seychelles in July.
India’s traditional political relations with Ethiopia continued to
consolidate in 1999. The Government of Ethiopia reiterated its;
interest in our small and medium scale industries and in the fields of
dairy, agriculture and agro-industries. In May this year, a Cultural
Exchange Programme was signed with Ethiopia. In the near future a
ministerial delegation is expected to visit India. The Bilateral trade
between India and Ethiopia has also been showing a rising trend,
increasing from US$ 8 million in 1989 to US$ 70 million in 1999.
In Eastern Africa, a treaty aiming at economic union amongst
Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda, known as the East African Community
47

Africa (South of Sahara)

(EAC), was signed by the Presidents of these three countries on the
30th November, 1999 in Arusha (Tanzania). This Treaty will come
into effect after it is ratified by their Parliaments. The formation of
this Community pledges these countries to work towards a customs
union leading ultimately to a political federation. In view of India’s
excellent political relations and the growing commercial and economic
interest with these countries, as also the presence of a large Indian
diaspora in this region, it will be our endeavour to intensify our
interaction with the individual member countries of the EAC as well
as with EAC as a regional organisation.
India’s relations with Kenya were further strengthened during
the period under review. Kenya showed a constructive understanding
of India’s position on key global issues like restructuring of the UN
Security Council, disarmament and the need for an equitable world
economic order. The Government of Kenya has also shown its keen
interest to further improve Indo-Kenyan bilateral relations in the fields
of small scale industries, dairy, agriculture, tourism etc. A special focus
of the year was our efforts to promote bilateral tourism. Seminars to
promote tourism were held in Nairobi in March and in Mombasa in
October’99. A special seminar focusing on business in the new
millennium was also held in Nairobi in association with the Kenya
Institute of Management.
India lost a great friend in the death of Tanzania’s former
President, Julius Nyerere on October 14, 1999. The Vice President,
Shri Krishan Kant, led the Indian delegation at the funeral of the
departed leader. He was also one of the only six leaders chosen to
address the public at the funeral ceremony.
The Confederation of Indian Industry in association with the
High Commission of India, organized a ‘Made in India’ show in Dares-Salaam from 26-29 August, 1999. Mr. Ram Jethmalani, Minister
of Law, Justice and Company Affairs inaugurated the show.
48

Comprising a Ministerial visit, a trade exhibition, five separate business
missions and an array of cultural events including fashion shows, a
dance drama ballet and a food festival, this was the largest event of its
kind to be ever held in Tanzania. A Bilateral Trade Agreement has
been finalized and would be signed shortly. India has emerged as
Tanzania’s largest trading partner. Defence and Cultural Exchange
agreements are also under consideration.
Relations between India and Uganda continued to remain cordial.
Michael K. Werikhe, Minister of State for Housing, led a delegation
to India to participate in the International Exhibition “Build India
99” and “Environment India 99” held in New Delhi between 13-16
April, 1999. Other visits exchanged during this period include that of
Mrs. Miria Matembe, Minister for Ethics and Integrity, a 4-member
delegation from the Ugandan Ministry of Finance to India and the
visits of a delegation from Karnataka Power Corporation Ltd, a 3member TCIL delegation, a 15-member CII delegation and a 14member FEII delegation from India to Uganda. As part of its ongoing
privatization programme, the government of Uganda sold its 49%
shares to the Bank of Baroda (Uganda) Ltd. With this, the Bank of
Baroda (Uganda) became a fully owned subsidiary of the Bank of
Baroda, India. Gujarat Communications and Electronics Ltd. bagged
a US$ 3.5 million project for setting up a digital Video/Audio Earth
Station at Kampala.
Subsequent to signing a Memorandum of Understanding with
the SADC, India continued its efforts to improve bilateral relations
with the individual member countries of SADC as well as with SADC
as a regional organization. Exercise ‘Blue Crane’ held in April 1999,
was a major SADC peace keeping exercise designed to develop
cooperative action in peacekeeping amongst the armed forces of
SADC countries. India was the only developing country requested
for material and technical assistance for this exercise.

Annual Report 1999-2000

market in Botswana. The Botswana Government sponsored two
business level delegations to India in May and December, 1999 and a
number of projects are under active consideration.
With a long tradition of close and cordial relations, India and
Zimbabwe continued to cooperate closely, bilaterally and in multilateral
fora. India participated in the Zimbabwe International Trade Fair
(ZITF) in April, 1999. In August 1999, National Book Trust, New
Delhi and nine other leading Indian publishers participated in the
Zimbabwe International Book Fair 99. Zimbabwe Dy. Minister for
Industry & Commerce, Mr. Obert M. Mpofu participated in the G15 Ministerial meeting on WTO at Bangalore in August. He utilized
that opportunity to sign an MOU with HMT for setting up a Watch
Assembly unit in Zimbabwe as a Joint venture.
Indo-Zambian bilateral relations continued to retain their
traditional cordiality during this year. In April, 1999, RITES bagged
an important contract in the field of infrastructure. Various Indian
companies are also pursuing the possibility of their involvement in
the power sector in Zambia. The Zambian Deputy Minister of Finance
visited India to discuss the issue of blocked funds (the government
of Zambia owes around US$ 37 million to India towards repayment
of GOI’s credit line extended to them earlier). The Zambian Army
Commander paid an official visit to India at the invitation of our
Chief of Army Staff. The Zambian Deputy Minister of Land led a
high level Zambian delegation to India to learn from our experiences
in the field of land reforms, land laws, etc. In the cultural field, ICCR

49

Africa (South of Sahara)

Commission has been approved by both sides and is likely to be
signed shortly. Similarly, a proposal to convene the first meeting of
the Joint Trade Committee under the Indo-Angolan Trade Agreement
in New Delhi is under active consideration by the Angolan side.

1999. During their stay in Delhi they called on Commerce Secretary
and Secretary, Food Processing Industries. They also visited National
Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) headquarters in New Delhi and
met some Indian industrialists at a seminar organized by the CII.

The return of democracy to Africa’s most populous country,
Nigeria, was a development of special happiness to India. In April
1999 Nigerian President-elect Mr. Olusengun Obasanjo, visited India.
During his brief stay in Delhi he met the President and the PM and
held wide ranging discussions on bilateral, regional and international
issues. Nigerian Minister of Commerce Mustapha Bello led a 6member delegation to attend the G-15 Ministerial Meeting on WTO
at Bangalore in August, 1999. During this period a 3-member rice
delegation, a 5-member TCIL-C.DOT delegation and a 3-member
MECON delegation visited Nigeria.

President Olusegun Obasanjo, the newly elected President of a
Democratic Nigeria was present as the Chief Guest at the 50th
Anniversary of India Republic in the first year of the new millennium.
President Obasabjo’s visit provided a new momentum to the wellestablished friendly relations between India and Nigeria. The Nigerian
President had detailed talks with the President and Prime Minister.
Several other key economic Ministers also separately called on him.
Nigeria is India’s second largest economic partner in Africa. During
the visit, both the sides agreed to give a qualitative new dimension to
the bilateral economic relationship. Given their membership of several
multilateral fora such as G-15, G-77, NAM, Commonwealth and their
common endeavour to set up a just and equitable world order, the
renewed contact at the highest political level underlined the need for
strategic consultations between the two countries.

The Minister of Education of Cameroon Charles Etoundi visited
India during July 1999. During his visit he met our Minister of Human
Resource Development. UNICEF sponsored the visit.
Bilateral relations between India and Ghana remained on an even
keel during the period under report. The two countries decided to
hold annual bilateral consultations. It has also been agreed to sign a
fresh Cultural Exchange Programme. A team from NISIET explored
the possibilities of cooperation in the field of Small and Medium
Scale Enterprises; their report is awaited. On the economic and
commercial front, two-way trade showed a rising trend with Ghanaian
companies showing increased interest in doing business with India.
A delegation sponsored by the Indo-African Chamber of Commerce
& Industry, Mumbai visited Accra.
Secretary to the Prime Minister’s Cabinet of Cote d’ Ivoire, Mr.
Jean Claude Brou led a two-member delegation to India in September
50

As part of his travel within India, President Obasanjo visited
Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana; HMT, HAL and Infosys in
Bangalore and went for lunch to his alma mater, Staff College at
Wellington.
The Kenyan Foreign Minister visited India from December 812, 1999. This was the first formal visit at FM’s level after a decade
which resulted in further improvement of Indo-Kenyan relations.
An agreement to establish a Joint Commission at ministerial level
was signed during the visit and the Kenyan Foreign Minister evinced
keen interest in developing cooperation with India in various fields.
He lauded the role played by the Indian community in Kenya in the
field of economic activities in that country.

Annual Report 1999-2000

India’s Assistance to African Countries
Continuing an established tradition, India extended assistance in
the form of machinery, manpower and human resource development
to the Sub-Saharan countries in various crucial sectors. We have been
associated as a partner in Eritrea’s agricultural development at the
initiative of FAO and would depute nearly 100 Indian agricultural
experts to that country to help increase agricultural productivity there.
The first batch of experts will be going there soon. As part of a
tripartite agreement between India, FAO and Mozambique, an advance
team of two agricultural experts from India visited Mozambique in

trial and propagation in Ghana. An Agricultural Development Project
with Indian assistance is in an advanced stage of implementation in
Senegal. The Indian Project Director is in position and is supervising
the remaining part of the project. This project is aimed at providing
expertise and equipment to Senegal to develop rice farming and to
cultivate better variety of cotton.
India donated medicines worth Rs. 8.5 lakhs, to Mozambique in
September. In November, relief supplies (medicines) worth Rupees
five lakhs were donated to Ghana to assist the flood-victims in the
northern parts of the country.
An Entrepreneurial Training and Development Centre was set
up under the Indian technical and financial assistance in Dakar, Senegal
to provide technical training in various vocational fields.
Prime Minister visited South Africa from 12-15 November, 1999
to attend the CHOGM Summit meeting held in Durban. This visit
provided a useful opportunity to renew contacts with the leadership
of South Africa and with several other leaders of Africa as a whole.
uu

51

7
Europe

Eastern Europe
Section 1

R

elations between India and the Russian Federation have been
historically close, friendly and time tested. With the countries
of East and Central Europe, we have traditionally maintained
ties based on goodwill, friendship and close cooperation. The year
saw further consolidation and diversification of these ties to mutual
benefit. The Czech Republic, Poland and Hungary were admitted
into NATO and several of them re-oriented themselves towards
joining Euro-Atlantic Security structures and the EU. Despite these
developments, the countries of East and Central Europe reiterated
that relations their relations with India will continue to develop on
the traditional friendly basis. India’s cooperation with these countries
is multi-dimensional in character and encompasses economic,
commercial, defence, scientific and technological and cultural spheres.
Bilateral exchanges at the political level have played a significant
role in the consolidation of our ties with these countries. These
exchanges provided an opportunity towards creating greater
understanding of each others interests and concerns. Efforts were
made to renew contacts between the Parliaments of these countries.
Specific steps were taken to impart a new thrust towards the expansion

52

of trade and economic cooperation. Initiatives were taken in
diversifying our cultural relations with them.
The President of the Russian Federation, Mr Boris Yeltsin,
resigned on 31 December 1999 and nominated Mr Vladimir Putin,
Prime Minister, as the Acting President. Mr Putin would also continue
to be the Prime Minister of the Russian Federation. Presidential
Elections are scheduled to be held on 26 March 2000 to elect a new
President of the Russian Federation.
Section 2

One of the main priorities in our foreign policy objectives
continued to be the strengthening of our time tested relations with
the Russian Federation. Our multi-dimensional relations with the
Russian Federation have been developing and expanding in all areas
of mutual interest to mutual benefit. We have sought to raise the level
of our bilateral ties to that of a strategic partnership. A Declaration
on Strategic Partnership will be signed between the two countries
during the next Summit meeting. The visit of External Affairs Minister
to the Russian Federation in May 1999 was an important milestone.
The visit to India by the First Deputy Prime Minister Khristenko
and the Deputy Prime Minister Klebanov lent further weight to our
interaction. The tradition of bilateral exchange of visits both at all
levels, including political and official, continued during the year.

Annual Report 1999-2000

A delegation of Indian parliamentarians led by then MOS for
Parliamentary Affairs, Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar, visited the
Russian Federation from 5 - 9 April 1999. He led a multi-party
delegation comprising seven Members of Parliament from the Lok
Sabha and four from the Rajya Sabha. The delegation called on Mr
Gennady Seleznyov, Speaker of the State Duma; Mr Yuri Maslyukov,
First Deputy Prime Minister; Dr Vladimir Lukin, Chairman of the
State Duma Committee on International Affairs; Dr Anatoly
Lukyanov, Chairperson of the State Duma Committee on Legislation,
Courts and Legal Reforms and Chairperson of the Group of
Parliamentarians on Relations with India; Mr A.V. Selivanov, Deputy
Chairperson of the State Duma Committee for Women, Family and
Youth Affairs; Dr Gennady Zuganov, Leader of the Communist Party
of the Russian Federation; Mr Sergei Ivanenko, Deputy Leader of
the State Duma faction of “Yabloko”; and Mr Vladimir Platonov,
Deputy Chairperson of the Federation Council.

Mr Sergei Prikhodko, Deputy Head of the Russian Presidential
Administration, visited India from 15 - 17 May 1999 as Special Envoy

Mr Viktor Semenov, Agriculture Minister of the Russian
Federation, visited India from 11 - 17 April 1999. He met the then
MOS for Agriculture. During this visit, an Agreement on Cooperation
in Veterinary Field was signed. The 1st session of the sub-Group on
Agriculture under the Indo-Russian Inter Governmental Commission
also took place during the visit.
Dr A I Lukyanov, Chairperson of the State Duma Committee on
Legislation, Courts and Legal Reforms and Chairman of the Group
of Parliamentarians on Relations with India, led a Russian
Parliamentary delegation to India from 18 - 22 April 1999. He met
the Vice-President, Speaker of the Lok Sabha, then MOS for
Parliamentary Affairs, and the then Chairman and Members of the
Parliamentary Standing Committee on External Affairs.
The Chairperson of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation,
Mr V M Lebedev visited India from 3 - 5 May 1999. He called on the
Vice-President and had meetings with the Chief Justice of India.
53

Europe

on 27 July 1999. EAM once again had a meeting with Mr Ivanov in
Almaty, Kazakhstan, on 14 September 1999 on the margins of the
Conference on Interaction on Confidence Building Measure (CICA)
and on the sidelines of the 54th UNGA in New York. During these
meetings, bilateral, regional and international issues were discussed.

The “Days of Delhi” were held in Moscow from 26 October - 2
November 1999. The official delegation from the Government of
the NCT of Delhi was led by Dr. Narendra Nath, Minister of
Education of the National Capital Territory of Delhi. More than 130
artists from India participated in this event.

The Russian Foreign Minister, Mr Igor Ivanov, transited through
New Delhi on 25 July 1999 and on 28 July 1999 on his way to and
from the 6th ASEAN Regional Forum Meeting in Singapore.

The Deputy Prime Minister of the Russian Federation in-charge
of military-technical cooperation, atomic energy, space and other
subjects, Mr Ilya Klebanov paid an official visit to India from 4 - 8
November 1999. Mr Klebanov was accompanied by a high-powered
delegation which included the Minister for Atomic Energy, the First
Deputy Defence Minister, the First Deputy Minister of Trade, the
Chairperson of the Inter State Aviation Committee and many senior
Government representatives. During the visit, Mr Klebanov called
on PM and had separate meetings with the External Affairs Minister,
Raksha Mantri and Principal Secretary to PM. The 6th Meeting of
the Indo-Russian Group on Military-Technical Cooperation was also
held, coinciding with the visit. At the conclusion of the visit, a joint
statement was issued.

A delegation from the Central Election Commission (CEC) of
the Russian Federation led by Mr Sergei Bolshakov, Commissioner,
paid an official visit to India from 2 -7 September 1999. The delegation
called on the Chief Election Commissioner of India and visited polling
stations in and around Delhi and Haryana during the first phase of
the Lok Sabha poll on 5 September 1999. Interaction between the
Election Commissions of the two countries has been institutionalised
since 1997.
Mr Vladimir Putin, Chairperson of the Government of the
Russian Federation, transited through New Delhi on 14 September
1999 on his way back to Moscow from the APEC Summit in
Auckland. Principal Secretary to PM had detailed discussions with
Mr Putin on issues of mutual interest and concern.
Foreign Secretary visited Moscow on 16 September 1999 for
Foreign Office Consultations. He called on Mr Igor Ivanov, Foreign
Minister of the Russian Federation and had detailed discussions with
Mr Alexander Avdeev, First Deputy Foreign Minister and with Mr
Grigory Karasin, Deputy Foreign Minister.
The Chief of Naval Staff paid an official visit to the Russian
Federation from 15 - 20 September 1999
Col Gen Anatoly Kornukov, Commander-in-Chief of the Russian
Air Force, visited India from 4 - 10 October 1999.
54

After the hijacking of IC-814, EAM spoke to the Minister of
Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, Mr Igor Ivanov on 26
December 1999. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation issued an official statement on 27 December 1999 and
two official statements on 28 December 1999 condemning the
hijacking.
The Deputy Chairman of the Government of the Russian
Federation and Co-Chairman of the Indo-Russian InterGovernmental Commission for Trade, Economic, Scientific,
Technological and Cultural Cooperation (IRIGC), Dr Viktor
Khristenko, visited India from 14 - 15 January 2000. The 6th session
of the IRIGC was held during the visit. It was co-chaired by the
Finance Minister (Co-Chairman of the IRIGC) and Dr Khristenko.
Dr Khristenko called on the President of India and the Prime Minister

Annual Report 1999-2000

of India and met the Minister of Power, Minister of Civil Aviation
and Minister of Surface Transport. A Protocol on the 6th Session of
the IRIGC was signed on 15 January 2000.

EAM and Mr Boris Tarasyuk, Foreign Minister of Ukraine, had a
meeting in New York on 28 September 1999 on the margins of the
54th UNGA.

The Acting President and Prime Minister of the Russian
Federation Mr Vladimir Putin called the Prime Minister on the hotline
on 27 January 2000 to offer felicitations on the occasion of the 50th
anniversary of the creation of the Republic of India.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine issued a statement
on 30 December 1999 condemning the hijacking of IC-814.

The 1st session of the Indo-Russian Working Group on Export
Controls took place in Moscow from 2 - 3 February 2000.
The Speaker of the State Duma of the Federal Assembly of the
Russian Federation, Mr Gennady Seleznyev, is scheduled to visit to
India from 1 - 3 March 2000 at the invitation of the Speaker of the
Lok Sabha.
The first Resident Ambassador of India to the Republic of
Armenia arrived in the Armenian capital Yerevan in early October
1999 to take up office. At the same time, the first resident Armenian
Embassy to India was opened in mid-October 1999 with the arrival
of a Charge d’ Affaires ad interim in New Delhi.
The Chief of Army Staff paid a goodwill visit to the Czech
Republic from 15 - 19 May 1999.
Mr Hynek Kmonicek, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs of the
Czech Republic visited India on 20 August 1999 and had discussions
with Secretary (West) on issues of mutual interest.
Secretary, Department of Steel, visited Ukraine from 25 - 29
July 1999. During the visit, he had meetings with Mr Viktor Padalko,
First Deputy Minister of Industrial Policy of Ukraine, Mr. Viktor
Pantelenko, Deputy Minister of Industrial Policy, and Mr. Olexandr
Chalyi, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs. Secretary Steel also visited
some industrial sites in the Donetsk region.

The first session of the Working Group on Electronics and
Information Technology under the aegis of the Indo-Bulgarian Joint
Commission for Economic, Scientific and Technical Cooperation was
held in Sofia from 21 - 23 July 1999. An MOU on the Establishment
of the Working Group and a Protocol were signed during this meeting.
Secretary (West) visited Sofia on 23 - 24 September 1999 for
Foreign Office Consultations with Bulgaria. Secretary (West) called
on Ms Nadezhda Mihailova, Foreign Minister of Bulgaria and Mr
Valentin Vassilev, Minister of Trade and Tourism and Co-Chairperson
of the Indo-Bulgarian Joint Commission. Detailed discussions were
held with Mr Marin Raikov, Deputy Foreign Minister. The Instruments
of Ratification of the Indo-Bulgarian Bilateral Investment Protection
Agreement were exchanged during this visit.
The Chief of Army Staff paid a goodwill visit to Poland from
11- 15 May 1999.
MOS (External Affairs) and Mr Janusz Stanczyk, the Under
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of Poland, met in New York on
28 September 1999 on the margins of the 54th UNGA.
The Institute of Oriental Studies, Warsaw University, in
cooperation with our Embassy in Warsaw and ICCR, organised an
“International Conference of Sanskrit and Related Studies to
commemorate the centenary of the birth of Stanislaw Schayer (18991941)” from 7 - 10 October 1999. (Schayer had started Sanskrit studies
in Warsaw University in 1926.) Scholars from India, Japan, Germany,
Sweden, Italy, Finland and Russia participated in this Conference.
55

Europe

Participation from India was by Dr Satya Vrat Shastri and Shri Kunwar
Narayan. The conference was a big success and altogether 38 papers
were presented in the conference.
Foreign Office Consultations were held with Hungary during
the visit of Secretary (West) to Budapest from 20 - 22 September
1999. Secretary (West) called on Mr Zsolt Nemeth, Political State
Secretary and the then Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs. Detailed
discussions were held with Mr Denis Tomaj, Deputy Foreign Minister
of Hungary.
The Foreign Minister of Hungary, Dr Janos Martonyi,
accompanied by his wife and a 3-member delegation, paid an official
visit to India from 30 October - 1 November 1999. Dr Martonyi
called on the President of India. He held detailed discussions with
EAM on bilateral, regional and international issues. The Hungarian
delegation also visited Agra.
The Chief of Air Staff paid on an official visit to Hungary from
25 - 28 October 1999.
Mr Radu Berceanu, Minister of Industry and Commerce of
Romania, visited India from 13 - 17 November 1999. During this
visit, the 14th Session of the Indo-Romanian Joint Commission (IRJC)
and the 7th Session of the Indo-Romanian Joint Business Council
(IRJBC) was simultaneously held in New Delhi from 15-16 November
1999. Shri Murasoli Maran, Minister of Commerce and Industry, cochaired the meeting of the Joint Commission along with Mr Berceanu.
A Protocol of the Joint Commission Meeting and an MOU on
Cooperation between the EXIM Banks of India and Romania were
signed. Mr Berceanu had separate meetings with Defence Minister,
Minister of Petroleum, Minister of Heavy Industry and MOS for
Steel. Mr Berceanu also visited Agra.
Mr Marian Tomasik visited India on 12 May 1999 as a Special
56

Envoy of the Slovak Foreign Minister. He called on Minister of State
for External Affairs and Secretary (West).
The President of the National Council of the Slovak Republic,
Mr Jozef Migas, is scheduled to visit India from 13-17 March 2000 at
the invitation of the Speaker of the Lok Sabha.
The 4th session of the Indo-Slovak Joint Committee for trade
and economic cooperation is scheduled to be held in New Delhi
from 14 - 15 March 2000.
The Government of India has been closely monitoring the
developments in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY),
specifically in Kosovo since late last year. We issued statements on
the issue on 9 October 1998 and on 24 March, 25 March, 11 May and
22 May 1999. We reiterated that the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the international borders of the FRY were inviolable and must be
fully respected by all States. We urged that the crisis should be resolved
through peaceful means; through consultation and dialogue and not
through either confrontation or any military action unilateral or
otherwise. We called for commitments to the UN Charter by pointing
out that no enforcement action should be undertaken under regional
developments without UNSC authorisation. Such actions seriously
undermined the authority of the entire UN system. We were concerned
at the mounting human and material devastation which had among
other things led to far reaching ecological and environmental damage.
Our statements were made on the basis of well established principles
of Indian foreign policy.
We had welcomed all moves which could have led to a diplomatic
negotiated solution. We were happy that NATO action was terminated
pursuant to adoption of UNSCR 1244 which had the consent of the
Government of the FRY.
Secretary (West) visited Bucharest from 9 - 10 December 1999
for Indo-Romanian Foreign Office Consultations. He held detailed

Annual Report 1999-2000

discussions with the Secretary of State in the Romanian Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, Mr Ion Pascu, on bilateral matters and on regional
and international issues. Secretary (West) called on Romanian Foreign
Minister, Mr Andrei Plesu, Minister of Culture, Mr Ion Caramitru,
Defence Minister, Dr Victor Babiuc and the Chairman of the
Romanian Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Mr Gheorghi
Prisacaru. Instruments of Ratification of the Indo-Romanian
Agreement on Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments
were exchanged during the visit.
Secretary (West) visited Bratislava from 13 - 14 December 1999
for Indo-Slovak Foreign Office Consultations. He held detailed
discussions with the Director General in the Slovak Foreign Office,
Mr Frantisek Dlhopolcek on bilateral matters and on regional and
international issues. Secretary (West) called on Slovak Foreign Minister,
Mr Eduard Kukan, State Secretary in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Dr Jaroslav Chlebo and State Secretary in the Ministry of Economy,
Mr Peter Brno.
Western Europe
Western Europe is a region of considerable importance to India
both politically and economically. The European Union is lndia’s
largest trading partner and the second largest source of approved
foreign investment. India has traditionally maintained close and
friendly relations with the EU as well as with individual countries in
the region.
Europe is witnessing rapid moves towards greater integration:
economic, political, and strategic. The European single currency ‘Euro’
was adopted by 11 of the 15 EU member states on January 1, 1999.
The decision taken at the EU Cologne summit in June 1999 to create
a Common Foreign and Security Policy and to appoint a High
Representative for Foreign & Security Policy, marked tangible progress
towards the goal of political unity. The’ related decision to merge the

WEU into the EU marks a major step towards the evolution of a EU
collective self-defence. The expansion of the EU is bound to enhance
its political influence, although the economic costs will, in the short
term, be considerable.
India and the European Union are both addressing themselves
to the task of moving forward relations with the EU and its member
countries economically, commercially, politically and strategically.
During this period, some concrete measures towards the objective of
an intensified dialogue on global political and economic issues with
the European Union and its member countries have been put into
effect. A steady pace of interaction has been maintained at all levels
with the Governments in West Europe. The frequency of high-level
exchanges between India and the countries of Western Europe is
indicative of a mutual recognition of the advantages of, and need for,
closer interaction and co-operation.
The dialogue which has been conducted with various West ,Asian
countries, has led to a better understanding of lndia’s position on
various issues including on non-proliferation and disarmament. There
has also been a considerable growth in bilateral economic ties with
these countries as well as an all-round diversification in various fields
of co-operation.
The trend of warming and deepening of relations with the EU
and its member countries was amply demonstrated in the reaction of
these countries to the Kargil intrusions. There was a clear recognition
that the situation had been caused by cross-border infiltration and
violation of the Line of Control. India’s restraint throughout the crisis
in not crossing the LOC was also acknowledged and appreciated.
Their support and understanding of lndia’s position and concerns
was clearly reflected in individual country statements as well as those
of the EU.
India’s relations with France have gained momentum over the
year. The high-level political dialogue which was initiated with the
57

Europe

visit of French President Jacques Chirac in January 1998 continued
throughout 1999 as well.
The momentum of the relationship is demonstrated by the
numerous ministerial visits from both sides over the year: EAM visited
France on May 26-27, 1999 for bilateral talks and to attend the OECD
Ministerial Conference held in Paris. He also had meetings with French
President Chirac, Foreign Minister Vedrine, National Assembly
President Laurent Fabius and Senate President Christian Poncelet
during the visit. The visit provided an opportunity to extensively brief
the French side and place matters relating to the Kargil developments
in perspective. Jean Claude Gayssot, French Minister of Capital Works,
Transport and Housing, visited India in February 1999; Mr Claude
Allegre, French Minister for Higher Education, Research and
Technology in November 1999; Louis Besson, French Minister for
Public Works, Housing and Transport in December 1999; and Mr.
Francois-Poncet, Co-Chairman, lndo-French Initiative Forum in
December 1999.
Two rounds of talks were held under the lndo-French Strategic
Dialogue in January and July 1999. The Dialogue was instituted
following a high-level decision taken during the Indian Prime Minister’s
visit to Paris in September 1998 and aimed at facilitating structured
and regular discussions on issues of core importance to both sides.
The lndo-French Initiative Forum, a high-level non-governmental
group of eminent personalities set up advise on ways of diversifying
and enriching the bilateral relationship, held two meetings in February
and September 1999. Foreign Office Consultations were held on June
30, 1999 in Paris. The Indo-French Joint High Committee on Defence,
a committee set up to examine the possibilities for defence cooperation, including defence industrial co-operation, held its second
meeting on July 5-6, 1999. The lndo-French Joint Working Group on
Energy held its first meeting on 15-16 March 1999 in New Delhi.
The lndo-French Water Week and the Higher Education in France
58

Forum were organised in India in November 1999. The France-India

Annual Report 1999-2000

a positive ambience for promoting bilateral exchanges and
cooperation. The visits of EAM and Principal Secretary to Prime
Minister, to the U.K in January and February 1999 respectively were
instrumental in an enhanced understanding of our concerns and
position on various issues.
Visits of senior British Ministers including Ms. Patricia Hewitt,
Secretary of State for Economy (February), Mr. John Prescott, Deputy
Prime Minister and Secretary of State for Environment and Transport

59

Europe

first Indian origin Minister in the British Cabinet and has responsibility
for the UK’s relations with Europe and visa/consular matters.
Interaction between India and Germany at the very highest
levels, as well as the people-to-people level has been substantial.
Germany is India’s largest trade partner in Europe and second largest
worldwide, with a bilateral trade of around DM9 billion and a major
technology and investment source with total approved investment of
over Rs 64 billion. However, economic relations witnessed a downturn
in the year with a slump in bilateral trade.
Germany was very supportive of India during the Kargil crisis. It
was the term President of the EU as the crisis unfolded. The numerous
EU statements issued in connection with Kargil clearly acknowledged
that the confrontation was triggered off by infiltration into the Indian
side of the LOC.
EAM’s visit to Germany on September 30- October 1, 1999
facilitated detailed discussions with the German President Rau and
Vice-Chancellor & Foreign Minister Fischer on issues of bilateral,
regional and multilateral importance. The visits of National Security
Advisor Brajesh Mishra to Germany in February and again in July
1999 were also marked by substantive and productive meetings. Prof.
Dr. Klaus Gretschmann, Director-General, Department of Economic
& Financial Affairs, and Personal Representative of Chancellor
Schroeder visited India on September 19-21, 1999 and had useful
interaction with Indian officials as well as with the Indian business
community. Dr. Theo Sommer, co-chairman of the Indo-German
Consultative Group and publisher of the influential “Die Zeit”, visited
in May and November 1999.
Parliamentary exchanges were dynamic with visits by Bundestag
Foreign Affairs Committee chairman, Mr. Hans Uirich Klose in April
1999 and by Bundesrat President Prof. Dr. Kurt Biedenkopf in
December 1999. State level interaction was appreciable with visits to
60

India of the State Secretary for Economics of Bavaria in February
1999 and of Deputy Minister-President of Baden Wuerttemberg in
August 1999 and visits to Germany of the Chief Minister of Kerala
and Deputy Chief Minister of Rajasthan.
The high-level lndo-German Consultative Group, a Group of
eminent personalities which was set up to monitor ongoing
developments and trends in Indo-German relations, and suggest
policy measures for up-gradation of bilateral relations from a long
term perspective, held its eighth meeting on November 13 & 14,
1999 in Bangalore. The meeting generated useful ideas for the further
strengthening of bilateral relations, especially in the economic,
commercial and technological sectors.
Mr. Sebastian Edathy, Member of the ruling Social Democratic
Party and the German Bundestag visited India on February 4-5, 2000.
Mr. Gunter Eymael, Vice-Minister for Economics, Transportation,
Agriculture & Viniculture from the Germany Federal State of
Rheinland also visited India on January 26- February 3, 2000.
The Indo-German Consultative Group was reconstituted in
December 1999 and Dr. I.P. Singh, retired Indian diplomat, has taken
over as the Indian co-Chairman.
National Security Adviser, Shri Brajesh Mishra would visit
Germany on 4-6 February 2000 to participate in the 36th Munich
Conference on Security Policy.
Relations with Austria entered into a new phase with the
exchange of the first Head of State level visit between India and
Austria. Rashtrapatiji visited Austria from 7-11 November 1999 and
exchanged views with the Austrian President, Thomas Kiestil and
the Federal Chancellor, Viktor Klima. The visit has led to an enhanced
understanding of lndia’s position and concerns on various issues.
Rashtrapatiji’s visit to Austria coincided with the celebration of

Annual Report 1999-2000

50 years of diplomatic relations between India and Austria, which
was marked by a number of cultural events and seminars in both
countries. During the visit, the Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement
and the Bilateral Investment Protection and Promotion Agreement
were also signed. The lndo-Austrian Joint Commission met in Vienna
from 14-15 October 1999 to renew bilateral trade and commerce.
The first round of Foreign Office Consultations is scheduled for the
year 2000.
Italy has emerged as lndia’s fourth largest export market in the
EU. India’s US$ 2 billion annual bilateral trade with Italy constitutes
nearly 3% of lndia’s global trade and Italian investment in India has
reached US$ 700 million. A number of Indo-Italian Joint Ventures
are functioning satisfactorily in India.
The Italian Government offered food aid worth US$1.6 million
for the victims of the cyclone, which struck the state of Orissa in
November 1999. In November ’99. Italy announced a grant of US$ 1
million for the national programme of eradication of poliomyelitis in
India. The project is part of the framework of the Indo-Italian
Technical Cooperation Agreement. On the political front, the
beginning of the new millennium is likely to see an enhancement of
the high-level bilateral dialogue between both countries.
EAM visited Italy from 11-12th January 2000 and held wideranging talks with Italian Foreign Minister Lamberto Dini. Besides
reviewing bilateral relations in the political and, economic field they
discussed international terrorism and other international issues of
mutual concern.
We continue to enjoy excellent political relations with Spain.
The economic content of our relationship has been on the upswing
in recent years. An encouraging element has been the interest shown
by regional trade and commercial bodies in Spain in looking at India
as a commercial destination. The Minister of Industry, Commerce

and Tourism of the Province of Catalunya, (Spain), Mr, Antoni Subira,
visited India from May 13-14 along with a business delegation. The
President of Catalunya, Mr. Jordi Pujoi visited India from 6-8
December 1999 to attend the Indian Economic Summit 1999
organised by the World Economic Forum. In an effort to promote
bilateral trade, Spain has been chosen as the partner country for India
Expo 2001. Although total Spanish investment in India has not
exceeded the modest figure of US$ 28 million, the volume of bilateral
trade with Spain has been steadily increasing and annual bilateral trade
stands at US$900 million. Shri Dilip Lahiri has been appointed as
lndia’s next Ambassador to Spain.
Our cordial relations with the Vatican were strengthened with
the State visit of Pope John Paul II to India from 5-7 November
1999. (This was the Pope’s second visit to India. He had earlier visited
India in 1986. An earlier Papal visit to India took place in 1964). The
main objective of the Pope’s visit to India was to sign and release the
post-synodal exhortation of the Special Assembly of the Synod of
Bishops for Asia held in the Vatican last year. During the visit, the
Pope expressed an appreciation for lndia’s secularism and religious
freedom and for the respect that Indian culture has for all religions.
The Pope’s visit has contributed to enhancing the international
community’s understanding of India as a multi-religious, multi-ethnic
society which is committed to the maintenance of secularism.
The high-point of our relationship with the Netherlands was
the visit of Dutch Prime Minister Wim Kok from November 20-25,
1999. This was the first interaction at HOG/HOS level since 1993
and the first important interaction after our nuclear tests in May 1998.
The visit facilitated detailed discussions on issues of importance to
both sides, including bilateral relations, regional developments and
global issues. Co-operation in the economic and commercial field
prospered with bilateral trade amounting to US $ 1.3 billion. The
economic restrictions imposed by the Netherlands following the
61

Europe

Indian nuclear tests in May 1998, viz, freeze on government -to government macro-credit and project assistance have since been lifted.
The restrictions on military supplies remain in place.

The Visit of Greek Foreign Minister George Papandreou is
tentatively scheduled from 9 -14th March 2000. He is likely to be
accompanied by a delegation of Greek businessman.

Mr. Gerrit Ybema, Dutch Minister for Foreign Trade visited India
on January 9-13, 2000. Detailed discussions were held with the
Commerce Minister and apex industry associations.

Iceland: Mr. Olafur Ragnar Grimsson, President of Iceland is
expected to visit India from 21-26 March, 2000.

The year witnessed steady progress in bilateral relations with
Belgium, which is an important economic and political partner for
India. EAM’s visit to Brussels in September 1999 facilitated useful
and cordial discussions on bilateral relations, regional developments
in Europe and Asia and multilateral issues with the Belgian Deputy
Prime Minister & Foreign Minister Mr. Louis Michel. The discussions
lent a fresh impetus to ‘bilateral relations. The need to diversify our
commercial relations from the present diamond-dominated trade was
emphasised by both sides.
Ambassador De. Ruyt, Director General, Belgian Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, External Trade and Development Cooperation visited
India on February 3-7, 2000. He held extensive discussions at the
official level in the MEA.
Our cordial relations with Luxembourg received a boost with
the visit of Luxembourg Prime Minister Jean-Claude Juncker on
January 13-15,1999. This visit carried forward the progress made
during Rashtrapatiji’s visit to Luxembourg in September 1998.
The 4th Session of the lndo-Greek Joint Economic Commission
was held in Athens on July 8-9, 1999. Negotiations on the Double
Taxation Avoidance Agreement (DTAA) were also conducted with
the concerned Greek authorities. The first meeting of India-Greece
JBC Meeting was held in New Delhi on 22nd November, 1999. During
the lndo-Greek Foreign Office Consultations in New Delhi on
October 25, 1999, discussions were held on a wide range of bilateral
and multilateral issues of mutual interest.
62

Mr. Thorsteinn Palsson, the (non-resident) Ambassador-designate
of Iceland based in London is expected to present credentials to
Rashtrapatiji in February 2000.
The second round of Foreign Office Consultations with
Denmark on May 25-26, 1999 in Copenhagen, marked a resumption
of political dialogue. Official interaction continued with the visit of
Mr. C. N. Pedersen, Head of Asia-Pacific Department of the Royal
Danish Ministry for Foreign Affairs on 8th September. The visit
provided an opportunity for a review of bilateral relation and for the
annual aid negotiations.
The Foreign Affairs Committee of the Danish Parliament is
expected to visit India from 27 February to 2nd March 2000.
The first session of Foreign Office Consultations with Norway
in Oslo on July 5-6, 1999 enabled discussions on bilateral relations,
developments in Europe, and regional international issues. The
consultations represent a movement away from the distortions which
had entered into the relationship subsequent to our nuclear tests. Mr.
Nirupam Sen was appointed as our Ambassador to Norway.
Mr. Knut Vollebaek, Foreign Minister of Norway visited India
on 7-11 January 2000 at our invitation. He was accompanied by senior
officials and a 26-member business delegation. Extensive discussions
on bilateral linkages as well as on measures for augmenting economic
cooperation were held during the visit. The Norwegian Foreign
Minister also participated in the CII Partnership Summit while in
New Delhi.

Annual Report 1999-2000

Foreign Office Consultations with Sweden in Stockholm on May
27-28, 1999 provided an opportunity for official interaction on many
issues of mutual interest global significance. The discussions enabled
a resumption of political dialogue, which had been interrupted after
our nuclear tests of May 1998.

Mr. Pascal Couchepin, the Minister of Economy of Switzerland
would be visiting India from 15 - 21 February 2000. During the visit,
both sides are expected to sign the Draft Protocol for amending the
Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement and exchange the Instrument
of Ratification for the Bilateral Investment Protection Agreement.

Finland maintained a neutral position on Kargil crisis and
stressed bilateral dialogue between India and Pakistan. Seven Finnish
soldiers are stationed in J&K and Rawalpindi as part of the
UNMOGIP. The second session of Foreign Office Consultations
was held in Helsinki on July 8-9, 1999. The discussions which were
held at the outset of Finnish Presidency of the European Union from
1" July 1999 covered bilateral relations and developments in Europe.

Secretary (West) would be leading the Indian delegation to the
Foreign Office Consultations with Switzerland to be held from 1415th February in Berne. The two sides are expected to discuss matters
pertaining to bilateral relations, international terrorism and security,
etc.

India-Ireland trade, has shown a consistent growth during this
period. A bilateral Agreement for Avoidance of Double Taxation was
initiated in Dublin in October 1999. Mr. Philip Mc Donagh assumed
charge as the Irish Ambassador to India in September 1999.
Secretary (West) will lead the Indian delegation to the Foreign
Office Consultations with Ireland to be held from 14-15th February
in Dublin.
The relationship with Portugal has progressed very well, building
on the impetus given by our President’s visit to Portugal in September
1998. Bilateral trade stands in favour of India. Prof. Fernando Pacheco,
Portugal’s Secretary of State for Industry and Energy visited India in
March 1999 to explore new avenues for bilateral trade and commerce.
Parliamentary exchanges have been initiated with the visit to India by
a nine-member parliamentary delegation led by Dr. Almeida Santos,
President of the National Assembly of Portugal from 15-22 December
1998. An lndo/E.U Summit in Lisbon is scheduled for mid 2000.
India and Switzerland shared a stable commercial relationship
during this period. Mr. Waiter Gyger has been nominated as
Switzerland’s next Ambassador for India.

Mr. Walter Gyger assumed charge as Switzerland’s Ambassador
to India on 13th January 2000.
During Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in
Durban from November 12-15, 1999 India reaffirmed its support
for independent, sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Republic
of Cyprus and emphasised that the demand for recognition of a
separate state in the occupied part of Cyprus is unacceptable.
The fourth meeting of the Indo-Cyprus Joint Committee on
Economic, Trade, Scientific, Technical and Industrial Cooperation is
scheduled to be held in New Delhi from 6-7th March 2000.
The EU is lndia’s largest trading partner, with an annual bilateral
of US $ 20 billion in 1998. The balance shifted in lndia’s favour for
the first time in 1997 and gap was $282 million. The EU is also India’s
largest source of direct foreign investment, an important source of
technology and home to a large Indian diaspora.
Bilateral exchanges between India and the EU have been intensive
in the past year. The India-EU talks on Export Controls were held in
March 1999. The second and third Senior Officials’ Meeting were
held on May 4 & December 2, 1999 respectively. The second meeting
of the lndo-EU Policy Planners dialogue took place from 20-21 June
63

Europe

1999, in Bonn. EAM paid a visit to Brussels on September 30, 1999
and had a highly substantive meeting with Mr. Chris Patten, EC
External Relations Commissioner. A direct consequence of this
meeting was the India-EU talks which were held prior to the WTO
Seattle round in November 1999 to discuss positions on key WTO
issues. EAM had a second bilateral meeting with the EC External
Relations Commissioner on December 3, 1999, following which a
firm decision on launching the India-EU Think Tank Network as
well as the India-EU Round Table were taken.
The India-EU Ministerial Troika held its 12 th round of talks in
Helsinki on December 3, 1999. The Indian delegation for the talks
was led by EAM. The reconstituted EU-Troika was represented by
Ms. Tarja Hallonen, Finnish Foreign Minister, Mr. Francisco Xeiha
de Costa, Portuguese Secretary of State for European Affairs, Mr.
Chris Patten, External Relations Commissioner of the European
Commission and Mr. Roland Zinzius, Principal Administrator of the
EU Council General Secretariat. The meeting was highly productive
and facilitated detailed discussions on issues such as South Asian
security and prospects of Europe and Asia in the 21st century. An
India-EU summit along the lines of EU Summit meetings with
countries like the USA, Canada, China and Russia is proposed to be
held at the end of the Portuguese Presidency of the EU in June 1999.
Sir Leon Brittan, the then EC Vice President and Trade
Commissioner, paid a visit to India from April 11-12, 1999 as part of
the ongoing high-level economic dialogue between India and the EU.
The India-EU Joint Commission held its 10th meeting from January
14-15, 1999. Its recommendation that joint working groups be set up
to further India-EU relations in specific sectors such ad textiles,
environment, steel etc. has been acted upon. It is expected that these
working groups would hold the first meeting early in the year 2000.
The three joint sub-commissions on trade, economic co-operation

and development co-operation met in October-November 1999 and
had fruitful discussions on various aspects of India-EU economic
relations.
It is expected that certain initiatives taken such as the decision to
launch an India-EU Think Tank Network, an India-EU Round Table
and an India-EU Summit will further cement India/EU relations.
Chief Emeka Anyaoku, the Commonwealth Secretary General,
visited India in March and October 1999 for consultations in the
run-up to the biennial summit meeting of the Commonwealth Heads
of Government (CHOGM) held from 12-15 November 1999, in
Durban, South Africa.
Prime Minister led the Indian delegation to the Durban CHOGM,
which considered several issues of global significance under the broad
framework of the special theme ‘People Centred Development: The
Challenge of Globalisation”.
Finance Minister led the official delegation to the Commonwealth
Business Forum, which preceded the CHOGM.
The Final Communique which was issued at the culmination of
the Durban CHOGM reflected the parameters set by our PM during
the discussions on the recent political developments in Pakistan. The
Durban Communique condemned the unconstitutional overthrow
of the Government in Pakistan. It also endorsed Commonwealth
Ministerial Action Group’s recommendations for suspension of
Pakistan from the Councils of the Commonwealth.
India’s views and positions on the next round of WTO
negotiations were also reflected in the Fancourt Declaration, which
called for a full implementation of Uruguay Round commitments
and for improved market access for the exports of all countries,
particularly developing countries.
uu

64

Annual Report 1999-2000

8

The Americas

USA

T

here was increased dialogue and engagement with the United
States of America on a broad range of bilateral regional and
international issues besides the continuation of the ongoing
dialogue on security and nonproliferation issues. Regional
developments, particularly Pakistan’s armed intrusion in Kargil, the
military takeover in Pakistan, the evolving situation in Afghanistan
and the problem of terrorism, constituted important elements of
constructive dialogue with the US. The US also took steps to increase
cooperation in the energy sector. There was also a useful exchange of
views on WTO related issues in the context of the WTO Ministerial
Meeting in Seattle from 28 November to 3 December 1999. On the
other hand, the US continues to maintain many of the unilateral
restrictions it imposed under its domestic law in the wake of the
nuclear tests in May 1998. India also received broad support from
the US Congress on several issues of concern to India.
Following the nuclear tests, India had decided to engage in a
more intensive dialogue with the United States. Shri Jaswant Singh,
External Affairs Minister and Mr. Strobe Talbott, Deputy Secretary
of State were designated as Representatives to conduct this dialogue.
The talks are being conducted on the basis of the comprehensive

proposals that India has put forward on disarmament and
nonproliferation matters, our unilateral moratorium on explosive
nuclear tests, willingness to discuss converting this moratorium into
a de jure obligation, our offer to enter into constructive negotiations
on FMCT and reaffirming our policies of stringent control on export
of sensitive technologies. The dialogue is focussed on four issues.
These issued are: The CTBT, the FMCT, Export Controls and
Defence posture. On Export Control issues, following the Export
Control level meeting in New Delhi from 9 - 10 November 1998,
another expert level meeting was held in New Delhi from 29 - 30
March 1999.
There was an extensive exchange of views between July 1998
and January 1999. Following the dissolution of the Lok Sabha, it was
decided that the Government that assumes office after the General
Elections in September-October 1999 would take a decision on further
dialogue with the US on these issues. The dialogue was resumed in a
meeting between Shri Jaswant Singh and Mr. Strobe Talbott on
November 16-17, 1999 in London.
The dialogue has led to some progress in creating a better
understanding of India’s security concerns by the US authorities. The
two sides have agreed that the dialogue is useful for increasing mutual
65

The Americas

understanding and for the purpose of building broad-based relations
between India and the US and should continue.
Following Pakistan’s armed intrusion in Kargil and during the
Operation Vijay launched to evict the intruders, India kept the US
along with our other key interlocutors, informed on the developments
and the nature of the intrusion. The US took a forthright position
regarding Pakistan’s armed intrusion in Kargil and called for
withdrawal of the intruders. The US also expressed appreciation of
the restrained and responsible manner in which India conducted
Operation Vijay. India’s position drew support from the US Congress
and the US media.
India and the US also had the opportunity to exchange views on
issues of mutual concern during the meetings that Shri Jaswant Singh,
External Affairs Minister, had with Ms. Madeleine Albright, US
Secretary of State, at the margins of the ARF Meeting in Singapore
on 24th July 1999 and later on 24th September 1999 in New York
during the opening session of the United Nations General Assembly.
During these meetings, the US reiterated its desire for better relations
with India.
India and the US have also been engaged in consultations on the
problem of terrorism. As part of the dialogue on matters relating to
terrorism, official level talks were held in Washington from September
2-3, 1999 which was followed by another round of official level talks
in New Delhi on 17th September 1999. The two Government have
agreed to intensify cooperation in this area. The Indo-US Extradition
Treaty, signed on 25th June 1997 in Washington, came into force
after the exchange of the Instruments of Ratification on 21st July
1999 in New Delhi. The Treaty represents an important step in the
law enforcement cooperation between India and USA in the area of
counter-terrorism.
66

As part of the process of regular consultations on bilateral,
regional and international issues. Shri Brajesh Mishra, National
Security Advisor, visited the US from 26-28 October 1999. The US
Deputy Trade Representative, Susan Esserman visited India from
1st to 3rd November 1999 for discussion on WTO related issues, in
the context of the WTO Ministerial Meeting in Seattle. From 28th
November to 3rd December 1999. The US Secretary of Energy, Mr.
Bill Richardson visited New Delhi on 26th October 1999. During his
visit, the US Secretary of Energy discussed cooperation in the fields
of energy and environment. The External Affairs Minister. Shri
Jaswant Singh and the US Energy Secretary also signed a Joint
Statement on Cooperation in Energy and Related Environmental
Aspects. General VP Malik, Chief of the Army Staff, visited the US
from 8th to 17th November 1999 to participate in the Conference of
the Defence Chiefs of Asia-Pacific Countries in Honolulu hosted by
the US Commander-in-Chief of the Pacific Command.
Following the nuclear tests in May 1998, the US had imposed
certain restrictive measures against India. Effective from 1st December
1998, the US had partially lifted some of these restrictions till 21st
October 1999. In partial exercise of the fresh waiver authority given
by the Defence Authorisation Act 2000, passed by the US Congress
in October 1999, the US Government once again removed some of
the economic restrictions with effect from 27th October 1999.
However, non-basic humanitarian financing from multilateral financial
institutions is still subject to US restrictions. India regards these
unilateral restrictive measures as unjustified and counter-productive,
which should lifted in entirety. Several members of the US Congress,
including the Chairperson of the House International Relations
Committee. Mr. Benjamin Gilman, has written to the US President
to remove restrictions on the US support for loans to India by the
World Bank and other international financial institutions.

Annual Report 1999-2000

There was a considerable increase in bilateral dialogue between
India and the US during the period January to March 2000. The
dialogue on Nonproliferation, Security and Disarmament, which was
resumed in London in November 1999, was further continued from
January 18-19, 2000 in London. Apart from security issues, the two
sides also had extensive discussions on counter-terrorism, the hijacking
of IC-814, regional developments and President Clinton’s visit to India.
At London, the two sides announced the creation of the IndoUS Joint Working Group on Counter-terrorism to institutionalise
their cooperation in combating all forms of terrorism. The Joint
Working Group on Counter-terrorism held its first meeting from
February 7-8, 2000 in Washington D.C. The two countries agreed to
share their expertise, experience, resources and information in
countering terrorism and also agreed to work together to bring the
perpetrators of the hijacking of IC-814 to justice.
The Commander in Chief of the US Pacific Command, Admiral
Dennis Blair, visited India from January 8-12, 2000. This follows the
visit of COAS General Malik to Washington and Honolulu in
November 1999 and together represents the first steps in revitalising
Indo-US Defence contacts.
The US Treasury Secretary, Lawrence Summers, visited India from
January 17-19, 2000. Issues relating to trade and investment between
the two countries, the unilateral US restrictions imposed after the
nuclear tests and the resumption of the dialogue process in WTO,
following the collapse of the Ministerial Conference in Seattle, were
discussed with Treasury Secretary.
Several US Congressmen visited India in January 2000. These
included influential Congressmen such as Senator Tom Daschle,
Senate Minority Leader; Representative Sam Gejdenson, Ranking
Democrat in the House International Relations Committee; and,

Senator Sam Brownback, Chairman of the Senate Sub Committee
on Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs.
Visit of President Bill Clinton

President Bill Clinton is scheduled to visit India for five days
from 20th March 2000. Both sides expect that the visit of the US
President will pave the way for qualitatively new and closer relations
between the two democracies.
Canada
In the wake of India’s nuclear tests in May 1998, Canada had
decided to put political contacts with India “on hold”. However during
the current year. Canada has taken steps to re-establish political
contacts with India. A Canadian delegation led by Secretary of State
(Asia Pacific), Raymond Chan, visited India from 13-15 May, 1999.
During the ARF meeting held in Singapore in July 1999, EAM
had talks with the Canadian Foreign Minister Lloyd Axworthy. The
two Foreign Ministers also had the occasion to meet during the
Durban CHOGM in November. These meetings were utilised by
EAM to put India’s views on the question of CTBT and Nuclear
Doctrine in the right perspective.
Trade between the two countries has been on the rise. Indian
exports during the period January-August 1999 stood at Rs. 1,858
crores registering an increase of 10%. Indian imports from Canada
during the same period stood at Rs. 695 crores, up by 21%. A large
number of Indian delegations visited Canada during the year. Some
business delegations from Canada also visited India. Among the
important Indian visits, was that by a 7-member CII delegation in
August 1999. The delegation met the Chamber of Commerce besides
meeting with various Canadian business houses. These visits are
expected to result in further growth in economic and commercial
cooperation between the two countries.
67

The Americas

Latin America and the Caribbean
India’s relations with the countries of Latin America and the
Caribbean region have been traditionally problem-free and cordial.
The thrust of our policy towards the region is to strengthen and
widen the existing relationship and to give more economic content
to it. Our interactions and cooperation, both at the bilateral and
multilateral levels, have been mutually beneficial. India maintains, at
present, 13 resident diplomatic missions and one post in the region.
Eleven countries from the area have their resident missions in New
Delhi.
An important component of our bilateral relations has been the
mechanism of Foreign Office level bilateral consultations. Over the
years we have signed MOUs on the subject with ten countries from
the region and a few more are under consideration. The regular review
of bilateral relations has facilitated a better understanding of the
potentials and concerns of the dialogue partners and has led to
improved coordination on multilateral issues of mutual interest. Other
official and technical level visits have complemented the Foreign
Office level consultations. In the economic and trade arenas there
has been a growing interaction at the private sector level giving depth
to our relationships.
As a follow up of the “FOCUS LAC Programme” of the
Government of India, participation by Indian Export Promotion
Councils and business houses in international exhibitions in the Latin
American and Caribbean region as well as visits by trade delegations
to the region have helped dissemination of valuable information on
Indian commodities and technological advancement. Concerted
efforts have been made to overcome the barriers of distance and
language. In this context another important element has been the
liberalisation of many economies in the region opening up avenues
68

for enhanced cooperation. We have signed trade and economic
agreements with seven countries of the region and set up business
councils with some others. As a result of the growing understanding
between the private sectors of LAC and India, a number of accords
have also been signed between the apex trade and industrial bodies.
However, because of the economic difficulties that the region as a
whole continued to experience during the year, the actual increase in
overall trade with India was marginal and currently stands at US$
1.32 billion only.
Culturally India enjoys considerable goodwill in the LAC region.
Indian philosophy, yoga and Mahatma Gandhi and his teachings have
been a source of inspiration for many in the region. Between them
the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean have named more
than five hundred institutions, schools, libraries, streets and squares
after India and its leaders. As a mark of respect to our Father of
Nation, his busts and statues have been installed at important places
in a number of countries in the region. The latest being the one
unveiled at the campus of the University of Londrina in Brazil on
November 19 1999. The bust was gifted by the ICCR to the Centre
for Afro-Asian Studies of the University. At the institutional level we
have cultural agreements and cultural exchange programmes with
fourteen countries in the LAC area. Indian artists and academicians
have visited the region with the help of ICCR. Another interesting
aspect of our cultural relations with the Caribbean region in particular
is that some of the countries there have a substantial population of
Indian origin that still has a high regard for its cultural heritage.
Technical assistance under the ITEC Programme for students,
academicians and technical personnel for training and study tours in
India is another important mechanism by which we forge mutually
beneficial relations with the LAC countries.

Annual Report 1999-2000

The region has witnessed steady progress towards
democratisation and economic liberalisation. Presidential elections
were held during the reporting period in Antigua and Barbuda, El
Salvador, Panama, Argentina and Uruguay. In Guyana, a new President
took office due to the ill health of Mrs. Jannet Jagan and in Paraguay,
a new President assumed office after Mr. Raul Cubas resigned. The
countries in the region are steadfastly promoting regional groupings.
There has also been a tendency towards developing a Pan American
approach to national and international issues. The opposition of the
countries of the region to the US-sponsored economic and trade
embargo against Cuba is indicative of this approach. Keeping the
above in mind we have established institutional relations with regional
organisations. India has observer status with the Organisation of
American States (OAS), the Association of Caribbean States (ACS)
and the Andean Community. Our High Commissioner in Georgetown
(Guyana) is concurrently accredited as India’s Ambassador to
CARICOM. We have been participating regularly in the meetings of
these organisations. Mechanism for dialogue with the Rio Group has
also been established and we are seeking to set up an institutional
relationship with MERCOSUR as well.
The Former Minister of State for External Affairs, Smt.
Vasundhara Raje, led the Indian delegation to the Fourth Session of
the Indo-Cuban Joint Commission held in Havana from April 5-7
1999. During her stay in Havana, the Minister called on President
Fidel Castro and had meetings with other high dignitaries. The Joint
Commission provided an opportunity to review India’s overall
relations with Cuba and to explore avenues for further cooperation.
The meeting of the Trade Revival Committee between India and Cuba
was also held along with the Joint Commission. As agreed in the last
Joint Commission, the Work Plan of Cooperation for the period 19992000 in the field of Agricultural Research and Education was signed
in Havana on 13 August 1999. Secretary, Department of Science &

Technology, visited Cuba on 28-29 September 1999. Under the S&T
agreement, the Protocol for Cooperation in Science & Technology
between India and Cuba for 1999-2000 was signed during the visit.
Mr. Jose Armando Guerra Menchero, Cuban Vice-Minister of
Foreign Affairs, accompanied by Mr. Miguel Angel Ramirez Ramos,
Acting Director of the Asian Affairs Division of the Ministry, visited
New Delhi from 24-27 November 1999 for Foreign Office level
consultations. During the visit the Cuban Vice-Minister handed over
a letter of invitation to our EAM from his Foreign Minister for visiting
Cuba. The Vice-Minister also requested for Indian assistance in next
year’s South Summit to be held in Havana.
The Former Minister of State for External Affairs, Smt.
Vasundhara Raje, visited Paramaribo, Suriname, as the leader of the
Indian delegation to the Second Session of Indo- Surinamese Joint
Commission from 9-10 April 1999. During the visit, she called on
President Jules Wijdenbosch and held discussions with other
dignitaries. The Joint Commission identified a number of areas of
bilateral cooperation.
Shri Ranjit Singh Kalha, Secretary (West), accompanied by Shri
Amitava Tripati, Joint Secretary (LAC), visited Colombia, Ecuador,
Argentina and Brazil from 5-19 June 1999 for bilateral consultations
and for briefing these countries on the Kargil situation. During the
visit, Secretary (West) handed over to President Andres Pastrana of
Colombia a formal invitation from our President to visit India. The
Colombian Government also awarded a concession to upgrade the
country’s Atlantic railway system to an international consortium of
which the Indian public sector undertaking RITES is a member.
The Minister of External Affairs held meetings with the Foreign
Ministers of Brazil, Jamaica, Cuba and Guyana in New York during
the UNGA in September in tune with our policy of high level
69

The Americas

interaction with the region. A meeting between former MOS(EA)
and the Foreign Minister of Trinidad and Tobago also took place
during the UNGA. These meetings provided an opportunity to review
our overall relationship as well as to identify new areas of cooperation.
During the discussion the Jamaican Foreign Minister supported India’s
right to a permanent seat on the UN Security Council .
The first meeting of the Joint Working Group set up between
India and Venezuela as a mechanism for bilateral cooperation in the
energy sector was held in Caracas from 12-15 July 1999, in which it
was agreed that the national oil companies of the two countries will
collaborate in R&D, training of personnel and collaboration in
engineering services etc..
The second Indo-Brazil Workshop of climatic research under
the Bilateral Science and Technology Agreement was held in Brazil
from 20-24 September 1999. Both sides had useful interactions and
identified areas including climate variability and its impact on
agriculture and vegetation, use of parallel processing in meteorology,
El Nino phenomenon and its implication on climatic pattern in
different parts of the globe and pollution control for joint
collaboration.
Dr. A.P. Kulshreshtha, Advisor, Deptt. of Science and
Technology, visited Mexican counterpart to discuss the development
of cooperation between the two countries in the field of science and
technology. He also visited the National Council for Science and
Technology of Mexico during which it was agreed that two joint work
shops would be organised, one in Mexico and another in India, on
Manufacturing Technology with the participation of senior scientists
working in different fields.
A Memorandum of Undertaking on establishment of diplomatic
relations between India and the Dominican Republic was signed in
70

Santo Domingo on 4 May 1999. For India, High Commissioner to
Jamaica with concurrent accreditation to the Dominican Republic,
Shri O.P Gupta, and for the Dominican Republic, Foreign Minister
Mr. Eduardo Latorre signed the MOU.
A Bilateral Investment Protection Agreement (BIPA) was signed
on 20th August 1999 during the visit of Dr. Julio Caceres, Secretary
of Cooperation in the Ministry of Economy of Argentina to India.
Argentina is the first ever Latin American country with whom we
have signed the BIPA. Dr. Caceres has also participated tin the G- 15
ministerial meeting in Bangalore on 16-18 August.
The Chairperson and Managing Director of India Trade
Promotion Organisation, Shri Yogesh Chandra, visited Santiago, Chile
from 25-30 July 1999 in connection with the proposed India
Exhibition to be held in Santiago July 2000. During his visit Shri
Chandra held discussions with Finance Secretary, officials from the
Foreign Office, trade representatives and members of the IndoChilean Chambers of Commerce.
A programme to commemorate Gandhi Jayanti was organised in
Sao Paulo during the week 2-9 October 1999 in which a number of
workshops, lectures, yoga demonstrations etc. were presented. An
Autobiography of Mahatma Gandhi in Portuguese was also published
during the event.
Dr. Felipe Humberto Pachano Rivera, Rector, University of
Merida, Venezuela visited India from 18-22 October 1999 under the
Distinguished Visitors Programme of the ICCR. Separate MoUs
between the University Merida and the University of Delhi and
Jawaharlal Nehru University were signed during the visit.
This year, too, the Central American region was affected by natural
calamities in the form of hurricanes and heavy rains. India has offered
medical relief worth Rs. 5 lakhs to El Salvador.

Annual Report 1999-2000

Shri Parimal Kumar Das took over as India’s High Commission
for Trinidad and Tobago on 16 July 1999.
Shri H.K.Singh took over as India’s Ambassador to Colombia
on 28 September 1999.
Shri Tara Singh presented his credentials to the President of
Panama on 11 October 1999 as India’s Ambassador to that country.
The new Ambassador of Colombia Her Excellency Marica C
Betancur presented her credentials on 7 May 1999.
Her Excellency Mrs. Vera B Machado presented her credentials
to the President as the new Ambassador of Mexico to India on 27
August 1999.
The new Venezuela Ambassador His Excellency Mr. Walter
Marquez presented his credentials as Ambassador of Venezuela on
23 September 1999.
Dr. Hugo Fernandez Faingold, Vice President of Uruguay visited
India from December 5-9, 1999, at the invitation of our Vice President.
He was accompanied by an eleven-member official delegation and
five businessmen. This was the first high level visit of an Uruguayan
dignitary to India. During the visit the Uruguyan Vice President had
talks with our Vice President, Prime Minister, EAM and other
dignitaries and attended the Rajya Sabha session as well. Two MOUs
- one on Foreign Office Level Consultations and another on
Cooperation between the diplomatic academies of the two countries
and an agreement on doing away with visa requirement for diplomatic

and official passport holders of the two countries were signed. Mr.
Faingold also addressed a seminar on “Uruguay and MERCOSUR;
Business and Investment Opportunities” organised by CII. The
Council of Industries of Uruguay and the National Commercial
Council of Uruguay signed MOUs for cooperation with CII, FICCI
and ASSOCHAM. A street in Chanakya Puri was renamed after
Uruguayan national hero, General Jose G. Artigas. During his talks
with the Indian dignitaries the Uruguayan Vice President offered his
country’s assistance to India in establishing an institutional relationship
with MERCOSUR.
Venezuela was hit by heavy rains followed by mud and landslides
resulting in approximately 30,000 deaths and left over 2,00,000 people
homeless. The Government of India sent medical relief worth US$
20,000. Separately, more than ten tonnes of relief material meant for
the victims of Orissa Cyclone received as donations from the
Venezuelan entities and individuals was diverted for the victims of
the natural disaster in Venezuela.
Forecast of important events

Visit to India by the Cuban Special Envoy H. E. Alberto Valzco
San Jose from 19 to 22 January, 2000.
Visit to India by the Mexican Foreign Minister H. E. Ms. Rosario
Green from 15 to 19 February, 2000.
The Fourth Session of the Indo-Mexician Joint Commission from
14-15 February, 2000 in New Delhi.
uu

71

9
United Nations and International Organisations

Introduction

T

he year 1999 was an eventful one for the United Nations. The
Security Council had before it important matters concerning
resolution of conflicts in different parts of the world like
Kosovo, East Timor, Sierra Leone, Congo and Lebanon. Debate on
important issues relating to Security Council restructuring and
terrorism continued during the year in concerned Committees and
Working Groups. India remained actively involved in all these matters
and breakthroughs were achieved in the area of terrorism where India’s
proposal for a comprehensive convention on international terrorism
has received approval for initiation of discussions in September 2000.
Public support for India’s candidature to the Security Council was
forthcoming from Russia, Vietnam and Laos.
The General Assembly was held against the backdrop of an
ongoing debate on the concept of humanitarian intervention. Kosovo
and East Timor had sensitised the world on this matter and India
continued to be an active participant in the global debate on the
subject.
Political Issues in the UN

Security Council Expansion & India’s Candidature

The Open Ended Working Group of the UN General Assembly

72

on the Restructuring of the Security Council wound up its deliberations
for the year on 30.7.99 without making any substantial progress. No
decisions were arrived at on any of the key issues including categories
to be expanded, size of the expanded Council, the question of veto
and review mechanism. The report of the OEWG recommends that
the Group would continue its work and submit its report including
any agreed recommendation at the end of the next (54th) session of
the UNGA in September 2000.
Several countries addressed the subject of UN expansion and
restructuring in their plenary speeches at the 54th UNGA. Among
these, Vietnam and Laos expressed support for India’s candidature
to an expanded Security Council. Russia also expressed support for
India’s candidature earlier during the debate in OEWG.
The question of UN Security Council restructuring was also
debated under Agenda Item 38 during the closing days of the session.
The debate only revealed the wide differences in opinion and stands
that still exist. Support for India’s candidature was expressed by Cyprus
& Mauritius.
New NonPermanent Members of Security Council Selected

General Assembly on 14th October, 1999 selected five new
members who would begin their two-year term as non-permanent
members of the Security Council starting 1st January, 2000. These
members are :

Annual Report 1999-2000

a)
b)
c)
d)

Asian Group - Bangladesh replaces Bahrain
Latin American Group - Jamaica replaces Brazil.
East European Group - Ukraine replaces Slovania
African Group- Mali and Tunisia replace Gambia and Gabon
There will be no change in the OEWG Group in the year 2000.

The 54th UN General Assembly

The 54th session of the UN General Assembly officially
commenced on 14th September, 1999 with the election of Mr. TheoBen Gurirab, Foreign Minister of Namibia as the President of the
Session.
The 54th UNGA had a 172-item agenda dealing with political,
economic, social and development issues. An important aspect of
the 54th UNGA has been the focus and widespread interest on the
question of humanitarian intervention that was sparked of by the
Secretary General who led off the general debate by inviting the GA
to consider laying down terms and conditions under which
humanitarian intervention would be carried out. Opinion on the
subject was divided and it was rejected by NAM during the Ministerial
meeting on the margins of the GA.
The Indian delegation to the 54th Session of the UN General
Assembly was headed by the External Affairs Minister Shri Jaswant
Singh who addressed the Plenary Session on September 22, 1999. As
this was the last UNGA session of the 20th century, his address
surveyed the major developments of the century. The dominant
themes of the address were the global menace posed by terrorism,
including narco-terrorism, recent developments in Indo-Pak relations
and global nuclear disarmament. India’s interest in a permanent
membership of an expanded Security Council was reiterated with
EAM mentioning that by any objective criteria India’s credentials for
permanent membership are persuasive.
Other important developments from India’s point of view are

the expression of support for India’s candidature by Russia, Laos,
Vietnam, Cyprus and Mauritius in spite of the fact that debate on the
question of the UN restructuring was conclusive only in once more
reflecting the wide differences in opinions and stands that prevail.
India’s initiative in the Sixth Committee also resulted in adoption
of the Convention for Suppression of Terrorist Financing as well as
the resolution on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism
which has the provision for discussing India’s draft of a
Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism from
September 2000.
NAM

NAM Foreign Ministers’ Meeting was held on the margins of
the 54th UNGA on September 24, 1999 to coordinate NAM’s
approach to issues deliberated during the GA session.
The meeting adopted a statement, which covered political and
economic development since the XIIth NAM Summit at Durban. It
reiterated NAM position on Security Council restructuring, selfdetermination and terrorism. It also expressed deep concern at the
updating of strategic defence doctrines that set out new rationales
for the use of nuclear weapons. It expressed deep concern over the
new “Alliance Strategic Concept” adopted by NATO in April, 1999
and the negative implications of the development and deployment of
anti-ballistic missile system. The statement reiterated the decision of
the Durban Summit mandating the Coordinating Bureau to study
further the question of mechanism for peaceful settlement of disputes
between member states and rejected the so called concept of
‘humanitarian intervention’.
EAM in his address to the Meeting emphasised the need for
maintaining and reinforcing unity of the movement.

Terrorism

The phenomena of international terrorism was an important area
73

United Nations and International Organisations

of attention of the UN during the year. The Ad Hoc Working Group
of the Sixth Committee had before it drafts of the French sponsored
Convention on Suppression of Terrorist Financing which was adopted
and the Russian sponsored Convention against Nuclear Terrorism
which is still in debate.
The Sixth Committee of the UN General Assembly also adopted
the resolution on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism in
November 1999 during the General Assembly session. This resolution
contains provision for initiating work on the Indian sponsored draft
convention on international terrorism in September 2000. The
resolution also refers to the Egyptian proposal for convening a global
conference to discuss the issue of terrorism.
Important aspects of the Indian sponsored convention are that
they lay emphasis on responsibility of states and also covers terrorist
acts in all its aspects. All previous international conventions on
terrorism concentrated only on specific acts of terrorism e.g.. terrorist
bombing, hijacking, etc.
The Convention on Suppression of Terrorist Finance and the
resolution on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism were
subsequently adopted by the main GA on 9th December, 1999.
UN Security Council on October 19, 1999 adopted resolution
No. 1269 condemning all acts of terrorism and calling upon all States
to combat terrorism in all its forms. An important element of the
resolution is that it calls upon all states to prevent and suppress
preparation and financing of any acts of terrorism in their territories
and deny safe havens to terrorists. The resolution was adopted at the
initiative of Russia.
Peacekeeping

UNIFIL, Lebanon: The UN Security Council on 30.7.99 voted
to extend the mandate of the UN Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
for a further period of six months until end January 2000. In its

74

unanimous resolution the Council reiterated its strong support for
the territorial integrity, sovereignty and political independence of
Lebanon within its internationally recognised borders. It also stresses
the need for urgent implementation of its resolution 425 of 1978
which initially set up the UNIFIL to confirm the withdrawal of Israeli
forces from Southern Lebanon, restore international peace and
security and assist Lebanon to re-establish its authority in the area.
India had contributed the IInd Battalion of the 4th Gorkha
Regiment to UNIFIL. The battalion completed its one year term of
duty in November 1999 and has been replaced by a battalion from
the Madras Regiment.
Democratic Republic of Congo: On 10.7.99 in Lusaka, the
Heads of State of the Democratic Republic of Congo, Namibia,
Rwanda, Uganda and Zimbabwe and the Minister of Defence of
Angola signed an agreement for the cessation of hostilities between
all the belligerent forces in the Democratic Republic of Congo. The
representatives of the rebel forces The Rally for a Democratic Congo
and the Movement for the Liberation of the Congo declined to sign.
The agreement contains modalities for implementation of a ceasefire and establishment of a joint military commission comprising two
representatives from each party under a neutral Chairperson to be
appointed by the OAU in consultation with the parties.
It also contains provisions for the constitution, facilitation and
deployment of an “appropriate force” by the UN in collaboration
with OAU.
In anticipation of requirement of peacekeeping troops, the UN
Department of Peacekeeping operations has initiated contingency
planning and approached various countries, including India, to provide
troops.
India has already contributed 20 Army officers as Military liaison
officers for the UN Mission in Congo.

Annual Report 1999-2000

UNOMSIL, Sierra Leone: A peace agreement was signed
between the Government of Sierra Leone and the Revolutionary
United Front of Sierra Leone in Lome on 7.7.99.
UN Security Council on October 22, 1999 passed resolution No.
1270 establishing the UN Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). The
resolution authorises deployment of a 6000-strong UN peacekeeping
force in Sierra Leone.
The first group of these peacekeepers arrived in Sierra Leone on
29th November,1999. Among other tasks, the UN Mission in Sierra
Leone will assist the Government in the implementation of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration plan, and monitor
adherence to the cease-fire assistance. The peacekeeping troops will
work together with some 220 UN military observers already on the
ground in Sierra Leone.

parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the months of July and October
1999 for an initial period of one year.
Kosovo: International efforts towards resolving the crisis in
Kosovo culminated in an agreement being hammered out and
legitimised vide the UN resolution No. 1244 of June 10, 1999 whereby
Yugoslav forces would withdraw from Kosovo to make way for the
entry of an international force with NATO at its core as well as a
parallel civilian interim administration under the UN flag. The UN
resolution on Kosovo clearly indicates that the political solution for
Kosovo will be based on principles enunciated by the G-8.
The UN presence in Kosovo with the acronym UNMIK (United
Nations Interim Administrative Mission in Kosovo) has four main
components, each with a partner agency.
u Interim civil administration: the United Nations;

India has confirmed contribution of 2 Infantry battalions (of
which one has already been deployed), a level-3 medical unit, a quick
reaction company and a medium helicopter transport unit along with
an aviation refuelling unit for UNAMSIL. With complete deployment
of the above military configuration, India will be the single largest
contributor of troops in UNAMSIL. Other major troop contributors
are Nigeria, Kenya and Ghana. Maj. Gen. Vijay Kumar Jetley of India
has been appointed as the Force Commander of UNAMSIL. Prior
to the creation of UNAMSIL, the UN had only an observer mission
in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL).

u

Humanitarian affairs: the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNCHRR);

u

Institution-building: the Organisation for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE); and

u

Reconstruction: the European Union.

In a related development, Mr. Oluyemi Adeniji, a senior diplomat
from Nigeria, has been appointed as UNSG’s Special Representative
and Head of UNAMSIL, on 19th November, 1999.

East Timor

Bosnia: UN Security Council vide its resolution No. 1247 dated
18.6.99 has extended the mandate of UNMIBH upto 21.2.2000. India
has contributed 134 civilian police officers for the UN Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. These officers were deployed in various

India has contributed 88 civilian police officers to UNMIK. The
officers were deployed in Kosovo in early December 1999. In addition,
two companies of CRPF Rapid Action Force have also been
committed for UNMIK by the Indian government.
A major breakthrough on the question of East Timor was reached
when the Foreign Ministers of Indonesia and Portugal, in the presence
of the UN Secretary General signed two agreements on 5.5.99
concerning details for holding of a ballot to decide the question of
autonomy for East Timor.
After some initial delay, consultative balloting was finally held in
75

United Nations and International Organisations

East Timor on 30th August, 1999. The exercise saw 438,968 persons
or 98% of the registered voters cast their ballot. Results of the ballot
announced by the UN Secretary General on 3rd September, 1999
indicated that a total of 344, 580 or 78.5% of the voters had voted
against the proposed special autonomy status, thereby indirectly opting
for ultimate independence. The balloting was followed by an escalation
of violence and fighting between the pro-independence and prointegration factions in the Island.
In response to widespread international reaction to the killings
and the humanitarian crimes which followed, the UN Security Council
adopted Resolution No. 1264 on 15th September, 1999 and gave
approval for the deployment of a multinational peacekeeping force
in East Timor. The multinational task force, going by the acronym
INTERFET (International Force in East Timor) consists mainly of
the Australian troops with contributions in various forms also from
Thailand, the UK, France, Canada, the US, Singapore, New Zealand
and some others.
This was followed by the Security Council resolution No. 1272
(1999) of 25th October, 1999 which established the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) as a Chapter
VII exercise. The resolution empowers UNTAET with the overall
responsibility for the administration of East Timor and also gives it
legislative and judicial powers. The resolution gives mandate for
UNTAET for an initial period until 31st January, 2001.
A Donor’s Meet for East Timor was held in Tokyo from 16-17,
December,1999 under the co-chairmanship of World Bank and
UNTAET. The donors pledged a total of US$ 522 million in a three
year programme to accelerate the nation building process
Afghanistan

International efforts under the aegis of the UN to find a peaceful
solution to the Afghan problem continued through out the year
without any success. The group of 6+2 held their last meeting in

76

Tashkent on 19-20 July, 1999, where they reiterated that negotiations
for a peace settlement in Afghanistan must be conducted under the
UN auspices in a two-stage manner, the first stage consisting of
confidence building measures including immediate and unconditional
ceasefire as well as direct negotiations and followed by the second
stage where the Afghans would themselves draw up basic principles
for a future Afghan State. Almost immediately after 6+2 meeting in
Tashkant, the Taliban launched an offensive on July 28,1999 against
other factions.
On 27th August, 1999 the UN held an open debate on
Afghanistan in which India also participated. The debate generally
saw countries taking tough positions against the Taliban.
Indian statement during the debate noted that the criminal
conduct of Taliban had negative implication for peace and security in
Afghanistan and the region. India also drew attention to international
terrorist groups who find a safe haven in Afghanistan and the
dangerous nexus between the Taliban, terrorism and the drug mafias
operating in the region. India called upon the Security Council and
the international community to take meaningful and effective measures
in this regard.
The Security Council on 15.10.99 passed resolution No. 1267 on
the situation Afghanistan. The resolution calls upon all States to deny
permission to any Taliban owned or leased aircraft to take off from
or land in their territory and also freeze funds and other financial
resources of the Taliban. This is the first time that elements of
sanctions are included in a Security Council resolution on Afghanistan.
India played an active role in the formulation of the resolution.
The sanctions on the Taliban came into effect on 14th November,
1999.
Iraq

The UN Security Council remained engaged on the question of

Annual Report 1999-2000

sanctions against Iraq for a considerable part of the year. At the centre
of their discussions were two drafts concerning economic sanctions
against Iraq. The first, a Russian resolution supported by China,
France, Malaysia and Namibia and the second one proposed by Britain
with the support of the US. The two drafts, while having common
elements on the strengthening of mechanisms for verification of
weapons and inspection systems, differed greatly on the question of
easing of sanctions.
The Security Council finally adopted Resolution No. 1284 (1999)
on 17th December, 1999.
This so-called “Omnibus” or “Comprehensive resolution
authorises the creation of a successor body to UNSCOM called
UNMOVIC (UN Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission), for the verification of compliance by Iraq of various
resolutions, particularly UNSCR 687(1991).
Once UNMOVIC and the IAEA report that Iraq has been
cooperating in all respects with their reinforced monitoring system
for a period of 120 days, the sanctions would be suspended for 120
days, renewable by the Council.
Ceiling for the export of Iraqi oil under the “oil for food”
programme has been removed.
The United Nations programme of humanitarian assistance to
Iraq known as Oil For Food Programme continued to be regularly
extended by the Security Council.
Iraq however has given oral notification on 20th November 1999
that it rejects further extension of Oil-for-Food programme and
informed the UN that it would not renew the Memorandum of
Understanding governing the Council’s Oil-for-Food programme.
South Asia Task Force

The SATF was set up in 1988 following the nuclear tests in South

Asia. Members of the SATF are Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada,
China, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, Russia,
United Kingdom, United Sates, European Union and Ukraine.
The SATF held an official level meeting in Kyiv on 23rd June,
1999. In addition to the expected calls to both India and Pakistan to
adhere to the CTBT and expression of concern at the absence of
progress in the implementation of UNSCR 1172, reference was also
made to the fighting in Kargil.
The SATF also met at the official level in New York on September
7 and November 5, 1999. It is understood that the general sense in
New York was that the group had not been able to achieve much and
there was no decision on future action except that the members should
continue their dialogue with India and Pakistan and exchange views
among themselves. It is important to note that France was the only
member to insist that SATF should be wound up and that the dialogue
should be pursued at bilateral levels. Other members particularly the
US, the UK and China, wanted the group to continue.
Indo-Pak Matters

Atlantique Episode: The Secretary General of the UN
expressed regrets over the loss of lives following the downing of the
Pakistani Atlantique surveillance aircraft by the Indian Airforce and
concern at repeated incidents between India and Pakistan. He also
urged that differences between the two countries be resolved by
peaceful means.
The Security Council did not accept China’s proposal to issue a
Presidential Statement on the subject.
Pakistan took the matter to the International Court of Justice,
The Hague and the matter is under examination by the ICJ.
Kargil: In his report on the Work of the Organisation, the
Secretary General mentioned that the recent upsurge of fighting along
77

United Nations and International Organisations

and across the line of control in Kashmir, specially in the Kargil area
is a reminder of the fragility of the situation in this region. The SG
also stressed the need to put the Lahore Process back on track.
Separately, the Kargil issue was also touched upon in the statement
issued at the end of the G-8 Summit on 20th June, 1999, where deep
concern was expressed about continuing military confrontation in
Kashmir following the infiltration of armed intruders which violated
the Line of Control. The G-8 statement also called for restoration,
and full respect in future for the Line of Control, thus vindicating
India’s stand.
Hague Peace Conference

To commemorate the centenary of First Hague Peace Conference
of 1899, the Netherlands and the Russian Federation organised an
Intergovernmental Conference (IGC) in The Hague from 17-19 May,
1999 to be followed by the Intergovernmental Conference at St.
Petersburg from 22-25 June, 1999.
The two IGCs were preceded by an NGO event at The Hague
on May 11-15,1999. The basic idea was to provide an alternative forum
for discussions on matters relating to disarmament, human security,
resolution of conflicts, human rights, etc. and ultimately forward the
results of the conference to the UN as input during its discussions.
The results and suggestions of the meetings are supposed to nonbinding.
Disarmament and International Security
India’s stand on issues related to disarmament and international
security in multilateral and regional forums continues to reflect India’s
national security interests and the nation’s tradition of restraint and
engagement with the international community. In particular, India’s
commitment to non-discriminatory and universal nuclear
disarmament continued to be reflected in India’s pronouncements
and initiatives. At the regional level, India pursued purposeful dialogue

78

aimed at building confidence, trust and cooperative security structures.
The visit undertaken by the Prime Minister to Lahore in Pakistan on
the inaugural run of the Delhi-Lahore-Delhi bus service, the
agreements signed during the visit as well as the visit of the External
Affairs Minister to Beijing demonstrate that given the political will
the region is capable of responsibly managing the nuclear dimension
of bilateral security equations. This certainly is an important objective
for India.
The challenge of Pakistan’s aggression in the Kargil sector of
Jammu & Kashmir and its attempt to question the sanctity of the
Line of Control in violation of the commitments undertaken at Shimla
and Lahore was met through a skilful use of diplomacy and military
force. The international community has appreciated the restraint
shown by India during this conflict.
The series of bilateral dialogues commenced after the nuclear
tests of May 1998 were pursued during this year with the objective of
harmonising India’s security concerns with international concerns
on non-proliferation and disarmament. The results of these dialogues
are encouraging. In particular there is greater appreciation of India’s
security concerns and the underpinning of restraint and responsibility
in India’s conduct and policies post May 1998.
United Nations General Assembly

India participated in the First Committee of the 54th United
Nations General Assembly held in New York from October 11November 12, 1999. India put forward its traditional resolutions on
the ‘Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons’
adopted by the General Assembly by 104 votes in favour, 42 against
and 17 abstentions, and on the ‘Role of Science and Technology in
the Context of International Security and Disarmament’, adopted by
the General Assembly 98 votes in favour, 46 against and 19
abstentions. In addition, a new resolution which was introduced by
India last year, to highlight the dangers associated with hair-trigger

Annual Report 1999-2000

alert of nuclear Weapons leading to risks of accidental or unauthorized
launch of nuclear weapons, was adopted by the General Assembly by
104 votes in favour, 43 against and 17 abstentions. India projected its
national policy on Nuclear Disarmament and was actively involved
in deliberations on a number of resolutions in the First Committee.
Conference on Disarmament

The Conference on Disarmament (CD) could not undertake any
substantive negotiations during 1999 in the absence of adoption of
its Programme of Work due to lack of consensus on two issues Nuclear Disarmament and Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer
Space (PAROS). The areas on which consensus existed included reestablishment of the Ad Hoc Committees on FMCT and Negative
Security Assurances, and the reappointment of Special Coordinators
dealing with a ban on transfer of Anti Personnel Landmines (APLs),
Transparency in Armaments (T1As) and procedural/reform issues
relating to the CD. following the adoption of the traditional agenda
early in the 1999 session, the remaining time of the CD was taken up
in trying to craft a ‘balanced and comprehensive’ Programme of Work,
an exercise which remained inconclusive. The only important decision
adopted by the CD during the year related to the expansion of its
membership by admitting five new members - Ecuador, Ireland,
Kazakhstan, Malaysia and Tunisia. India along with a number of other
countries remained actively engaged in the work of the CD and efforts
to reach a consensus on its Programme of Work. India remains
supportive of a comprehensive and balanced Programme of Work in
the CD.

United Nations Disarmament Commission

The 1999 Substantive Session of the UTNDC from April 12-30
in New York addressed three issues, all of which were in the final
year of their deliberations in the respective Working Groups: The
establishment of Nuclear Weapon Free Zones on the basis of
arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the region

concerned (NWFZs); the Fourth Special Session of the General
Assembly devoted to disarmament (SSOD-IV); and Guidelines on
conventional arms control/limitation and disarmament, with
particular emphasis on consolidation of peace in the context of
General Assembly Resolution 51/45 N (CD). The UTNDC reached
consensus on Guidelines pertaining to NWFZs and CD. No
consensus was possible on SSOD-IV due to absence of agreement
on the Chairperson’s Paper concerning the Objectives and Agenda
of SSOD-IV. India’s position was that SSOD-IV should ‘reaffirm
the principles and priorities of SSOD-1’, which accord priority to
nuclear disarmament.
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC)

As an original state party to the CWC, India has endeavoured to
discharge, fully and faithfully, its obligations under the Convention.
On 29th April 1999, the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW), which is headquartered in The Hague, Netherlands
completed two years of its existence. During this period, the Technical
Secretariat (TS) of the OPCW has conducted more than 400
inspections at chemical weapons storage and former production
facilities, as well as at industrial plant sites in States Parties to the
Convention. A number of inspections have taken place in India, and
our cooperation with the OPCW in implementing the CWC has been
impeccable. As a member of the Executive Council from the entry
into force of the Convention, India has been playing an active role in
the deliberations of the Council to oversee the implementation of all
obligations assumed by States Parties. The lack of progress in
implementing some of the provisions of the convention that are of
interest to the developing countries, such as those relating to
International Cooperation and assistance, casts a shadow on what is
otherwise a unique disarmament treaty. It is also a matter of collective
concern that some States Parties have not provided full declarations
to the OPCW, adversely affecting the inspection schedules.
79

United Nations and International Organisations

Biological and Toxic Weapons Convention

India actively participated in the work of Ad Hoc Group of States
Parties to the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention (BTWC) in
Geneva during 1999 to negotiate a Protocol on the basis of the agreed
mandate. The Indian delegation continued to support strengthening
of BTWC through an effective Protocol for creating a nondiscriminatory and transparent compliance regime including the
unimpeded exchange of bio-technology for peaceful purposes.

International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)

The 43rd General Conference (GC) of the IAEA was held from
September 27 - October 1, 1999. The Indian delegation was led by
Dr. R. Chidambaram, Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission. After
25 years a resolution on amendment to Article VI of the IAEA Statute,
relating to the membership of the Board of Governors, finally received
the approval of the General Conference. The Board of Governors
was expanded by 8 seats from the present 35 to 43. The final proposal
increases the seats for Middle East & South Asia (MESA), the area
group India belongs to and is the Chairman of, by 1 elected and 1
designated seat. Presently MESA has 1 designated seat (India) and 3
regular seats as well as 2 floating seats shared between 3 area groups.
In the Committee of the Whole, India as the Chairperson of the
Group of 77, introduced the resolutions pertaining to Strengthening
of the Agency’s technical cooperation activities, Plan for producing
potable water economically, Extensive use of isotope hydrology for
water resource management, Staffing of the Agency’s Secretariat and
Women in the Secretariat.
Third UN Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space (UNISPACE-III)
The third UN Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space (UNISPACE-III) was held at Vienna in July 1999.
Professor U.R. Rao of India was elected as President of the
Conference. The Indian presence at the Conference was active and
80

positive: India participated in the Space Exhibition, the Technical
Forum meeting organised workshops, and also supported the Space
Generation Forum (for youth). The Conference adopted the Vienna
Declaration which essentially recognises the need for international
cooperation in the peaceful uses of the outer space and outlines
definitive recommendations to achieve these objectives.
Anti-Personnel Landmines (APLS) and Small Arms

India remains fully committed to the eventual elimination of AntiPersonnel Mines (APLs). The current humanitarian tragedy of antipersonnel mines has been caused by their illegal and irresponsible
exports and indiscriminatory use. India has always refrained from
exporting APLs and is of the view that the individual moratoria on
exports should be strengthened by developing a universal agreement
that would ban such exports and transfers. India is not a party to the
Ottawa Convention because our own legitimate security concerns
require us, in view of long land border, to make use of APLs in a
purely defensive mode. India’s responsible use of APLs has been
universally acknowledged, including by the ICRC. India is a major
contributor to UN demining efforts since its participation in the
Congo peace keeping operations in 1963. Experts from the Indian
Army’s Corps of Engineers have been associated with UN demining
efforts in Angola, Rwanda, Mozambique, Somalia and most recently
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
India is a party to the Protocol - II of the Inhumane Weapons
Convention and was actively involved in strengthening this Protocol
during the 1995-96 negotiations. India’s instruments of Ratification
on Amended Protocol - II on Anti-Personnel Landmines and
Protocol-IV on Blinding Laser Weapons were deposited with the
UN Secretary General on 2 September 1999. India put forward the
idea of a complete ban on use of APLs in situations other than
‘international armed conflict’ but this suggestion did not enjoy
agreement among all the countries. India had also made suggestions

Annual Report 1999-2000

for banning Remotely Delivered Mines (RDMS) as well as a complete
ban on all transfers of APLs and IEDs (Improvised Explosive
Devices). These proposals still remain on the table and India hopes
that they will enjoy greater support at the forthcoming meeting in
mid-December.
The First Annual Conference of States Parties to the Amended
Protocol II of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons
(CCW) was held in Geneva, 15-17 December 1999. The Conference
adopted a declaration calling on all States that have not done so to
ratify Amended Protocol II as soon as possible. India participated
actively in this Conference. While reiterating its commitment to the
objective of the total elimination of landmines, India supported a
phased approach that would balance the humanitarian considerations
arising from an indiscriminate use of landmines on one hand, and
their use for legitimate purposes of self-defence by States.
During the past decade, the issue of small arms proliferation has
become a major concern. These weapons have become more portable
and at the same time more lethal. Non-state actors such as terrorists,
drug smugglers and organised crimes syndicates find it easy to procure
these weapons and use it against civil societies and law enforcement
agencies. India has a strict arms licensing policy with production of
small arms and ammunition being undertaken in ordnance factories.
Proliferation of these weapons during the Afghanistan war had led
to large quantities of such weapons being smuggled into India in
order to perpetrate the low intensity conflict and step up acts of
terrorism and violence. India has repeatedly called for concerted
international efforts to stem illegal manufacturing and trafficking of
small arms and explosives. India has welcomed the call for an
international conference in 2001 and remain actively engaged in the
negotiations of a Firearms Protocol as part of the Convention on
Transnational Organised Crime.

Bilateral Dialogue on Confidence Building Measures
(CBMs); ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF)

India’s approach to confidence building has unilateral, bilateral
and regional aspects. The Bilateral Confidence Building Measures
(CBMS) have been negotiated both in the India-Pakistan and the
Sino-Indian context. With Pakistan, conventional CBMs were sought
to be supplemented with nuclear and missile related CBMs in the
framework of the MOU signed between the Foreign Secretaries of
the two countries at the February 1999 Lahore Summit. The agreement
also envisaged updating of conventional CBMs in the light of new
realities. However, Pakistan’s aggression in Kargil constitutes a setback
to this process.
As regards China, the brief hiatus in dialogue post-May 1998 is
now over. India and China have agreed to begin a security dialogue
following the visit of the External Affairs Minister to China. India
and China have a number of conventional CBMs in place. India would
be prepared to enter into bilateral restraint arrangements also in the
nuclear field taking into account the unilateral commitment of both
countries to no-first-use.
At the Asia-Pacific level, the only arrangement for a regional
security dialogue is the ASEAN Regional Forum. ARF has been
focussing on building confidence and trust and has built a basket of
proposals on CBMS, which can be negotiated. External Affairs
Minister led the Indian delegation to the 6th ARF meeting held in
Singapore on July 26, 1999. The meeting was followed by PostMinisterial Conferences (PMC) with the ASEAN. The ARF/PMC
meetings provided an opportunity for a wide range of bilateral contacts
including with the US, China, Japan, Russia and some ASEAN
countries. Unlike the ARF Meet in Manila last year when nuclear
testing by India was in focus, there was no discussion on India-specific
issues. There was a general reference in the Chairperson’s statement
issued at the end of the meeting for states that had tested nuclear
81

United Nations and International Organisations

weapons last year to exercise restraint, including by adherence to the
CTBT. In our bilateral contacts, India’s restraint on Kargil was
appreciated and the Chairperson’s statement endorsed our stand on
bilateralism. Officials from the Ministry of External Affairs and the
Ministry of Defence continued to participate in the inter-sessional
meetings of the Forum.
Environment and Sustainable Development Issues
The Seventh Session of the UN Commission on Sustainable
Development (CSD), established by the ECOSOC to review progress
in the implementation of Agenda 21 (Sustainable Development - Earth
Summit, 1992), was held from April 19-30, 1999. The main themes
were Tourism, Changing Consumption and Production Patterns,
Oceans and Seas, and, Small Island Developing States - Programme
of Action. The issue of oceans’ governance was a major point of
discussions in the Oceans and Seas segment. It was agreed that there
would be a more comprehensive review of oceans-related matters by
the UN General Assembly, which will be the sole forum in which
coordination of oceans’ issues will take place.
The VIIth Meeting of the Conference of Parties (COP-VII) of
the 1971 Ramsar Convention on Wetlands was held in San Jose, Costa
Rica from May 10 to 18, 1999. Among the issues before the
Conference was the question of adoption of guidelines for (a)
integrating wetlands conservation and “wise use” into river-basin
management and (b) for international cooperation under the
Convention. The Indian delegation actively participated in the
negotiations and ensured that India’s concerns were adequately
addressed, including by stipulating that the implementation of these
guidelines is to be in accordance with the national plans and priorities.
The meeting of the Subsidiary Bodies of the Convention on
Climate Change was held in Bonn from May 29 - June 11, 1999 to
discuss the flexibility mechanisms of the 1997 Kyoto Protocol to the
82

Convention, available to the developed countries, in order to achieve
their legally-binding caps on Green House Gases’ emissions. This
was preceded by a meeting of the Group of 77 and China on May 2930, 1999, at which India was appointed as the Coordinator and the
Spokesman of the Group on mechanisms of the Kyoto Protocol.
The meeting agreed that the priority should be accorded to the Clean
Development Mechanism (CDM), one of the three flexibility
mechanisms under the Protocol. The Group also agreed on a paper
outlining its perspectives on the CDM, which was submitted to the
5th Conference of Parties to the UN Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) which met in Bonn from October 25November 5, 1999.
The 5th Conference of Parties to the UN Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) met in Bonn from October 25November 5, 1999. It considered the implementation of the Buenos
Aires Plan of Action and in this context decided to have additional
meetings of the Subsidiary Bodies to help COP VI in arriving at
decisions as set out in the Plan of Action. In addition to its position
paper on the Mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol, G-77 and China
had tabled before COP V, additional papers on two of the Mechanisms,
viz , the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) and Emissions
Trading were tabled. India played a leading role in the meeting of G77 and China in this regard. The Conference also decided to authorise
the consolidation of a text for further negotiations on the Mechanisms
so as to be ready for adoption at COP VI.
Economic And Social Commission For Asia And The Pacific

The most important event relating to Economic And Social
Commission For Asia And The Pacific (ESCAP) from India’s point
of view was the Second Ministerial Conference on Space Applications
for Sustainable Development in Asia and the Pacific held in New
Delhi from November 15-20, 1999.
The Ministerial segment of this important conference was

Annual Report 1999-2000

inaugurated by the Prime Minister. The Conference was attended by
20 ministers from 27 ESCAP member countries participating in it. It
served as an excellent exposition of India’s achievements in the use
of space systems towards sustainable development and showcased
India’s capabilities for sharing its experience with other countries in
the region. The Delhi Declaration on Space Technology Applications
in Asia and the Pacific, unanimously adopted at the Conference, is a
landmark in regional cooperation with particular emphasis on national
capacity building and enhancing the regional capability in space
technology applications, through the participation of countries of
the Asia Pacific region.
In addition, there was the annual ESCAP Commission Session
held in April 1999 and the regular intergovernmental and other
Committee meetings, in which the delegations from India participated
actively .
Development Issues

The Working Group set up by the 53rd UN General Assembly
to prepare for the International Conference on Finance for
Development adopted its report at the concluding substantive session
on 27th May, 1999. An inclusive agenda list, incorporating issues of
interest to India such as, trade and reform of financial architecture
was the main feature of the Report in the drafting of which India had
a major role to play as one of the two Vice-Chairmen. The 54th
session of the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution on the
basis of these recommendations. The text of the resolution on
financing for Development was satisfactory from India’s view point
as it preserves the outcome of the preparatory process thus far and
sets in place a similar process on substantive matters. The Conference
on Financing For Development to be held in 2001 is expected to be
a high-level inter-governmental event, with ministerial level
participation.
The 54th UN General Assembly adopted by vote the resolution

on international financial stability with the US setting out their position
that the UN had no role to play in this area, which should be left to
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
United Nations International Narcotics Control Bureau

The 67th session of United Nations International Narcotics
Control Bureau was held from November 1-18 ,1999. The meeting
was attended from Indian side by Member, International Narcotics
Control Bureau. He criticized the UN International Drug Control
Programme’s policy of maintaining contacts with Taleban government
in Afghanistan and for ignoring Taleban complicity in the cultivation
of illicit opium crops.
Social, Human Rights and Humanitarian Issues
In the discussions on human rights issues in sessions of the UN
Commission on Human Rights, the Sub Commission on Promotion
and Protection of Human Rights, the Economic and Social Council
and the General Assembly, India’s participation was substantive and
constructive.
The 54th session of the UN General Assembly adopted 250
resolutions , 19 of which were on the strengthening of the machinery
for coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance by the
UN , with regard to 19 countries either recovering from conflict or
devastated by natural and man-made disasters. The Assembly
commemorated the 10th anniversary of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and decided to convene a special session in September
2001 to review the implementation of the goals of the 1990 World
Summit for Children. Assembly also adopted an Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination
Against Women (CEDAW) which was opened for signature on
October 6,1999 and will enter into force, once ratified by 10 states.
The resolution on right to development was voted upon.
83

United Nations and International Organisations

India participated actively in the 55th session of the UN
Commission on Human Rights held in Geneva from March 22 to
April 30,1999 and made significant contribution to the substantive
issues, consensus building and decision-making . The session was
preceded by meeting of 8 working groups of the Commission on
various issues mandated to these working groups, such as indigenous
people, migrant workers, children in armed conflict and child
prostitution and child pornography. India revived a resolution on the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights which was
adopted by consensus and was the leading sponsor of resolution on
Mainstreaming Technical Cooperation which was adopted by vote in
the session of UN Commission on Human Rights. India also piloted
a resolution on Regional Cooperation in the Asia-Pacific based on
the conclusions of the Workshop on Human Rights held in New
Delhi in February 1999. The resolution on the Right to Development,
cosponsored by India and presented by the group of Non-Aligned
countries, was adopted with out a vote in the Commission. India
worked with the US on a new resolution on Promotion of Democracy.
The resolution on Human Rights and Terrorism moved by Turkey
was cosponsored by India and was adopted by vote. The Indian
delegation made 36 interventions and statements and cosponsored
22 resolutions during the meeting of UN Commission on Human
Rights .
A number of eminent Indians continued to serve with distinction
as the members of important human rights mechanisms and treaty
bodies. These included Smt. Shanti Sadiq Ali (Member of the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination), Sh. Soli
Sorabjee (Expert member on the Sub Commission on Promotion
and Protection of Human Rights) , Sh. Kapil Sibal (ChairmanRapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights Working Group
on Arbitrary Detention), Sh. P. N. Bhagwati (Vice Chairman of the
Human Rights Committee and Regional Adviser for the Asia Pacific
Region for promoting technical cooperation in the field of Human
84

Rights), Sh. Abid Hussien (Special Rapporteur on the Right to
Freedom of Opinion And Expression). Sh. M. J. Ahmadi was
appointed as a Member of the International Commission of Inquiry
on East Timor.
The crisis in Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY)-Kosovo found
its reverberations in environment-related bodies e.g.. Commission
on Sustainable Development and the Commission on Human
Settlements (Habitat) .India argued against the politicisation of these
bodies by the introduction of such politically sensitive and divisive
issues.
The Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC)’s Substantive
Session was held from July 5-30, 1999 in Geneva. The ECOSOC
considered the reports of its various subsidiary bodies in the fields of
economic and environmental matters and social and human rights
questions. The high level segment during the session focussed on the
theme - the role of employment and work in poverty eradication: the
empowerment and advancement of women. The Ministerial
Communique issued on the focal theme adequately reflected India’s
position with regard to sustained economic growth being the key to
poverty eradication and employment generation.
India participated in the 21st Special Session of the General
Assembly to review the implementation of the Programme of Action
(POA) of the 1994 International Conference on Population and
Development, which was held in New York June 30 to July 2, 1999.
The Indian Delegation was led by Hon’ble Minister of State for Health
and Family Welfare, Shri Dalit Ezhilmalai. The final documents of
the Special Session reflected our concerns with regard to the creation
of an enabling environment to achieve sustained economic growth
in the context of sustainable development and eradicating poverty;
empowerment of women, resource mobilization, etc.
The Special Session of the Commission on Human Rights was

Annual Report 1999-2000

held from September 23-27 on East Timor against the background
of questionable procedures adopted by the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Bureau of the Commission.
India spoke against the establishment of an international commission
of inquiry as steps had been taken by Government of Indonesia to
restore normalcy and cooperate with UN and international agencies.
Further , such a move may have had the opposite effect of exacerbating
tension, leading to further conflict and confrontation.
India was an active participant in the 27th International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent held from October
31 to November 6,1999. India contributed actively to drafting of the
Conference Plan Of Action both during the preparatory process and
the Conference. Besides recalling its age old humanitarian traditions
and emphasizing its full commitment to humanitarian causes as also
the principles enshrined in the Geneva Conventions, India also
stressed the need to keep international humanitarian assistance with
in the ambit of the principle of state sovereignty.
India played an active role in the 50th Session of the Executive
Committee of the Office of The United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees in October, 1999 in Geneva and highlighted issues of
concern to developing countries such as economic and social impact
of the massive refugee flows into these countries. India’s statement
on the annual theme of the Executive Committee – “Strengthening
Partnership to Ensure Protection , also in relation to Security”–
stressed its commitment to the protection of asylum seekers, the
significant contributions made by developing countries to refugee
issues and the importance of international solidarity and burden
sharing . India also emphasized the need to tackle poverty which is
the root cause of number of refugee flows. India expressed concern
at the growing tendency of a number of signatories to the 1951
convention on the Status of refugees to derogate from its basic
principles and provisions.

Specialised Agencies
WHO

The Indian delegation contributed extensively in the deliberations
of the World Health Assembly in May 1999. A number of important
decisions including adoption of budget 2000-2001, the launching of
a campaign to enact a Framework Convention on Tobacco Control”
,as also on the Roll back Malaria Programme and the revised drug
strategy were taken .India outlined its fast track approach to meet the
target of eradicating polio by the end of 2000 with an ambitious plan
of National Immunisation Days.

ILO

The 87th session of the International Labour Conference held
in June 1999 unanimously adopted a Convention supplemented by a
Recommendation concerning the prohibition and elimination of the
worst forms of the child labour. The Indian delegation played a key
role in the deliberations and was able to get the poverty dimension of
child labour reflected in the text , in emphasizing the need to address
this root cause and to strengthen obligations related to international
cooperation.

FAO

The Food and Agriculture Organisation Council at its meeting
in Rome from 14-19 June, 1999, elected Shri Bhaskar Barua, Secretary,
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture
as Chairman of the Commission-II of the Conference. The previous
Chairman of Commission-II from India had been Dr. M.S.
Swaminathan.
The 30th session of the Food and Agriculture Organisation
Conference was held from 12-23 November in Rome. The Indian
delegation was led by Shri S.B.P.B.K. Satyanarayana Rao, Hon’ble
Minister of State for Agriculture. India was re-elected to the Council
as well as to the Finance Committee during the session.
85

United Nations and International Organisations

Dr. Jacques Diouf of Senegal was re-elected as the Director
General of the Food and Agriculture Organisation at the elections
held on November 13, 1999 during the 30th session of the Food and
Agriculture Organisation Conference in Rome.
UNESCO

Ambassador Koichiro Matsura of Japan was confirmed as the
new Director General of United Nations Education , Scientific and
Cultural Organisation on November 15 during the General
Conference of the Organisation held in Paris.
Elections and Appointments
During the year, India was elected to the following bodies:
1. Hon’ble Dr.(Mrs.) Najma Heptullah, Deputy Chairperson, Rajya
Sabha, was unanimously elected on October 16,1999 as President
of the Inter-Parliamentary Council of the Inter Parliamentary
Union. Dr.(Mrs.) Heptullah is the first-ever woman President in
the history of the Inter Parliamentary Union.
2. Executive Council of World Meteorological Organization
(WMO), for the period 1999-2003.
3. UN Commission on Narcotic Drugs, for the period 2000-2003.
4. UN Commission on Human Settlements for the period 20002003.
5. Executive Board of UNICEF, for the period 2000-2002.
6. Dr. P.C. Rao was re-elected as Judge of the International Tribunal
of the Law of the Sea (ITLOS), for the period 1999-2008.
7. Council of Administration (CA) and Postal Operation Council
(UPU), for the period 2000-2004;
8. Council of Food & Agriculture Organisation (FAO), for the
period 2000-2003.

86

9. UN Environment Programme (UNEP), for the period 20002003.
10. Shri V.K. Shunglu was elected as External Auditor of the
International Maritime Organisation (IMO), for the period 20002004.
11. Council of the International Maritime Organisation, for the period
2000 -2001.
12. Executive Board of WHO for the term 1999-2002.
International Law : Development and Activities
The 54th Session of the United Nations General Assembly
(UNGA) commenced on 14 September 1999. The report of the
International Law Commission (ILC) on the work of its fifty first
session was discussed. ‘The discussion centred on the various subjects
including: State Liability; State Responsibility; Reservations to Treaties;
Nationality in Relations to the Succession of States and; Unilateral
Acts of States.
During the session, the Sixth Committee (Legal) considered the
following agenda items including: Convention on jurisdictional
immunities of States and their property; United Nations Programme
of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider
Appreciation of International Law; United Nations Decade of
International Law; Outcome of the action dedicated to the 1999
centennial of the first International Peace Conference; Report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its thirty-second session; Report of the Committee on Relations
with the Host County; Establishment of an international criminal
court; Report of the Special committee on the Charter of the United
Nations and on the strengthening of the Role of the Organization;
Measures to eliminate international terrorism and; Review of the Statue
of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal.

Annual Report 1999-2000

The Legal & Treaties Division prepared briefs on all these topics
of ILC as well as Sixth Committee, for the use of the Indian delegation,
for making statements in the session.
Also during the session, a Convention for the Suppression of
the Financing of Terrorism was adopted. A resolution condemning
terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable was also adopted. The mandate
of the Adhoc Committee on Terrorism and to hold its meetings in
the year 2000 was also renewed.
The Thirty-second Annual Session of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) was held at
Vienna from May 17 to June 4, 1999. During the current session, the
major focus was on the Government contract Management and
support for privately financed infrastructure project as well as ways
of selecting participation companies core terms of project agreement,
legal issues of constructing, operating and regulating infrastructure,
duration of projects as well as extending or ending them, governing
law and settlement of disputes. Legislative guide aims to help the
government and legal bodies at the national provincial or local levels,
review adequacy of laws regulations, decrees and other legal texts for
carrying out privately financed infrastructure projects.
The Commission also discussed the Reports of Working Group
on Electronic Commerce of its Thirty-third and Thirty-fourth
Sessions, preparing uniform rules on digital signatures, other electronic
signatures, certification authorities and related legal issues, the report
of Working Group on International Contract Practices entrusted with
the task of preparing uniform law on assignment in receivables
financing. The commission also discussed the possible future work
on insolvency law and the prevailing view was that an exploratory
session of Commission should be convened to prepare a feasibility
proposal for consideration by the Commission at its Thirty-third
Session.

Pursuant to Resolutions of the Preparatory Commission of the
International Criminal Court, meetings were held at New York in
February, August and December 1999. During these Sessions the
Elements of Crimes and the Rules of Evidence and Procedure were
discussed. A separate working group has also been set up on the
definition of aggression.
The Legal & Treaties Division participated in negotiations, held
at: Tunis, Tunisia; Muscat, Oman; New Delhi, India, respectively from
8-9 February 1999, 11-12 April 1999, 20-22 October 1999 and 22
November 1999 for concluding extradition treaties with Tunisia,
Oman, Poland (second round) and Mangolia. In the 22 November
1999 meeting with Mangolian delegation, discussion also took place
on agreements on Mutual legal assistance in criminal matters and
civil matters. The Division also participated in negotiations held at
Astana, Kazakhstan from 26-28 July 1999, for concluding agreements
on Mutual legal assistance in criminal matters and civil matters. A
proposal received from Egypt for concluding an Extradition treaty
was also examined and advised upon. Proposals received from Hong
Kong, Egypt, Nepal, Bulgaria and Turkmenistan, for agreements on
Mutual legal assistance in criminal matters were also so examined.
This Division examined various extradition requests and requests
for mutual judicial assistance, received both from domestic as well as
foreign jurisdictions and rendered legal advice therein. Various requests
prepared by CBI, aimed to seek assistance from foreign countries in
ongoing criminal investigations including those with which there exists
no formal agreement in this area, were also examined by this Division.
Legal advice was rendered in all extradition court cases pending in
Indian and foreign courts.
The Division participated in the Meeting of Legal Experts of the
member States of Indian Ocean Rim -Association for Regional
Cooperation (IOR-ARC), held in Maputo, Mozambique, from 8-10
87

United Nations and International Organisations

December 1999. The important issue, inter alia, that came up for
discussion was the finalization of the instrument of acceptance.
Pursuant to a request from the United States, the Division
examined the status of ‘UN Standard Minimum Rules for the
treatment of prisoners’ in respect of India. Also legal issues involved
in a case concerning missing Indian war prisoners believed to be in
Pakistan were examined in this Division.
This Division attended the Diplomatic Conference on the
Adoption of the Second Protocol to the 1954 Hague Convention for
the Protection of Cultural Property. The Protocol seeks to make the
rules regarding grant of special protection to cultural property more
liberal. A simplified regime is expected to provide more flexibility
regarding the eligibility of cultural property to become specially
protected. Once a property is placed under special protection then
any violation of such property either by using it for military purposes
or making such property an object of attack will be treated as a serious
violation. This puts an obligation on the Parties either to try or
extradite the offender. The Protocol, also prohibits acts of hostility
directed against any cultural property and puts an obligation on states
to make such offences punishable. However, the concept of military
necessity has been retained and the Protocol lists out the conditions
under which the obligations may be waived in case of imperative
military necessity.
The 38th Annual Session of the Asian African Legal Consultative
Committee was held at Accra from 19-23 April, 1999. Officers of the
Division prepared briefs in various subjects that formed agenda of
discussion during the session. Those items include: Report on the
Work of the International Law Commission at its Fiftieth Session;
Status and Treatment of Refugees; Legal Protection of Migrant
Workers; Law of the Sea; Extraterritorial Application of National
Legislation; Sanctions Imposed Against Third Parties; The United
88

Nations Decade of International Law; Report of the Expert Group
meeting, New Delhi 11-12 February 1999; the Report of the UN
Conference of Plenipotentiaries on the Establishment of an
International Criminal Court; United National Conference on
Environment and Development; Follow-up and; Trade Law matters.
The Division participated in the second to fifth sessions of the
Ad Hoc Committee on the Elaboration of a draft convention against
Transnational organized Crime held in 1999 in Vienna.
The Division also participated in the negotiations for concluding
Bilateral Investment Protection Agreement with Bangladesh, Hungary
and Austria.
The 27th International Conference of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent was held at Geneva from 31st October to 6th November
1999. The Conference adopted a Plan of Action to the coming four
years. The Plan of Action is divided into 3 chapters i.e, Protection of
Victims of Armed Conflict; Humanitarian Response; and Health
Services and Humanitarian Principles. Under these three chapters
various goals have been identified and actions which are required to
be taken to fulfil those goals are proposed.
The Legal and Treaties Division prepared a note on United States
sanctions against India: A Case for Invocation of WTO Dispute
Settlement Mechanism. It coordinated with Haj Cell in constituting
new Haj Committee by clearing legal hurdles created by the members
of old Haj Committee by filing writ petitions in the High Courts of
Delhi, Allahabad and Jammu & Kashmir and Supreme Court of India.
Asia and Africa were represented in the Drafting Committee of the
Bio-Safety Protocol. Legal advice was rendered in handling the matter
of arrest and seizure of North Korean ship and another similar matter
of Vietnamese vessel.
The issue of the WTO requirement of a comprehensive legislation

Annual Report 1999-2000

at the National level on transparency in government procurement
was also examined in this Division.
This Division gave legal opinion on Pakistani petition before the
International Court of Justice (ICJ) on downing of Atlantique and
also organized consultation in evolving the litigatory strategy in this
connection. Also matter relating to the extent of the legal right of hot
pursuit in territorial waters contiguous zone and Exclusive Economic
Zone (EEZ) was examined in this Division and the legal opinion
rendered.
A seminar on “Issues Relating to the Implementation of
Intellectual Property Rights” was held from 15-16 November, 1999
under the auspice of the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee.
This Division along with the Ministry of Industry Coordinated this
seminar.
The Division participated in the meetings of the Core group
concerning various aspects of intellectual property rights constituted
under the HRD Ministry.
India has signed/ratified many bilateral agreements in various
fields during the year. A list of treaties/agreements entered into by
India with foreign countries during the year is given at Appendix-IX.
A list of instruments of Full Powers issued during 1999 for signing
treaties/agreements on behalf on India is at Appendix-X and a list of
instruments of ratification is at Appendix-XI.
Forecast of important events scheduled for the period of
January-February, 2000

In her first official visit of the new century, Dr. Gro Harlem
Brundtland, Director General of World Health Organisation , visited
India from January 6 to 8, 2000. She called on President, Prime
Minister, Health Minister and Chief Justice of Supreme Court. She

participated in the International Conference on Framework
Convention on Tobacco held in New Delhi from January 7-9. India
participated actively in the Working Group Meetings of the Framework
Convention leading to the Conference. The Convention would provide
an international instrument to address and steer the global health
debate through capacity -building, transfer of resources to the
developing countries for developing alternative crops, and for moving
the population depending on tobacco-growing to new means of
livelihood. Launching the “Final Push for Polio” programme in New
Delhi, she paid tributes to India’s phenomenal efforts towards polio
eradication .
Meeting of the State Parties to the Convention on Elimination
of All Forms of Racial Discrimination is to be held in New York on
January 18. India presented candidature of Sh. R. V. Pillai for the
election to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination.
India’s first Periodic Report on the Convention on the Rights of
the Child submitted in February, 1997 along with India’s written
response to the List of Issues identified from its First periodic Report
were discussed at the 23rd session of the Committee on Convention
on the Rights of the Child held in Geneva on January11-12.
India would present its first initial report to CEDAW on January
24 in New York during the meeting of The Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination Against Women. Indian delegation
would be led by Smt. Kiran Aggarwal, Secretary, Department of
Women And Child Development.
Juan Somavia, Director General of International Labour
Organisation will visit India from February 16 to 22 ,2000.During
his visit , he is expected to call on the PM, the EAM and the FM.
uu
89

10
Foreign Economic Relations

Economic Division

T

he year 1999-2000 saw a significant improvement in the global
economic situation. The financial crisis that plagued the world
in 1998 and 1999 definitely bottomed out. The East Asian
region came out of recession through disciplined macro-economic
policies and structural reforms. The growth in the world economy is
set to gain moderate strength in the coming years. It may, however,
be necessary for governments to resist pressures from special interest
groups to take protectionist measures, as such measures may be
counterproductive and undermine a promising economic
environment.
The launch of the EURO on 1 January 1999 to replace the national
currencies of eleven countries of the European Union (EU) was a
major step taken by the EU towards economic integration. The EURO
was expected to enable the EU to exert a greater influence over the
direction of the world economy.
India’s trade and economic relations with other countries
continued to expand during the year. Efforts by the Ministry and
Indian Missions abroad to promote foreign trade and Indian
investment abroad continued. India’s total exports amounted to
Rs.1416 billion during April 1998 - March 1999 as against Rs.1301

90

billion during April 1997 - March 1998. The exports from the country
during April 1999 - July 1999 stood at Rs.474 billion compared to
Rs.417 billion in the corresponding period in 1997-98. The European
Union continued to be India’s principal trading partner. The other
major trading partners were the USA, Japan, China, UAE and Russia.
Major commodities of India’s exports included agricultural and allied
products, marine products, iron ore, leather goods, gems & jewellery,
chemicals and related products, engineering goods, electronic goods
and textiles.
Export promotion activities such as organizing and participating
in trade fairs, exhibitions and seminars both at home and abroad
continued. Besides the annual India International Trade Fair held in
New Delhi in November 1999, the 13th India Engineering Trade
Fair organized by the Confederation of Indian Industries in New
Delhi in February 1999 with the Republic of Korea as the partner
country, a seminar-cum-exhibition on technology in electronics
organized by the Department of Electronics in New Delhi in February
1999 and an India International Maritime Expo in Goa in October
1999 supported by the Ministry of Surface Transport were some of
the notable trade promotion events held in India. The Ministry
sponsored a Made in India Show along with the Confederation of
Indian Industry in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania in August 1999. A trade

Annual Report 1999-2000

fair in Panama City in March 1999, an international trade fair in Athens
in September 1999, the Israel Agritech Exhibition 1999 in Haifa also
in September 1999, and the International Leather Goods Fair at Messe
Oftenbach, Germany were some of the exhibitions abroad in which
Indian Missions abroad played a very significant role.
India continued to encounter certain problems in the area of
exports, such as the European Union’s anti-dumping/anti-subsidy
cases against Indian products. India has been one of the most targetted
countries for trade defence instruments like anti-dumping duties. Antidumping/anti-subsidy investigations were mainly directed towards
textiles, pharmaceuticals and iron and steel sectors where Indian
exports are competitive. India shared the first position with China
for the largest number of cases since 1994, with 22 investigations
each out of a total of 175. Out of the 29 new investigations initiated
in 1998, India shared the top position with South Korea with 7 cases
each. Of the provisional measures in 30 cases in 1998, India was
again the country affected by the largest number of cases, namely
seven.
The Ministry has worked closely with the Ministries of Labour,
Commerce and Textiles on the issue of child labour, and in the setting
up of the mechanism by the Ministry of Labour for the investigation
of complaints relating to the use of illegal child labour in the export
consignments of goods such as hand made carpets.
India has also been facing some difficulties in the matter of export
of textiles to the countries of the European Union (EU). While the
Memorandum of Understanding on Textiles signed by India and the
EU on 31 December 1994 provides for the grant of exceptional
flexibilities by the EU for better utilisation of quotas, the EU has not
granted such flexibilities in 1998 and 1999. The Ministry has been
working closely with the Ministry of Textiles on this issue. The matter
has been taken up with the European Commission and the EU
national governments and is being actively pursued.

The Ministry continued to support and encourage Indian
investment abroad with a view to promoting India’s economic
cooperation with other countries. In 1999-2000, the Ministry cleared
241 proposals for the setting up of Joint Ventures/ Wholly Owned
Subsidiaries abroad. The Ministry has been responding positively to
the Reserve Bank of India’s proposals with regard to simplification
of procedures for Indian investment overseas. India’s important
investment destinations were the USA, UK, UAE, Singapore, Malaysia,
Thailand, Indonesia, Sri Lanka and Mauritius. Engineering and
construction, software, telecom, textiles and allied produces, chemicals
and pharmaceuticals, leather and rubber products, iron and steel,
consultancy and trading and marketing were some of the notable
areas of collaboration. The Ministry has been working closely with
various governmental and other bodies in the matter of promoting
overseas exports and investment. It is represented in the Governing
Bodies of OCCI, ITPO, IRCON Ltd, WAPCOS and ONGC Videsh Ltd.
Exchanges between India and other countries on economic
related matters at official and unofficial levels continued. The Second
India-UK Annual Talks on International Economic & Financial issues
took place in London in May 1999. The third round of dialogue
between the Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of
International Trade & Industry (MITI) of the Government of Japan
was held in Tokyo in February 1999. Shri Jaswant Singh, Minister of
External Affairs, paid an official visit to Japan from 23-27 November
1999. He had discussions with his counterpart and others in the
Japanese Government on several bilateral matters including IndiaJapan economic relations. An economic commission sponsored by
the MITI of Japan proposes to visit India shortly to study and examine
the avenues of investment. A meeting of the India-Japan Joint Business
Council is also proposed to be held in the near future. There also
have been visits of commercial and industrial delegations from India
to other countries and from the other countries to India .
91

Foreign Economic Relations

Exchanges took place between India and other developing
countries in the area of technical training under the Colombo Plan
and the Technical Cooperation Programmes. Under these
programmes Government of India nominees participated in training
programmes in Thailand, Indonesia and Singapore in such fields as
health, family planning, environment, urban development, housing,
quality control, irrigation and drainage engineering and taxation.
Following India’s nuclear tests in May 1998, some countries
imposed certain restrictive economic measures against India. The
Government of India had explained the rationale behind the nuclear
tests and has been continuing the of dialogue with key interlocutors
with regard to the withdrawal of the restrictive measures. The USA
has recently announced relaxation of a number of restrictive economic
measures against India. Exercising the authority given to him under
the Defence Appropriation Act passed by the US legislature in
October 1999, the US President waived, for an indefinite period,
restrictive measures against India in respect of the following:
i)

Activities and programmes of the Export-Import Bank (EXIM
Bank)

ii) Activities and programmes of the Overseas Private Investment
Corporation (OPIC)
iii) Assistance under the International Military Education and
Training Programme (IMET)
iv) The making of any loan or the providing of any credit to the
Government of India by any US bank
v) Assistance to the Asian Elephant Conservation Fund, the
Rhinoceros and Tiger conservation Fund, and the Indo-American
Environmental Leadership programme and
vi) Any credit, credit guarantee, or other financial assistance provided
by the Department of Agriculture to support the purchase of
food or other agricultural commodity.
92

Multilateral Economic Relations
The year under review witnessed an improvement in the global
economic situation. Although still undergoing some post-crisis
symptoms, there were definite signs of recovery in South-East Asian
countries like Malaysia, Philippines and Thailand where various strict
fiscal and economic measures were rigorously implemented. Most
multilateral groupings focussed on ways and means to prevent
recurrence of crisis-like situations in the future. Besides questioning
the validity of blind adherence to globalisation, they also focussed on
critical issues like reform of the international financial architecture
and containment of social impact of future crises. During such
deliberations, it was generally acknowledged that the cure to the
economic malaise would require active collaboration between the
developed and developing countries.
India played an active role during the deliberations of various
multilateral and regional groupings like the Group of 15 (G-15), Group
of 77 (G-77), Association for South East Asian Nations (ASEAN)
and Indian Ocean Rim Association for Regional Cooperation (IORARC). The Ministry of External Affairs monitored such developments
and actively participated in all such deliberations in the light of our
long-term national interests. Further, the Ministry, through its various
Missions abroad, collaborated with other GOI Departments and
agencies in promoting foreign business investment and presence in
India in important infrastructural sectors like power, information
technology, telecom, etc.
Similarly, in various international fora, India pointed out that
globalisation has not led to economic growth or increased the per
capita incomes in many developing countries. In order for it to become
sustainable, the globalization process would have to give due regard
to the economic development objectives of developing countries. The
shortfall in the flow of official development assistance as also the

Annual Report 1999-2000

inherent shortcomings of private financial flows would have to be
remedied. Accordingly, the international community would have to
address three fundamental issues - a stable level of financial flows to
developing countries, initiatives to reincorporate world economic
growth, and consultations for the design of a new financial
architecture.
Besides the above issues, during the latter part of 1999, the
multilateral circuit was largely dominated by discussions on the World
Trade Organization (WTO) issues of mutual concern, which were
taken up at the third WTO Ministerial Conference at Seattle. EAM
met Ambassador Charlene Barshefsky, United States Trade
Representative, in Paris on 26 May 1999. During the meeting, the
External Affairs Minister (EAM) reiterated India’s principled position
on various areas of importance in the context of the WTO, including
the proposed Millennium Round, Industrial Tariffs, Agreement on
Agriculture and Information Technology Agreement - II.
The Ministry contributed tangibly to the preparatory process for
the Seattle Ministerial by ascertaining positions of important WTO
members through its Missions. Besides participating in the interministerial exercise to finalise India’s strategy for the Seattle Meeting,
Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) also collaborated with the Ministry
of Commerce in organizing a G-15 Ministerial Meeting at Bangalore
in August 1999 in preparation for the Third WTO Ministerial
Conference at Seattle. MEA officials also participated in the G-77
Ministerial Meeting held at Marrakech, Morocco, in September 1999
where a message was issued by the G-77 Ministers to the Third WTO
Ministerial Conference about the concerns of developing countries.

in Uruguay Round Agreements on Anti-Dumping, Subsidies, TRIPs,
operationalization of Special and Differential Treatment provisions,
etc. Under the Agreement on Agriculture, India maintained that it
was important not only to reduce subsidies on agricultural exports
but also to focus on concerns of developing countries in matters
such as food security, rural employment, etc. India was however, willing
to show flexibility in areas such as e-commerce and information
technology.
The ASEAN-India Dialogue Partnership received a further fillip
with India’s participation led by EAM in the 32nd ASEAN Post
Ministerial Conference (PMC) in Singapore on 27-28 July 1999.
Besides participating in the multilateral plenary sessions, EAM also
had bilateral meetings with Ministers from some ASEAN and
Dialogue Partner countries. In his detailed intervention on the
international economic and financial situation, he mentioned that due
attention would have to be paid to the specific priorities of each
country in order to make globalisation a more ‘“humane” and equitable
process.
India’s bilateral exchanges with ASEAN were also most rewarding.
ASEAN conveyed appreciation for the support given by India to
various activities in ongoing areas of cooperation through mechanisms
such as the ASEAN-India Fund to which India, contributes to the

At the Seattle Ministerial Conference of WTO, India categorically
rejected any attempts to link trade with labour, or trade with
environment. India also emphasized the need to take remedial action
on implementation issues pertaining to asymmetries and inequities
93

Foreign Economic Relations

Dr. Mohamed Ariff, Executive Director of the Malaysian Institute of
Economic Research, Kuala Lumpur and H.E. Mr. Soubanh Srithirath,
Minister from Lao People’s Democratic Republic, delivered lectures
in India in May and November 1999 respectively. Similarly, eminent
Indian educationist, Dr. Kapila Vatsyayan delivered lectures in Malaysia
and Indonesia in September 1999.
India remained an active participant in the ‘Group of 15’ (G-15).
G-15 representatives met at the Senior Officials and the Ministerial
level on 22 & 24 September 1999 on the margins of the United Nations
General Assembly (UNGA). Egypt, current G-15 Chair, led the
discussions. During their deliberations, G-15 leaders exchanged views
on the prospects of adopting a common G-15 position on matters of
mutual interest for the Seattle WTO Ministerial Conference (30
November - 3 December 1999), the 10th G-15 Summit in Cairo in
May 2000 and the steps taken for initiating a G-15 - G-8 dialogue as
decided at the IX G-15 Summit in Jamaica.
A GOI delegation participated in the meeting of G-15 Experts
on the “Financial Crisis and the Reform of the International Financial
Architecture” held in Cairo from 23-24 October, 1999. The meeting
offered a useful opportunity for interaction on important issues such
as capital account liberalization, monetary management and foreign
debt, strengthening of the banking system, role of monetary and fiscal
policy in financial markets, good governance, social safety nets, early
warning mechanisms and review of the role of credit rating agencies.
An Indian delegation also participated in the G-15 Symposium on
“Globalization and its Economic and Social Impacts – A South
Perspective” held at Cairo on 22-23 November 1999, and presented
an important paper on ‘Globalization and the Trade of Developing
Countries’. The discussions focussed on various aspects of
globalization such as the world economic and social environment
and the process of globalization and liberalization, transnational
corporations, capital markets, trade of developing countries, social
impact of globalization, etc.
94

India participated in the South-South forum of G-77 Ministerial
Meeting on 24 September 1999 on the margins of UNGA. The G-77
adopted a Ministerial Declaration which covers the global economic
situation highlighting issues such as globalization and interdependence,
international trade matters as evolving in the WTO, financing for
development, Official Development Assistance (ODA) and the
external debt of developing countries, environment, science and
technology, etc. The meeting also adopted a statement on the
forthcoming South Summit to be held in Havana, Cuba in April 2000.
The G-77 Ministerial Declaration followed up on the G-77 Ministerial
Meeting held in Marrakech, Morocco from 14-16 September 1999.
The Marrakech Meeting discussed preparatory action for the Tenth
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTADX) to be held in Bangkok in February 2000, as well as the WTO
Ministerial Conference in Seattle. Multilateral trade issues, as
highlighted in the Marrakech Declaration, were reiterated in the G77 Ministerial Meeting in New York.
India participated actively in the grouping of Indian Ocean Rim
Association for Regional Cooperation (IOR-ARC). A high-level
Indian delegation, led by External Affairs Minister, participated in
the Second IOR-ARC Ministerial Meeting, which was held in Maputo,
Mozambique from 30-31 March 1999. The Ministerial Meeting was
preceded by a Seminar on Trade & Investment in IOR-ARC Region
held on 26-27 March 1999, and a meeting of the Committee of Senior
Officials on 28-29 March 1999. Mozambique will chair IOR-ARC
meetings until 2001, when, Oman - after convening of the Third
IOR-ARC Ministerial meeting in Muscat in 2001 – will assume
Chairmanship of the grouping.
The IOR-ARC Ministerial Meeting decided to expand the
Association’s membership by admitting five new members, namely
Bangladesh, Iran, Seychelles, Thailand and United Arab Emirates.

Annual Report 1999-2000

The Ministerial Meeting also decided to extend Dialogue Partner status
to Egypt and Japan. The IOR-ARC Ministers met again in New York
in September 1999 on the margins of UNGA session for discussions
on the IOR-ARC Extraordinary Meeting of Ministers in Oman in
January 2000 and other IOR-ARC issues.
A meeting of Experts of IOR-ARC was held at Maputo on 8-10
December 1999 to finalize three draft documents for the grouping Instrument of Acceptance, Rules of Procedure, and a Headquarters
Agreement between the Government of Mauritius and the IOR-ARC
Coordinating Secretariat. A clause requiring all new members to extend
Non-discriminatory (MFN) trade treatment to all members of the
grouping was incorporated in the Instrument of Acceptance. All the
three documents were considered and approved by the Special Meeting
of the Committee of Senior Officials (CSO) and the Extraordinary
Meeting of the Council of Ministers held at Muscat, Oman from 2023 January 2000. The meeting also considered and approved dialogue
partnership status for UK and China. No consensus emerged on the
French application for membership. In case of Pakistan, the Council
of Ministers decided that membership would be considered upon its
adhering to non-discriminatory trade treatment to all members of
IOR-ARC and signing the Instrument of Acceptance.
The first meeting of the IOR-ARC Working Group on Trade
and Investment was also held on 20 January 2000 at Muscat prior to
the CSO meeting to discuss issues of trade facilitation, trade
promotion, technical cooperation among members.
India took active interest in the sub-regional grouping called
‘Bangladesh – India – Myanmar – Sri Lanka – Thailand Economic
Cooperation’ (BIMST-EC). A GOI delegation participated in the
BIMST-EC Preparatory Meeting for the Establishment of an
Economic Forum (8-9 November, 1999) and Trade and Investment
Sectoral Committee (10 November 1999) convened by the

Government of Bangladesh at Dhaka. The Economic Forum would
provide strategic leadership in initiating economic activities to benefit
the group, facilitate implementation of development projects, develop
mechanisms for greater private sector involvement in BIMST-EC
activities, enhance quality of information flows and promote
institutional linkages and networking, and generate increased
participation by the business community in the identified sectors of
BIMST-EC. India would be participating in the BIMST-EC meeting
of Experts in Energy Sector being convened by Myanmar on 28-29
February 2000.
The Sectoral Committee on Trade and Investment discussed the
critical role of information flows (on trade and investment matters)
within BIMST-EC member countries and the networking of private
sector agencies/institutions and investment promotion agencies of
member countries. India proposed setting up a BIMSTNet on the
Internet.
India also hosted a ‘World Intellectual Property Organization’
(WIPO) Sub-Regional Forum on Intellectual Property Rights among
BIMST-EC Countries in New Delhi on 18-19 November 1999. In
order to give greater impetus to cooperation in this area, the meeting
proposed that it would be desirable to officially include Intellectual
Property Rights (IPRs) as a sub-sector of cooperation under the trade
and investment sector in BIMST-EC. The meeting stressed the critical
role which Information Technology could play in facilitating IPRrelated cooperation under BIMST-EC and stressed the need to
intensify linkages between IPR-related institutions in member
countries.
Besides participating in the deliberations of various regional
economic and multilateral groupings, the Ministry also associated itself
with various other international economic conferences and seminars.
A high-level Indian delegation led by EAM participated in the bilateral
95

Foreign Economic Relations

India-United Kingdom (UK) talks on International Economic and
Financial Issues held on 24 May 1999 in London. The talks provided
an opportunity to both the countries to review the present state of
UK and Indian economies, bilateral economic relations, and global
economic issues of significance.
EAM visited Paris to participate in a special dialogue between
‘Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development’ (OECD)
Council of Ministers and selected non-member countries, held at Paris
on 26 May 1999. Other non-member countries which were invited
were Argentina, Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, the Russian
Federation, the Slovak Republic and South Africa. The meeting
provided an opportunity for the 29 member countries of OECD to
discuss policy coherence on a range of key economic issues, with
important non-member countries, representing a population of over
3 billion people and a rising share of the global GDP.
The Ministry played an active coordinating role in the ‘Economic
and Social Council for Asia and the Pacific’ (ESCAP) Projects of
Trans Asian Railway and Asian Highway. A 4-member Indian
delegation comprising representatives of the Ministry of Railways,
the Ministry of External Affairs, and ‘Container Corporation of India’
(CONCOR) participated in the meeting for development of TransAsian Railway - Southern Corridor (TAR-SC), convened by ESCAP
in Dhaka on 25-28 May 1999.
In the context of South-South cooperation, a GOI delegation
participated in the 11th Session of High Level Committee (HLC) on
the Review of Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries
(TCDC), held at New York from 1-4 June 1999. The HLC mechanism,
which has been created by the UN General Assembly, pursuant to
the Buenos Aires Plan of Action (BAPA) on TCDC in 1978, meets
every two years. Participation in the meeting provided an excellent
96

opportunity for reiterating India’s active involvement with the TCDC
cause. India’s statement was widely circulated within participant
countries along with other information booklets on the ITEC
programme. India announced the establishment of a specific Trust
Fund for beneficiaries in Africa, Latin America and South Pacific
countries.
Solidarity with Africa continues to be one of India’s main planks
of its multilateral economic relations diplomacy. Thus, India
participated in the Regional Review Meeting of the Tokyo Agenda
for Action - finalized at the Second Tokyo International Conference
on African Development (TICAD) at Tokyo in October 1998 - held
in Lusaka, Zambia from 23-25 November 1999. The Indian delegate
gave an overview of the initiatives being undertaken by India for the
economic development of Africa, both at a bilateral level under the
Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) Programme,
and in other multilateral fora such as the G-15, Southern African
Development Community (SADC), Special Commonwealth African
Assistance Plan (SCAAP), Economic and Technical Cooperation
among Developing Countries (ECDC/TCDC), Common Market for
Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). During the
conference, India conveyed its willingness to partner with developed
countries like Japan for developmental initiatives in Africa on a case
by case basis. Under such triangular cooperation, Indian experts could
collaborate in development-oriented projects funded by developed
countries in select areas such as information technology, agriculture,
small-scale industries, public health and education. India also
highlighted the potential for strengthening some of the Indian
institutions and centres of excellence imparting HRD training in
various fields to African candidates through assistance by developed
countries.

Annual Report 1999-2000

iv) Study visits of senior officials / decision makers to India.

used by the end of this financial year. The number of Training
Institutes has been increased to 51 after empanelling 12 new Institutes
in the current financial year in response to needs expressed by our
partner countries. The new Institutes cover fields such as Drugs and
Pharmaceuticals, Labour Administration and Employment Relations
in a global Economy, Hotel Management, Oceanography, Artificial
Insemination, Telecommunications, Sugarcane Production
Technology, Wildlife Management, Remote Sensing, etc. Regular
courses were conducted in the usual fields of Audit and Accounts,
Banking, Diplomacy, Manpower Planning, Parliamentary Studies,
Rural Development, Small Scale Industries, Information Technology,
Food Processing, Textile Technology, News Agency Journalism,
Standardisation, Educational Planning and Administration,
Entrepreneurship and Small Business Development, Packaging,
International Management, Human Resource Planning and English
Language. Under ITEC Civil Training Programme all costs including
international travel are borne by the GOI.

ITEC has created considerable goodwill for India and helped
boost her image as a country with indigenous technological skills and
capabilities who shares her knowledge and experience with other
developing countries without any strings attached. There has been a
growing demand for ITEC assistance from partner countries. From
actual expenditure of Rs. 22.69 crores in 1997-98, the programme’s
budget grew to Rs. 34.29 crores in 1998-99. The budget allocation
for 1999-2000 has been enhanced to Rs. 36.00 crores.

For the first time in 1999-2000, neighbouring countries, Nepal,
Bhutan, Sri Lanka, Maldives, Bangladesh and Myanmar were allotted
slots under ITEC’s Civil Training Programme. Utilisation of these
slots is, however, uneven; while Sri Lanka and Maldives have utilised
the entire allocation, Bangladesh, Bhutan and Myanmar have not so
far been able to utilise the slots to the extent desired. We expect the
utilisation to improve as information about the offer percolates better
into the system next year.

In 1999-2000, 1967 slots were allotted for Civil training (as against
1485 in 1998-99) in prestigious Training Institutes and Establishments
(Annexure-XIII) including 240 slots allotted to 24 Pacific, CARICOM
and Central American States under a newly created window for
technical cooperation with these countries. Until now 1067 slots have
been utilised (Annexure-XIV and XV) and more are expected to be

Under Military Training, nominees of friendly countries are
imparted training in national institutions in all three wings of defence
services, including the prestigious National Defence College, New
Delhi and National Defence Services Staff College, Wellington. The
Training covers fields such as Security and Strategic Studies; Defence
Management; Artillery; Electronics, Mechanical, Marine and

Technical Cooperation
The Technical Cooperation Division offers technical assistance
under the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC)
Programme and the Special Commonwealth African Assistance Plan
(SCAAP) to 141 developing countries in Asia, Africa, Latin America,
Eastern Europe and the Pacific. For the purposes of this report,
reference to ITEC will also include SCAAP (under which only civil
training is provided) as the two programmes are different only in
budget heads under which accounts are maintained.
The ITEC assistance takes the following four forms:
i)

Training (both civil and military).

ii) Projects and project-related assistance such as supply of
equipment, consultancy services and feasibility studies.
iii) Deputation of experts and

97

Foreign Economic Relations

Aeronautical Engineering; Anti-marine Warfare; Hydrographic;
Logistics and Management and Qualitative Assurance Services.
All Military training costs, including international travel, for
ITEC-I category candidates are met by GOI. For ITEC-II category
candidates, costs are partially covered under ITEC and partially
(international travel ) shared with the partner country. During 1999 2000, 195 slots for long and short term training courses were offered
under ITEC/SAP and 140 slots under Self-Financing Scheme. Some
slots were also offered on reciprocal basis. Annexures XVI- XIX
contain lists of beneficiary countries of ITEC Military Training
Programme.
Projects and project related assistance has helped enhance India’s
image as a modern economy and technologically and scientifically
advanced State. In 1999 - 2000, a project was launched to establish a
Plastic Technology Demonstration and Common Facility Centre in
the backward area of Ondangwa (located about 800 kms. from
Windhoek) in Namibia at a total cost of approximately Rs. 3.40 crores.
NSIC is the Implementing Agency for this project. The Centre will
provide vocational skills to the youth of Namibia and enhance
employment opportunities for them. Another project costing
approximately Rs.13 crores for setting up an Entrepreneurship and
Technical Development Centre (ETDC) in Senegal, started in 1998
by HMT(I), is expected to be completed in January/February, 2000.
Envisaged in the long run as a Regional Centre for all the French
speaking West African countries, ETDC provides vocational training
to 96 students in selected mechanical and electronic trades. After a
midterm review of the project was conducted by Additional Secretary
(FA) and Joint Secretary (TC), the Ministry of National Education,
Government of Senegal decided to confer National Diploma to each
student passing out from the Centre which will be recognised not
only in Senegal but also in other franco-phone countries in West
Africa.
98

The Indian Farmers’ Project in Burkina Faso aimed at transferring
Indian Green Revolution technology, particularly in rice cultivation
to Burkina Faso was also launched this year. This is a unique project
under which six practical farmers from Punjab have been sent to
Burkina Faso for three years to implement the project. Farm
machinery, equipment and other inputs have also been supplied by
the GOI. In fulfilment of a high-level commitment, equipment for
setting up five primary health centres was also supplied this year to
Burkina Faso. In Mongolia, where ITEC had set up the Rajiv Gandhi
Vocational Training Centre (RGVTC) in September 1996, two
additional faculties i.e. Computer Programming and Gem Stone
Cutting and Polishing were provided this year, to augment the existing
five faculties (auto mechanic, radio and TV repair, plumbing, electrician
and machine shop mechanics). These two additional faculties were
inaugurated by the Hon’ble Vice President of India during his visit to
Mongolia in August 1999. Smaller projects, feasibility studies and
consultancy services were undertaken in countries such as Myanmar,
Kyrghyzstan, Guyana, Cambodia and Fiji. A list of projects and
project-related assistance extended this year so far to different
countries may be seen at Annexure XX.
Under the much sought after Study Visits Programme, senior
decision makers from various partner countries are invited to India
for exchange of views and guided exposure to Indian capacities in
fields of interest to them such as small scale industries, agriculture,
health, education, foreign-trade, etc. Twenty study visits were planned
this year as against 10-11 in previous years. Manpower constraints in
TC Division were overcome by engaging the services of retired Deputy
Secretary / Director level officers of the Ministry to act as Liaison
Officers for the visiting delegations. A 2-member delegation led by
Mr. Yura Jigj, Director, Rajiv Gandhi Vocational Training Centre
(RGVTC), Ulaanbaatar, visited India from 19 - 25 June, 1999 to see
Computer Programming and Gem & Jewellery Processing facilities

Annual Report 1999-2000

in India and to discuss with the officials in the Ministry of Education
the possibilities of cooperation in the education field. A 2-member
team from Suriname led by Mr. S F Polanen, Chairman of the Electoral
Council of Suriname, visited India from 18 - 23 September, 1999 to
study India’s electoral process. Dr. Haseeb Bashi, Director General,
Iraqi Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research, visited
India from October 25 - 29, 1999 to select books in engineering,
technology, science, etc. which are proposed to be supplied to Iraq
under ITEC Programme. A 3-member delegation from Turkmenistan
led by H.E. Mr. N U Utamyshev, Deputy Minister of Textiles, visited
India from November 14 - 21, 1999 to study and discuss possible
cooperation in textile industry. Mr. M. Y. C. Lumbanga, Chief Secretary
of Tanzania visited India from December 14-20, 1999 to study the
industrial and technological progress made by India. Other study visits
are scheduled this year from Jamaica, Kyrgyzstan, Uganda and
Seychelles.
Indian experts are deputed abroad as advisors in response to
requests received from Governments of developing countries for
advice on technical and developmental subjects such as health,
agriculture, engineering, teaching, accounts, small scale industries and
legislation drafting. Over the years Indian experts have effected
incremental improvement in vital developmental sectors of the
economies of many countries with their well considered advice which
is generally respected for being most relevant to the needs and
capacities of the developing economies. Expenses on deputing experts
are shared with the host country although the larger share is borne
by the GOI. The number of experts until 1998-99 was 23 but there

are plans to raise this number to 50 to meet the growing demand.
Through the valuable cooperation and support of the Department
of Personnel and Training, we have been able to reduce our response
time taken to send an expert abroad. At present there are 22 long
term and 1 short term experts (Annexure XXI) in Guyana, Laos,
Mauritius, Namibia, Seychelles, Trinidad & Tobago, Vietnam, Zambia
and Zanzibar.
In May, 1999 a documentary video film on ITEC Programme
entitled, “The South Imperatives of Cooperation” was prepared and
shown at New York during the 11th Session of High Level Committee
on TCDC held from June 1-5, 1999. Copies of the video film were
also sent to Indian Missions for use on ITEC Day on 15th September,
1999. The film was well received. In some countries the film was
shown on local TV network.
Under the Aid for Disaster Relief (ADR) Programme
humanitarian assistance for victims of natural disasters in various
countries is provided in the form of medicines, food items, tents,
blankets etc. Under this programme 92 MT of sugar and 500 MT of
rice were supplied to Indonesia/ West Timor while medicines and
surgical items were supplied to Madagascar, Mozambique, Ghana and
Honduras for the victims of a cholera epidemic and floods. Tents
were supplied to Tajikistan in the wake of unseasonal torrential rains
and tea, surgical items and medicines were supplied to Turkey for the
victims of earthquake. The list containing the details of the relief
supplies is at Annexure XXII.
uu

99

11
Trade and Investment Promotion

T

he Central Government and the State Governments took
several initiatives and measures during the year aimed at
encouraging foreign investment inflows, particularly the flow
of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) into India. The major thrust
areas included infrastructure development, particularly energy, power,
telecom and information technology. It was the task of the Investment
Promotion and Publicity Division to actively undertake effective
investment promotion and publicity efforts, particularly through the
Indian Missions and Posts abroad for attracting foreign investment
into the country. Quite often, Commercial Wings in the Missions are
the first point of contact for the foreign investor. It is, therefore,
essential that the Missions are given full backup support in their efforts
in the form of providing up-to-date information about the economy,
the liberalised policies and the procedures, the project and
opportunities available in different sectors, the incentives offered by
the Central Government and various State Governments etc. Missions
are also approached by investors seeking their intervention in case of
delays in respect of clearances for their proposals or in respect of
other hurdles faced in the implementation of projects. For all these
and related matters the Investment Promotion and Publicity (IPP)
Division in the Ministry has acted as a nodal point of contact and
coordination to serve as an effective channel of communication
100

between the Missions and the relevant Ministries/State Governments
or other agencies, as the case may be.
Policy
The Ministry provides inputs for policy formulations, whenever
required, based on investment trends worldwide and based on the
need to maintain harmony between foreign policy objectives and our
economic policies. Regular feedback was received from the Missions
on foreign investor perceptions about India’s investment policies or
about successful model/policies followed elsewhere for serving as
inputs to the evolution of any new policies or to the review of an
existing one, if the same was considered necessary in the national
interest.
The Ministry also actively participated in the meetings of Foreign
Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) and Foreign Investment
Implementation Authority (FIIA) in collaboration with other
Ministries and State Governments. In FIPB, the Ministry was
represented by Secretary (ER) and investments from NRIs were given
particular attention. In FIAA, specific policy measures to speed up
the investment already made were taken up with concerned Ministries
and State Governments.

Annual Report 1999-2000

Promotional Efforts and Initiatives
The Ministry undertook several initiatives towards suitably
projecting the various investment policies and announcements of the
Government by coordinating with the Missions on the one hand and
various economic Ministries of the Central Government and State
Governments on the other. Economic news about India was regularly
disseminated to all the Missions highlighting major policy decisions
and new opportunities, thus keeping them abreast of the
developments. Missions were also encouraged to hold investment
promotion seminars and workshops besides extending investment
support services, for which suitable publicity material, speaking points
etc. were regularly despatched. Such seminars were held by several of
our Missions in identified target countries. The Ministry also
undertook special efforts to highlight the policies, procedures and
opportunities available in the Information Technology sector.
The Missions also provided support to visiting Indian delegations
including those sponsored by the State Governments by arranging
suitable meetings with potential investors, local Government officials
and the local Chamber of Commerce or Products Associations.
The Ministry also assisted, based on information provided by
the Missions, visiting foreign investor delegations/groups in having
appropriate meetings with concerned Government Departments, the
Apex Chambers of Commerce, the State Governments etc. The
Ministry also participated in many bilateral or other meetings/
conferences involving overseas investor groups.
The Ministry also actively assisted various Departments/
organisations in the country in organising investment/trade
promotion events in India, including the Ministerial Conference on
Space Applications for Sustainable Development in Asia and Pacific
organised by the United Nations Economic and Social Commission

for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) in New Delhi from 15-20 November
1999 and hosted by the Government of India. This Division liaised
with our Missions/Posts abroad for participation of the ESCAP
member countries in the above Conference. Indian and French space
agencies have joined hands to launch a scientific satellite, ‘Megha
Tropiques’, which will provide data on atmospheric and oceanic
activities to scientists across the world.
The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) and the French
space agency Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES) signed a
statement of intent in New Delhi to launch the satellite in an effort
to understand weather and climate better.
The Government launched a comprehensive scheme for the
persons of Indian origin - called ‘PIO’ Card Scheme on 30th March.
Under this scheme persons of Indian origin upto the fourth generation
(great grand parents settled through out the world except citizens of
Pakistan, Bangladesh and other countries as may be specified by the
Central Government from time to time), would be eligible. The Card
would be issued to eligible applicants through concerned Indian
Embassies/High Commissions/Consulates and for those staying in
India on long-term visa (more than one year), the concerned
Foreigners Regional Registration Officer (Delhi, Mumbai, Calcutta,
Chennai) would do the same. The fee for the Card which will have
validity of 20 years, would be US$ 1000. The Ministry actively
participated in the efforts to mobilise good response for the PIO
Card.
Publicity
The IPP Division has reprinted 10,000 copies of its brochure
“India Means Business - Perspectives” in view of the positive response
received from investors in India and abroad. The Division is also
bringing out the French, German and Spanish versions of this
brochure.
101

Trade and Investment Promotion

The Division is planning to set up a specialised web site on the
internet aimed at foreign business community. It will carry up-todate information on policies and procedures for investment in India,
economic reforms including second generation reforms, economic
data covering investment trends, success stories, interactive section
for business queries and specific projects on offer, etc.
Agreements
The Ministry participated in the negotiations for drawing up of
Bilateral Investment Promotion and Protection Agreements (BIPPAs)

and Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements (DTAAs) that were held
in respect of a number of countries. Such agreements were signed
during the year with New Zealand, Trinidad & Tobago, Kyrgyzstan,
Qatar, Indonesia and Zimbabwe.
The Ministry also participated in the negotiations relating to
bilateral Civil Aviation matters with other countries. The Ministry
provided legal inputs, as required, and also tendered advice based on
the need for increased civil aviation links particularly with our
neighbouring regions to evolve in consonance with the initiatives being
taken on the foreign policy front.
uu

102

Annual Report 1999-2000

12
Policy Planning and Research

T

he Policy Planning and Research Division of the Ministry
continued to perform its role of preparing briefs and
background papers on important topics and issues on the
evolving international situation. These covered issues of long-term
relevance to broad foreign policy objectives. The Division prepared
analytical position papers for Ministry’s interaction with other agencies.
An in-depth paper on ‘Euro’ prepared in the Division was circulated
in the Ministry and Missions abroad.
The Division continued to serve as a nodal point for interaction
with the National Security Council Secretariat (NSCS) formerly known
as the Joint Intelligence Committee (JIC), the University Grants
Commission (UGC) and its affiliates and the Area Study Centres
(ASC) located in various universities and specializing in research on
various regions of the world.
The Division extended financial, assistance to various academic
institutions/think tanks located in different parts of the country for
holding conferences, seminars, preparation of research papers,
exchange of scholars and support for Track-II programmes on issues
related to India’s external relations and security.
The subject of these seminars, conferences and research projects
covered Indian Foreign Policy, India-Iran Relations, India-Korea

Dialogue, Indo-US Dialogue, Contribution of Persons of Indian
Origin (PIOs) in the development of countries of their-adoption,
Conference on South Asia, Regional Cooperation among SAARC
Countries. Support was also provided to Indian scholars and experts
attending seminars and conferences in Turkey, Sri Lanka. Singapore,
Kyrghystan, Tajikistan, USA, UK and Canada.
The Centre for Advanced Study of India at the University of
Pennsylvania, USA is given an annual recurring grant by the Division.
A proposal for giving another grant is currently under examination
as a part of the continuing Indo-US cooperation in various fields.
The Division took initiative in promoting exchanges with official
and non-official visiting experts and projected India’s views and
perceptions on important issues. In continuation of this interactive
role, Joint Secretary (PP) led a delegation to Tehran, Iran or the First
Meeting of the Working Group on Research and Study between Iran
and India. During the meeting held on 7th and 8th December 1999
in Tehran, the two sides underlined the importance of research and
study in increasing bilateral cooperation and better understanding of
regional and international issues of mutual interest. It was agreed at
the meeting that:
a) research and study should be carried out on subjects which have
103

Policy Planning and Research

an immediate and direct impact on bilateral relations or issues of
common interest to both countries and
b) experts and scholars from outside the Foreign Ministries should
be engaged in research and study. Apart from holding discussions
on various political issues, science and technology issues were
also discussed under which it was agreed that a dialogue between
the scientific organizations and experts of both countries should
be held at the earliest convenience of both sides to identify specific
areas for cooperation and joint research. Economic and
commercial issues were also discussed wherein it was agreed to
undertake studies on economic complementarities, strengths in
specific sectors, obstacles to trade and economic cooperation
and greater rise of transit routes available under existing
arrangements. During the visit, the Indian delegation also called
on the Deputy Foreign Minister, H.E. Mr. Sadeq Kharrazi and
Deputy Minister for Technology, H.E. Dr. Sayed Ahmad
Motamedi. In view of the fruitful discussions at the First Meeting,
it was agreed that further meetings would be held alternatively in
New Delhi and Tehran at mutually convenient dates.
To further strengthen Ministry’s capabilities in research and
analyses, the Division prepared a detailed proposal for revival of the
Research Cadre as recommended by the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on External Affairs. The proposal and Cabinet Note are
in the last stages of being processed and with the revival of this vital
Cadre, it is hoped that our research and analytical capabilities will be
further strengthened to face challenges in formulating our foreign
policy.
The ‘Ambassadors-in-Residence’ Programme was also revived
with the posting of two Ambassadors – one specializing in Gulf
Studies and the other in Euro-Atlantic Studies. Both Ambassadors
are now attached to the School of International Studies, Jawaharlal
104

Nehru University, New Delhi. Agreements have also been obtained
from the universities of Mumbai, Goa and Delhi for posting of such
‘Ambassadors-in-Residence’ and volunteers having the required
qualifications and experiences are awaited for filling tip these posts.
The Division continued to edit and publish the Annual Report
of the Ministry. The Report served as a compendium of India’s
interaction with the rest of the world in the political, economic and
cultural fields, including the views of the government on various facets
of international relations.
The Division rendered all possible assistance to the terrorism
divisions as well as Indian Missions abroad whenever any specific
information or document on international relations was required. The
Research Wing examined the depiction of India’s international
boundaries in foreign publications. Cases of incorrect depiction were
taken up with the concerned government or the publisher through
Indian Missions abroad for necessary corrective measures. The
Division also scrutinized foreign publications containing maps
depicting India’s external boundaries before these were imported into
the county and offered its views to the Ministries dealing with such
matters. It coordinated the supply of map-sheets to various
Government and semi-Government agencies for use in their official
work with the Survey of India and the Ministry of Defence. The
Research Wing dealt with requests from research scholars for access
to the records of the Ministry. A Committee has been constituted
with representatives from the Ministries of External Affairs, Home
Affairs and Defence to examine the access of Research Scholars to
Pre-Independence ‘closed period’ records in the National Archives
of India.
In support of research, the Ministry’s Library has modern
information technology equipment and rich resource materials, with
over one hundred thousand books and a large collection of maps,

Annual Report 1999-2000

microfilms and official documents. The Library receives and maintains
600 periodical titles. It has in-house computer systems with fifteen
terminals, two of which support data entry and retrieval in Hindi. It
also has CD-ROM work station and has CD-ROM databases on
foreign affairs and current affairs. The Library is also equipped with
a CD-writer, a Colour Scanner (with OCR capability as well as facility
for storage and retrieval of images), a microfilm/fiche reader printer,
a plain paper photocopier, as well as a VTR and colour monitor and
a laser printer with Desk Top Publishing (DTP) software. This has
enabled better presentation of publications and documents of the
Division. The Library has internet and E-mail facilities. These are
being gradually made available to visiting users who including former
Foreign Service officers, Documentation/bibliographic services as
well as other library operations and services have been computerised,
using an integrated library software package. Information on all books,
maps, documents and selected periodical articles received in the
Library since 1986, and pre-1986 publications in active use, are
available on-line through each terminal in the as well as in the Ministry’s
headquarters in South Block and in Akbar Bhawan through network
in operation in these buildings. Library’s information databases can
also be accessed on internet on MEA Library's websites by eligible
users including our officials in Missions abroad. All new documents
received in the Library – books, maps, microfilms, selected articles
from periodicals – are being fed into the in-house computer system
to create a database on foreign affairs.

Using this database and CD-ROM Databases, the Library
provides Current Awareness Service and Bibliographical and
Reference Services. In addition, the Library regularly issues ‘Foreign
Affairs Documentation Bulletin’ – monthly list of selected periodicals,

105

13

External Publicity

A

s an instrument of foreign policy management, the External
Publicity Division discharges several key functions, namely:
responding to the citizens’ right to information; articulating
the policies and responses of the government on foreign policy and
international security affairs; projecting a holistic and correct image
of the country; playing the role of a catalyst for enhancing contacts
between Indian media and their counterparts in foreign countries;
dissemination of published information through Indian libraries
abroad; maintaining an internet website with a comprehensive database
and daily updates; and publishing an in-house monthly India
Perspectives in ten languages for wide circulation abroad. A special
responsibility was placed on the XP Division in the summer of 1999
to organise and anchor the inter-ministerial daily briefings to the
national and international media on political and military developments
following Pakistan’s aggression against India in the Kargil sector of
Jammu and Kashmir. These briefings helped galvanise international
public opinion in support of India’s message that aggression against
India would have to be reversed by Pakistan and that the sanctity and
inviolability of the Line of Control in the Indian State of Jammu and
Kashmir must be respected.
The official spokesman articulated and projected India’s position
on various national and international issues through official

106

statements, press briefings and public relations efforts. Over 200
official statements and press releases were issued by the XP Division
during the period 1999-2000 and circulated to Indian media, foreign
media resident in India, foreign missions in New Delhi and made
available on the ministry’s internet website.
The ‘Foreign Affairs Record’, a compilation of all press releases,
agreements, speeches and significant diplomatic developments, was
brought out on a monthly basis. Our news dissemination function
also includes daily news bulletins and clippings for headquarters and
missions and posts abroad; regular feedback to missions and posts
on developments concerning India. MEA’s internet website serves as
a vital tool in the overall effort towards information dissemination.
Efforts were made jointly with Indian missions and posts abroad
to enlarge areas of positive perception about India. Some focus areas
included: India’s foreign policy and international security approach;
India’s millennial history and civilization; its diverse and profound
religious and philosophical traditions; its democratic and secular
political culture and institutions, its pluralistic, tolerant and progressive
social ethos; its wide experience in nation building; its impressive
economic, scientific and technological achievements and its market
potential.

Annual Report 1999-2000

Audio visual publicity : Documentary and feature films were
used to reinforce the country’s positive image. In the year 1999-2000,
several documentaries on a variety of themes were completed while
others are under various stages of production. These include City
Scapes, Foreigners Who have Adopted India as their Home, Heart of
the Matter (foreign policy show), India & the UN, Wisdom of India,
SAARC in the Next Millennium, Software Frontiers and Coronation
of the King of Bhutan.
Documentary films were circulated for non-commercial publicity
through Indian missions and posts abroad. These include India in
Space, Adoor – A Journey in Frames, Bamboo Flute, Indian Nobel
Laureates, Rooted Imagination, Women in Panchayats, Design Classics
of India, Healing Tree, Heart of the Matter, Echoes from the Past
(Old Monuments of Delhi), Unheard Melodies, Fragrance of Love,
Nisbat, Of Melodies Divine, and Abiding Grace. On the occasion of
India’s Independence Day – 1999, several documentaries were sent
abroad for telecast on local TV networks and international channels.
A positive feedback was received from Indian missions and posts on
these telecasts.
A CD-ROM titled “India-Timeless Civilization....Vibrant
Democracy”, was brought out by the ministry and its English version
was sent to all missions and posts abroad. The Hindi, Arabic and
Chinese versions are in the final stages of completion, while the
Russian, Spanish and French language versions are also expected to
be completed in the near future. A major exercise was undertaken to
procure and distribute audio and video CDs, representative of the
best of Indian music and cinema, for reference and information.
Film festivals were organized by various missions and posts
abroad and foreign cultural centres in coordination with the ministry.
11 international film festivals, including retrospectives on Ritwik

Ghatak and Adoor Gopalakrishnan, were organized in Paris, Madrid,
Hanoi, Damascus, Glasgow, Cairo, Rome, Copenhagen, Kuala
Lumpur, Mexico City. 49 prints of feature films were supplied from
the XP audio-visual library and other prints were procured from
Directorate of Film Festivals (DFF) and other agencies for this
purpose. Assistance was also provided in facilitating foreign
participation in the 31st International Film Festival in Delhi in January
2000. The division also extended its support in the arrangement of
slide shows and photo-exhibitions in missions and posts abroad.
Requests for information infrastructure and audio-video hardware
from missions and posts were processed. These included sanctioning
of equipment such as satellite antenna, TVs, VCRs, projectors and
photocopiers.
Press facilitation: Foreign media, both print and electronic,
continued to evince keen interest in India through sustained visits.
India’s foreign policy and its approach to security issues, the general
elections and Pakistan’s aggression in Kargil further stimulated the
media’s interest in India. Various facilities were extended by the
Ministry to meet the increased inflow of media persons.
During the year, about 100 journalists, individually or as part of
media and TV delegations visited India from Australia, Austria,
Bangladesh, Brunei, China, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Egypt, Gaza,
Indonesia, Israel, Iran, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Philippines, Russia,
South Africa, South Korea, Syria, Turkey and Venezuela. These visits
led to a balanced coverage of India in foreign media, as well as to a
better understanding of the country. Many journalistic visits were
unstructured and spontaneous. The division provided assistance to
them, including arranging meetings with senior ministers, high-level
government officials, academicians, representatives of business houses,
industry, etc.
107

External Publicity

Another important aspect of press facilitation work handled by
the division was to provide assistance to foreign media accompanying
Heads of State or Government on visits to India, including those
from Australia, Bangladesh, Cambodia, Estonia, Kazakhsthan,
Kyrghyz Republic, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, Nigeria, Qatar,
Russia, Seychelles, Singapore, South Korea, Spain, Uruguay, Vatican
and Vietnam. The assistance rendered entailed facilitating media
coverage, arranging press briefings and providing other logistical
arrangements. Over 200 journalists, both Indian and foreign, covered
Prime Minister’s historic visit to Lahore in February 1999. Another
large media event was the visit by H.H. Pope John Paul II to India in
November 1999.
All logistical arrangements were made for coverage by the Indian
media persons accompanying the President, Vice President and Prime
Minister on their state visits abroad to Jamaica (G-15), Trinidad and
Tobago, Morocco, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Mongolia, Kyrghyz Republic,
Austria, Tanzania and South Africa. This included the setting up and
operation of media centres, media briefings and other facilities and
logistical arrangements. Assistance was also provided to Indian
journalists travelling abroad on specific assignments.
The making of documentary films by foreign TV channels was
encouraged and facilitated through timely clearance and administrative
assistance. Around 300 proposals were received from documentary
makers all over the world relating to diverse aspects of India including
tourism, wildlife, social and cultural issues, travelogues etc. Over 90
per cent of these proposals were cleared, while others are at various
stages of clearances awaiting requisite approvals of other central and
state government departments.
Supply of print material : The division continued to procure
and supply books, magazines, journals and other periodicals for use
in the libraries of and for distribution to local dignitaries, opinion
108

makers and academic institutions abroad. 77 titles of books were
purchased and distributed to all Indian missions and posts abroad.
Booklets on Prime Minister’s speeches at 9th G-15 Summit, brochures
on India and UN (in English and French); India’s role in UN peacekeeping; biographies of Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers;
and India at a Glance (in Portuguese) were some of the projects taken
up for implementation. Quarterly compilation of press releases and
Spokesman’s statements were printed regularly.
Infrastructure : Major renovation and restructuring work,
including the construction of a new state-of-the-art auditorium, an
audio-visual library and a waiting room for visitors is under
implementation.
MEA website : The ministry’s website was kept updated on a
daily basis to cover all developments relating to foreign policy, nuclear
issues, international terrorism, speeches and interviews of dignitaries,
official spokesman’s statements, bilateral treaties and agreements
signed by India, India’s political and economic developments, general
elections, Parliament questions and answers etc. During the Kargil
conflict, a special section was launched which included daily updates
by the Armed Forces, statements by the ministry and international
and Indian press coverage of the conflict. The website server was
also upgraded to incorporate audio-visual contents and a greater
volume of textual material. The website received an average of 2.2
million hits per month and was widely appraised and appreciated by
the users. The website was also hyper-linked by some of the important
organizations like CNN, The Economist, etc. for information relating
to India. An e-mail-based media reporting system for feedback from
abroad on the local reporting and for retrievable storage of this
reporting was started with selected missions abroad. Extensive archival
material on India’s foreign policy is being loaded on the website for
reference and easy retrieval.

Annual Report 1999-2000

India Perspectives, the monthly magazine of the ministry was
published every month in ten different languages for distribution
through Indian missions and posts abroad. Demand for the
publication has been ever-increasing and 55,000 copies were printed
during the year for supply to Indian missions and posts. Besides
highlighting India’s historical and cultural heritage, the journal has
been focussing on the impressive progress made by India in the fields

of science and technology and the steps taken to globalize the country’s
economy. Two special issues of the magazine were brought out in
March 1999 to mark the Prime Minister’s historic visit to Lahore and
to commemorate the celebration of the tricentenary of the
establishment of the Khalsa Panth Special Millennium issues, which
would carry articles of abiding interest on all facets of India are being
produced.
uu

109

14

Protocol

State Visits by Heads of State/Government/Vice Presidents/Crown Prince to India
January 1999

10-13
24-29

H. E. Mr. Jean Claude Juncker, Prime Minister of Luxembourg
King Birendra Bir Bikram Shah Dev, King of Nepal

February 1999

3-10

H. E. Mr. Lennart Meri, President of Estonia

April 1999

6-8
12-16

H. H. Sheikh Hamad Bin Khalifa AI-Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar
H. E. Mr.Askar Akaev, President of Kyrghzstan

July 1999

21-24

H. E. Dr.Sam Nujoma, President of Namibia.

November 1999

5-8
20-25

H. H Pope John Paul II
H. E. Mr. Witn Kok,PM of Netherlands

December 1999

1-5

H. E. Mr. Tran Duc Luong, President of Socialist Republic of Vietnam

February 1999

17-19

H. E. Hun Sen, Prime Minister of Cambodia

January 2000

17-20
24-27
110

H. E. Mr. Gok Chok Tong, Prime Minister of Singapore
H. E. Mr. O. Obasanjo, President of Nigeria

Annual Report 1999-2000

February 2000

8-9
21-24

H. E. Mr. Abdurrahman Wahid, President of Indonesia
H. E. Mr. Abderrahmane Youssouf, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Morroco

Official Visits by Heads of State/Government/Vice Presidents/Crown Prince to India
January 1999

5-8
27-29

H. E. Mr. Angadi Chettiar, Vice President of Mauritius
R. E. Sheikh Hasina, PM of Bangladesh (Calcutta)

February 1999

10-12

H. E. Mr. Kim Jong Pil, PM of South Korea

March 1999

21-25

H. E. Mr. James Michell, Vice-President of Seychelles

December 1999

5-9

H. E. Dr. Hugo Fernandez-Faingold, Vice-President of Uruguay.

Private Visits by Heads of State/Governments/Vice Presidents/First Ladies
January 1999

5-10

Mrs A.Oyunbileg, Wife of President of Mongolia

April 1999

16-17

H. E. Genl. Obasanio, President-elect Nigeria

May 1999

24-27

H H King of Bhutan Jigme Singye Wangchuk

August 1999

12-14

HRH Don Felipe de Borbon, Crown Prince of Spain (Jaipur/Agra)

November 1999

9-17

Mrs Zohra Uteem, First Lady of Mauritius

December 1999

25-2 January H. E. Queen Beatrix of Netherlands

111

Protocol

January 2000

12-26

H. E. Mr. A. V. Chettiar, Vice President of Mauritius

Transit visits by Heads of State/Government/Vice Presidents/Crown Princes/Foreign Ministers
January 1999

22

H. E. Mr. E. Rakhmanov, President of Tajikistan

March 1999

13-14
20
24 & 31

H. E. Mr.Ali Abdulah Saleh, President of Yemen
H. E. Mr. Kawasnewaski, President of Poland
H. E. Dr. Mahathir Mohammad, PM of Malaysia (Mumbai)

April 1999

9-10

H. E. Mr. Yasir Arafat, President of Palestine

May 1999

9
24-25

Mr. Taha Y. Ramdan, Vice President of Iraq
H. E. Mr. Harun Aptidon, President of Djibouti (former)

June 1999

19-20

H. E. Mr. Lakshman Kadirgamar,FM of Sri Lanka

July 1999

1-5
7-8
22 & 28
25 & 28

H. E. Dr.Sam Nujoma, President of Namibia (Mumbai)
H. E. Mr. Lakshman Kadirgamar, FM of Sri Lanka (New Delhi)
President of Sudan (Mumbai)
H. E. Mr. lgor Ivanov, FM, Russia

August 1999

25

H. E. Mr. R. S. Mahat, FM of Nepal

September 1999

14
14

H. E. Sheikh Hasina, PM of Bangladesh
H. E. Mr. Putin., PM of Russia (Delhi)

October 1999

23
112

H. E. Mr.Hugo Chavez., President of Venezuela (Mumbai)

Annual Report 1999-2000

December 1999

16

H. E. Mr. Milos Zeman, Prime Minister of the Czech Republic

January 2000

5-6

H. E. Mr. Tariq Aziz, Deputy Prime Minister of Iran

February 2000

1

H. E. Mrs. Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister of Bangladesh

Official Vists by Foreign Ministers or Equivalent and other Dignitaries
January 1999

Jan 29-Feb 1
Jan 30-Feb.3

Mr. Strobe Talbott, Deputy Secy. of State, USA
H. E. Mr. Nguyen M.Cam, Deputy PM & FM of Socialist Republic of Vietnam

February 1999

13-18
23-26

H. E. Mr. Emeka Anyaoku, Secy.Genl, Commonwealth
H. E. Mr. Kamal Kharrazi, FM of Islamic Republic of Iran

May 1999

15-17

H. E. Mr. Sergei Prikhodko, Special Envoy of Russian President

June 1999

12
29 June-1 July

H. E. Mr. Sartaj Aziz, FM of Pakistan
H. E. Mr. Theo Ben Gurirab, FM of Namibia

July 1999

28-31

H. E. Mr.V. Khristenko, Deputy PM of Russia

August 1999

16-18

H. E. Mr. Kasimjomart K.Tokaev, FM of Kazakhstan

October 1999

20-23
30 Oct.-1 Nov.

H. E. Mr.Emeka Anyaoku, Secy.General,Commonwealth
H. E. Mr. Janos Martonyi, FM of Hungary

December 1999

8-12

H. E. Mr. Bonaya A Godana, FM of Republic of Kenya

113

Protocol

January 2000

7-11
14-15
29-2 February

H. E. Mr. Vollaback, Foreign Minister of Norway
H. E. Mr. Viktor Kristenko, Deputy Prime Minister of the Russian Federation
H. E. Mr. Kadirgamar, Foreign Minister of Sri Lanka

February 2000

17-19

H. E. Mr. Hubert Vedrine, Foreign Minister of France

Foreign Tours of the President, Vice President and Prime Minister
February 1999

7-14
8-9
20-21

Shri A. B. Vajpayee, Prime Minister to Trinidad & Tobago, Montego Bay (for G- 15 Summit) and Morocco
Shri Krishan Kant, Vice President to Jordan (for the funeral of King Hussain II)
Shri A. B. Vajpayee, Prime Minister to Pakistan (Lahore by bus)

March 1999

·

Shri Krishan Kant, Vice President to Bahrain (for the funeral of Emir)

June 1999

14-18
19-20

Shri Krishan Kant, Vice President to South Africa (swearing in ceremony of President Mbeki)
Shri A. B. Vajpayee, PM, to Bangladesh (Dhaka for inauguration of direct bus service)

July 1999

24-27

Shri Krishan Kant, Vice President to Morocco

August 1999

24-31

Shri Krishan Kant, Vice President to Mongolia and Kryghyzstan

October 1999

20-22

Shri Krishan Kant, Vice President to Tanzania (Dar-es-Salaam) (for the funeral of Dr. Julius K.Nyerere)

November 1999

6-10
11-16

Shri K. R. Narayanan, President, State Visit to Austria (Vienna) and Germany (Salzburg)
Sliri A. B. Vajpayee, PM, to South Africa (Durban) (for (CHOGM)
uu

114

Annual Report 1999-2000

15
Passport and Consular Services and Indians Overseas

T

he Passports for Indian nationals, visa for foreign nationals
and Consular services encompass the activity in which the
Ministry of External Affairs and its subsidiary organisation
‘Central Passport Organisation – (CPO)’ serve the public directly. In
this era of increased foreign travel and globalisation the issue of a
passport empowers the individual to become a global citizen. Through
its activities the Consular, Passport and Visa (CPV) Division facilitates
the export of Indian manpower, expertise and technology abroad.
The growing number of Non-Resident Indians and the People of
Indian Origin abroad constitute a vital and vibrant link between India
and the rest of the world. In the Nineties as the international scene
has witnessed momentous changes, the people of Indian Origin
abroad have matured politically, prospered economically and have
developed socially nurturing their roots and simultaneously integrating
fully with the societies of their countries of adoption. In the new
millennium communities of people of Indian Origin are well poised
to play a significant role in promoting India’s interests and in
contributing towards the strengthening of India’s political and
economic relations with their respective countries of residence.
Passport Services
The CPO was imbued with a new dynamism and concerted efforts

were made to fulfil the Government’s commitments under the
Citizens’ Charter through various innovative measures aimed at
providing efficient, prompt and transparent service at the 28 Passport
Offices. Two new Passport Collection Centres were opened at
Vijaywada and Mangalore during the year. The Passport Rules were
amended to allow for printing, distribution and sale at a nominal
price of passport application forms for convenience of the passport
applicants.
A website was launched which carries all the rules, regulations
etc. for passport, visa and PIO Cards and allows all kinds of
applications forms to be downloaded.
Concerted efforts were made to reduce the pendency of
applications in various Passport Offices for which procedures were
streamlined. A ‘Pendency Clearance Week’ was declared in the last
week of July and November and December were declared as ‘Pendency
Clearance Months.’ Annual Passport Officers Conference was held
on 9-10 November 1999 at which emphasis was placed on reforming
and revamping the procedures to make the system more productive
and efficient. There was special emphasis on the redressal of public
grievances and the practice of periodical ‘Passport Adalats’ was
initiated at eleven Passport Offices.
115

Passport and Consular Services and Indians Overseas

Several measures were initiated to simplify and streamline various
procedures for issuing passports and rendering other miscellaneous
services promptly and efficiently in keeping with the commitment
under the Citizen’ Charter. The Police verification system was
comprehensively revised to make it more responsive to public demand.
To meet the public demand a ‘Tatkaal’ Scheme for out of turn
issue of passports was launched. The fee for this scheme was set at a
higher level to meet the extra costs involved in interruption of the
normal chain and sequence of work in the issue of an out of turn
passport.
At most Passport Offices concrete measures were taken to
enhance the level of comfort to the applicants/visitors by increasing
the number of public counters, augmenting air-conditioning,
installation of water coolers, provision of chairs etc.
The computerisation of Passport Offices continued and four
more Passport Offices were computerised taking the total of
computerised Passport Office to 19. Other Passport Offices are also
in the process of being computerised. A proposal for a comprehensive
satellite based computerised networking and connectivity as well as
creation of a Central Processing Cell has been formulated. The process
of tenders for comprehensive computerisation of all Passport Offices
has been initiated to take advantage of the latest available technology.
Separately machine writing of passports is being started on an
experimental basis in the Delhi Passport Office.
It has been the endeavour of the Government of India to house
the Passport Office in Government owned properties. At present
Passport Offices buildings at four places (Mumbai, Cochin, Kozhikode
and Hyderabad) are owned by MEA, at five places are owned by the
Central Government/State Government and are rented in 19 places.
The Passport Office at Hyderabad was shifted to a new building owned
116

by MEA during the year. MEA has acquired plots of land/built-up
properties in various cities in India and construction work is in
progress at five places viz. Ahmedabad for office and residential
complex, Cochin (residential complex), Patna (Office complex), Panaji
and Kozhikode (residential complex). The process for purchase of
land and construction of buildings for Passport Offices has been
initiated at seven other places i.e. Bangalore, Lucknow, Jaipur,
Thiruvanathapuram, Chandigarh, Tiruchirappalli, Jammu and
Calcutta. In Chennai space in an office complex has been purchased
and possession would be taken over in a few months.
The number of applications received during the year for grant of
passports and other miscellaneous services like renewal, change of
name, additional booklets, fresh passports for minors etc. continued
to rise in keeping with the overall climate of liberalization and increased
travel of Indians overseas. A total number of 25.78 lakh passports
were issued and 24.30 lakh miscellaneous services were rendered.
During the year 1999, detailed figures of passports issued/ services
rendered, including the revenue and expenditure of Passport Offices
are at Appendix-IV
A conscious beginning was made to introduce modern
management practices in the passport issue system. Services of a
private consultancy firm and a management expert were mobilized
for a management and process study of Regional Passport Officer,
Delhi.
PIO Cards
The six million Indian Citizens and over twenty million People
of Indian Origin (PIO) resident abroad have collectively evolved into
a major instrument for the furtherance of India’s foreign policy.
Recognising their significant role in the shaping of the country’s
destiny, Government launched the PIO Card Scheme for Persons of

Annual Report 1999-2000

Indian Origin, settled in countries specified by the Government, which
has, besides introducing a visa free regime, also conferred some special
economic, educational, financial and cultural benefits. All preparations,
were completed in time for the issue of PIO Cards from Missions
and Posts abroad.
Consular Services
All Missions and Posts abroad were sensitised to the consular
needs of Overseas Indians and to render them efficient and timely
assistance on all days and at all hours. Problems encountered by NonResident Indians/workers especially in the Gulf countries, including
disputes with their employers/sponsors were sought to be promptly
redressed. Government maintained contacts with the Governments
of the Gulf countries, including through the institutional mechanism
of the Joint Commissions, with the objective of resolving consular
problems and ameliorating the conditions of Indian workers in those
countries. In cases of deaths of Indians abroad, assistance continued
to be arranged by our Missions and Posts for completing the
formalities for early dispatch of the mortal remains, maintaining liaison
with the local and Indian authorities and keeping the relatives of the
deceased informed.
During the year, 8945 Indians were arrested abroad and 3589
deaths of Indian abroad were reported to the Ministry. A summary
of the consular data for the year 1999 is at Appendix-V
Visas
India’s 157 Missions and Posts abroad provided visa services to
over a million foreigners in the period 1 January to 30 September
1999. Over the years the procedure for grant of visa by our Missions
and Posts has been streamlined. Many Missions and Posts give visas
either across the counter or the same day and most others grant visas
within 48 hours.

The Consular Wing at CGI, Birmingham was computerised
during the year. It is proposed to computerise the Consular Wings of
our Missions and Posts in the Gulf, West Europe and North America.
A number of software companies have been short-listed and the
process of evaluation of their technical proposals and commercial
offers is at an advanced stage. First those Missions and Posts would
be computerised where the volume of services rendered is high.
Bilateral Agreements
As part of the global endeavour to combat organized crime,
international terrorism and drug trafficking, and acknowledging the
growing international dimensions of financial and other crimes,
consular agreements are being negotiated with several countries to
provide legal and institutional framework. These consular agreements
include Extradition Treaties, Agreement on Mutual Legal Assistance
in Criminal Matters, Agreements on Mutual Legal Assistance in Civil
Matters and Consular Conventions.
During the visit of Kazakh Foreign Minister to India in October,
1999 an Agreement on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters
was signed. In November 1999, an Extradition Treaty, an Agreement
on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters and an Agreement
on Juridical and Judicial Cooperation in Civil and Commercial matters
were signed during the visit of the Minister of Justice and Aukaf of
the UAE. The Extradition Treaty signed with the USA in June 1997
was ratified and instruments of ratification were exchanged in July
1999. During the year, official and technical level consultations were
held with Tunisia, Oman, Poland and Mongolia and Extradition
Treaties were initialed with all these countries. An Agreement on
Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters and an Agreement on
Mutual Legal assistance in Civil Matters were also initialed with
Mongolia.
117

Passport and Consular Services and Indians Overseas

The Ministry is actively pursuing requests for extradition and
other legal assistance from foreign Governments both for criminal
and civil and commercial charges. The requests for extradition emanate
from our obligations under the Extradition Treaties or Extradition
Arrangements entered into with various countries. During the year
16 requests for extradition and 68 requests for legal assistance were
received in addition to the ongoing cases.
During the year, 2,47,731 documents were accorded consular
attestation in CPV Division of which 1,55,645 were commercial
documents. This service is rendered on the same day, is without any
charge and is prompt and efficient.
Renovation of Patiala House
The CPV Division located in Patiala House, visited by a large
number of persons who come for attestation of documents as well as
by diplomats and staff of foreign Missions in New Delhi. Over the
years the building had become dilapidated and shabby in appearance.
Comprehensive renovation of the exterior as well as interior of the
building was undertaken and completed during the year.
Central Passport Organisation
The personnel of the Central Passport Organisation (CPO) man

118

the 28 Passport Offices and 15 existing Passport Collection Centres.
The current strength of CPO Cadre is 1690 with 173 Officers and
1517 non-gazetted staff. One of the major demands of the employees
has been for a comprehensive Cadre Review as there is stagnation at
various levels. A proposal for Cadre Review-cum-Creation of Posts
was partially approved by the Ministry of Finance in June 1999. A
fresh proposal has been prepared for Cadre Review to enhance the
number of officials to deal with public grievances and to streamline
the supervisory system.
As the volume of work as well as the network of Passport Offices
and Passport Collection Centres has been growing over the years, the
Ministry is considering a proposal to create a Central Passport
Authority with a view to grant greater autonomy to Passport Offices
to achieve greater efficiency and higher productivity.
Vision
The Consular, Passport and Visa work constitutes an important
public service. The public rightly expects prompt and courteous
service with minimal delays. The mission of the Ministry is to meet
the public expectations and provide a level of satisfaction of which it
can be proud.
uu

Annual Report 1999-2000

16
Administration and Organisation

F

ollowing the General Elections in September-October 1999,
Shri Atal Behari Vajpayee assumed charge of the office of
Prime Minister on October 13, 1999. Shri Jaswant Singh took
over as Minister of External Affairs and Shri Ajit Kumar Panja
assumed charge as the Minister of State for External Affairs.

officials and pensioners, the Pension Section has been revamped and
computerised. All pension cases are being dealt with in a time bound
manner.

At present, the Government of India has 160 Resident Diplomatic
Missions/Posts and other offices.

The Establishment Division was provided an outlay of Rs.90
Crores in BE for 1999-2000 under the Capital Outlay Budget - Major
Heads 4059 and 4216 i.e. Capital Outlay for Public Works and Housing
respectively. The Establishment Division earmarked these funds
towards construction/renovation and purchase of properties abroad
and in India.

The total strength of the IFS(A), IFS(B), Interpreter and L&T
Cadres of the Ministry is 3588 (Appendix I).
A table indicating the appointments to various posts in the
Ministry made in 1999-2000, including vacancies filled against
reservations is at Appendix II.
The extent of language proficiency in the Ministry can be judged
from the list of officers proficient in various foreign languages at
Appendix III.
Administrative procedures have been streamlined during the
period under review. This includes publication of a Manual of External
Affairs Instructions, updating of the IFS (PLCA) Rules and publication
of a Compendium of important instructions governing movement
of personnel and provision of facilities, etc. Following the Pay
Commission recommendations refixing the pay and allowances of

Establishment

Accordingly, in keeping with the Comprehensive Plan for the
purchase/construction of properties abroad, purchase proposals were
pursued and as a result a Chancery building for the Consulate General
in Edinburgh (UK), a residential unit in Budapest and 5 residential
units in Seoul were acquired. Purchase proposals of properties in
Hong Kong, Tehran, Paramaribo and Toronto were followed up.
The on-going construction projects in Abu Dhabi, Mauritius and
Berlin were closely monitored and progress achieved. Civil work for
the Indira Gandhi Centre for Indian Culture (IGCIC) complex in
Mauritius is virtually complete and the Interior work is on. In Abu
Dhabi, the construction of a Chancery-cum-residential complex is to
119

Administration and Organisation

be completed in the first quarter of year 2000. Major construction
work for a Chancery-cum-residential complex in Berlin was awarded
in May 1999 and is scheduled to be completed by October, 2000.
Other projects on the anvil are Beijing Residential Project,
Moscow Residential/School Project, Cultural Centre in Trinidad and
Tobago and renovation/reconstruction of the Embassy Residence
in Singapore.
The projects which are also expected to be taken up on priority
basis include construction projects for our Missions in Doha, Dhaka,
Islamabad , Warsaw, Tashkent and Gaborone. These are to be taken
in a staggered manner keeping in view the Budgetary allocations.
The project for renovation of the Embassy Residence in Berlin
was completed on schedule, in October, 1999. Cabinet approval for
the renovation of the High Commissioner’s residence in London was
obtained and work has begun. The renovation work of the GOIowned property in Moscow was approved.
With regard to Construction projects of the Ministry of External
Affairs in India, financial approvals for the construction of the ICCR
complex in Calcutta and Foreign Service Institute in Delhi were
obtained during the year. Work on these is expected to start during
the year 2000. The Central Vista Committee has approved the urban
built form for Videsh Bhavan, New Delhi. The design competition,
selection of architect and preparation of preliminary design will follow.
Preliminary plans for the MEA sponsored Afro-Asian Legal
Consultative Committee (AALCC) construction Project were
approved for which cost estimates are being prepared by CPWD.
With a view to alleviating the accommodation problems for the
officers and staff of MEA, construction projects in Chankaya Puri
and Pappan Kalan had been undertaken. The CPWD is presently
preparing preliminary financial estimates in respect of the construction
of the Chankaya Puri residential quarters, while the construction work
for Pappan Kalan residential complex is in progress.
120

Regional Passport Office project in Hyderabad was completed
in July, 99 and Construction work in Cochin, Kozhikode, and Panaji
is in progress. The Passport office in Ahmedabad is nearing
completion. The interior works in Patna Passport Office is being
completed. The new building purchased for Chennai Passport Office
is expected to be ready by next year for occupation. Planning work in
respect of Passport Offices for Bhuvaneshwar, Bangalore, Calcutta,
Chandigarh, Lucknow and Pune is in progress. Foundation Stone for
Videsh Bhavan, Calcutta which would house the Branch Secretariat
and the RPO was laid by Shri A.K. Panja, MOS(EA) in Calcutta on
24 December, 1999. Proposals for purchase of land in Jaipur, Trichi
and Trivandrum are being examined.
The 2nd Review of Indexation of Foreign Allowance was carried
out and the system of rationalizing Foreign Allowance was
consolidated further. The Indexation of Representational Grant is
under active consideration.
In order to upgrade and modernize office facilities, computer
hardware in several Divisions of MEA was updated and E-Mail and
Internet facilities provided to reduce communication costs, access
the myriad websites for relevant information as well as to speed up
links within the Ministry and also between the Ministry and the
Missions. All out efforts were made to ensure Y2K compliance at the
Headquarters and Missions abroad with the help of the National
Informatic Centre (NIC).
Several works for maintenance, renovation and beautification of
Ministry buildings have been carried out and a system of maintenance
Committees for the various buildings owned by MEA was introduced,
resulting in overall improvement in office environment.
Procedures for monitoring the purchase and distribution of office
equipment were reviewed and further streamlined during the year.
uu

Annual Report 1999-2000

The Foreign Service Institute continued its activities during 19992000, as below:

in importance such as national security, management challenges in a
rapidly changing global scenario and investment promotion.

(1) Professional Course in Diplomacy and International Relations
for the Indian Foreign Service Probationers (1998 batch);

The training programme for the 1998 batch of Indian Foreign
Service Probationers comprised of 26 modules which dealt with
important areas of work related to foreign policy and diplomacy. The
most comprehensive module related to India’s foreign policy, covering
almost every aspect of our external relations.

(2) Professional Course for Foreign Diplomats;
(3) Familiarisation Programme for Resident Foreign Diplomats;
(4) Basic Professional Course for IFS(B) personnel posted
abroad;
(5) Orientation Course for Non-MEA officers.
The Professional Course on Diplomacy and International
Relations for the Probationers of the Indian Foreign Service - the
most important part of FSI’s work - was conducted for the 1998
batch of Indian Foreign Service Probationers, from January 1999 to
December 1999. The 1999 batch of Probationers commenced their
training in January 2000 after completing the Foundation Course at
the Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration.

In keeping with the special emphasis in recent years on economic
diplomacy, the module on ‘International Economic Relations and
Commercial Diplomacy’ was strengthened, with focus on India’s
economic reforms, the international economic missions abroad, role
of Commercial Counsellors in investment promotion, commercial
negotiations, management challenges in the changing global scenario
and the international finance and capital markets etc. A comprehensive
programme was arranged in collaboration with CII and eminent
speakers from CII & Indian Industry briefed the Probationers on
above matters. CII’s active participation was a new feature introduced

The basic objective of this Course was to provide comprehensive
training to the young Indian Foreign Service Officer-trainees in the
traditional areas of diplomacy, international relations, political
reporting and protocol and in several related fields that are growing
121

Foreign Service Institute

The module on “Defence & Security” apart from focusing on
vital security issues like nuclear non-proliferation, disarmament and
arms control, also covered India’s defence policy, the state of our
armed forces, developments in defence technology and the security
of our border areas.
An additional module on “Special Diplomatic Skills” emphasised
negotiating skills, communications skills, use of Information
Technology, development of leadership skills and “espirit de corps”.
Practical mock sessions on negotiation skills were held.
Apart from these modules, there was a good deal of emphasis on
field visits to acquaint the Probationers with the ground situation in
important areas of the country such as the North-East and Jammu &
Kashmir. The Probationers were also attached with the armed forces
for training.
The Indian Foreign Service Probationers were given extensive
briefing on the role of culture in diplomacy at the National Institute
of Advanced Studies, Bangalore. They also visited the National
Hydrographic Institute and the Survey of India establishments in
Dehradun for briefing on border demarcation on land and sea.
Continuing with the programme of visiting neighbouring
countries, Myanmar & Bangladesh were visited by the Indian Foreign
Service Probationers for a period of around one week each.
The Professional Course for Foreign Diplomats (PCFD) is one
of the most prestigious courses organized by the FSI. 22 PCFDs
have been held so far and 483 diplomats from over 94 countries (in
Central Europe, Africa, Central Asia, South East Asia, South and
West Asia and South and Central America) have participated in them.
The 23rd and 24th PCFDs are scheduled to be held in January and
March 2000 respectively. The objective of the Course is to provide a
122

professional orientation in the main categories of activities which
diplomats deal with in their professional life. Some of the basic areas
covered relate to diplomacy, international relations, international law
and international organizations, security, focus on specific regions,
diplomatic practice and protocol, representational and media skills.
The diplomats are also exposed to presentations on Indian polity,
India’s foreign and security policies, Indian economy, science and
technology and culture. During the course, PCFD participants are
taken on study tours to various centres of economic, industrial and
cultural importance to expose them to the diversity in the country
and to enable a first hand feel of India’s achievements, capabilities
and constraints in different fields of national development.
The FSI expanded its computer training facilities with 16 new
stand-alone HCL Pentium II PCs interconnected via a LAN network
for internet access. ‘Basic Beginners Courses’ in computers are now
on offer on a standing basis to all MEA officials. They are aimed at
enabling officials of all levels/ages to overcome hesitancy in using
computers and developing felicity in word processing, internet
exploring and working on e-mail. Next level courses on MS Word,
MS Excel and MS Access are ready and would be commenced once
sufficient number of officials are trained in the Basic Beginners
Courses.
Three Basic Professional Courses were held in 1999 for officials
in the Ministry of External Affairs upto the level of Section Officers
prior to their departure on posting to Indian Missions abroad.
Emphasis is given in this Course on preparing officials to function
effectively is a team in diplomatic environment in various capitals
abroad, besides exposure to administrative rules and procedures;
finance and accounts work relevant to Indian Missions and passport,
visas and consular work. The effort is to co-relate closely with the
expected job profile of each participant even while retaining an overall
perspective of the functions of each wing in our Missions abroad.

Annual Report 1999-2000

The Institute also organised brief Orientation Programmes for
officers from other Ministries of the Government of India proceeding
on posting to our Missions abroad on an on-going basis.
The 10th Familiarisation Programme entitled “Introduction to
India” for resident foreign diplomats was arranged from Nov. 1st to
5th, 1999. The Programme was designed to impart basic information
about India to the newly arrived diplomats and covered topics such
as the Constitution of India; organisation of MEA and Government
of India; India’s economic policy; historical legacy of India; Indian
art, music and culture, etc. Twenty two resident diplomats participated
in the Programme.

The Rector of the Diplomatic Academy of Russia visited the
Foreign Service Institute and an Agreement for institutional
cooperation between the Foreign Service Institute and the Diplomatic
Academy of Russia was signed on this occasion. An Agreement for
cooperation between the Foreign Service Institute and the Institute
of International Relations, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Vietnam
was signed during the visit of the President of Vietnam in December
1999. Similar Agreements are due to be signed with the Diplomatic
Academies of Uruguay and Croatia.
uu

123

18
Implementation of Official Language Policy and
Propagation of Hindi Abroad

E

fforts are being made by the Ministry for the progressive use
of Hindi and its propagation in India and abroad. Documents
like bilateral treaties, agreements, memorandum of
understanding, credentials, speeches of President, PAC paras, Annual
Report of the Ministry, Parliament questions and other documents
submitted to both the Houses of Parliament are being issued in Hindi
and English.
The VI World Hindi Conference was organized in the United
Kingdom, the principal venue being in London with some cultural
events also being organized in Manchester, Birmingham and York,
from September, 14 to 18, 1999. The Conference was organized in
association with the following organizations:
(i) Hindi Samiti, U.K., London
(ii) Gitanjali Bahubhashiya Sahityik Samudaya, Birmingham
(iii) Bhartiya Bhasha Sangam, York
(iv) Other collaborators like the Nehru Centre, London, Bhartiya
Vidya Bhavan, London and SAMPAD, Birmigham
The inauguration of the Conference coincided with the 50th
anniversary of declaration of Hindi as Raj Bhasha. This added a special

124

significance to the event. This was the biggest Conference so far
both in participation and scale of activities.
The extensive pre-event publicity both within the UK and in
India resulted in a record response in the number of participants and
over 700 people participated (350 from India, 150 from other countries
and 200 from UK). The above included foreign and Indian scholars
from 21 countries.
Apart from the number of participants, it is also significant that
the Conference received about 300 papers for the academic sessions.
20 foreign and 13 Indian scholars were honoured at the closing
ceremony for their valuable contribution to Hindi language and
literature.
The inaugural ceremony held in the prestigious Wembley
Conference Centre was inaugurated by the Minister of State for
External Affairs, Smt. Vasundhara Raje. Ms. Patricia Hewitt, Minister
of State in the Department of Trade and Industry, British Government
was the Chief Guest. Messages from the Prime Minister of India Shri
Atal Behari Vajpayee, British Prime Minister Tony Blair and the Prime
Ministers of Mauritius, Fiji and Nepal were received and read out at
the inaugural ceremony.

Annual Report 1999-2000

During the Conference, a book and photo exhibition by DAVP
and a computer exhibition by C-DAC and Centre for Computer
Learning were organized at the Nehru Centre. Several cultural events
including Kavi Sammelans in major UK cities, Hindi play ‘Kayakalp’
staged by Japanese students of Osaka University and Hindi film shows
were also organized to coincide with the Conference. Dance
performance by Ms Shovana Narayan and songs by Shri Jagjit Singh
and Bhupen Hazarika were the main attractions of the inaugural
function.
The discussions during the Conference stressed on the necessity
to give equal importance to Hindi Language along with literature so
as to make it more popular among the future generations.
The resolution adopted at the Conference congratulated the
Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India for implementing
the two resolutions passed in the last five World Hindi Conferences,
namely creation of Mahatma Gandhi International University at
Wardha and signing of the Memorandum of Understanding between
Mauritius and Indian Governments for the establishment of a World
Hindi Secretariat in Mauritius.
Standard Hindi literature, comprising books in Hindi on Indian
art, history, literature, language, religion and philosophy will be sent
to Indian Missions/Posts abroad for use in libraries and as gifts to
educational and voluntary organizations engaged in teaching of Hindi.

Missions/Posts have also been promoting Hindi through special Hindi
classes, Hindi film shows, seminars and competitions. Hindi text
books, audio cassettes and Hindi dictionaries have been sent to
selected Missions/Posts.
Hindi forms an integral part of the FSI training programme.
Intensive training about the Government’s Official Language Policy
and its implementation is given to the trainees.
The Ministry provides liberal financial grants and assistance to
the organizations engaged in the promotion and propagation of Hindi
abroad.
In accordance with the recommendations of the Hindi Advisory
Committee of the Ministry, two officials were detailed to New York
during the UNGA Session to assist those members of the Indian
delegation who wished to speak in Hindi.
50 slots were allocated to foreign nationals for learning Hindi at
Kendriya Hindi Sansthan, Agra this year. Hindi teachers were
appointed in Indian Missions abroad under a special Ministry scheme
to teach Hindi to the children of India-based Embassy and other
officials.
Special programmes are being worked for the Celebration of
Golden Jubilee Year of Declaration of Hindi as the Official Language.
uu

125

19

T

he Indian Council for Cultural Relations (hereinafter referred
to as the Council or ICCR) was formally set up in 1950, with
the primary objective of establishing, reviving and
strengthening cultural relations and mutual understanding between
India and other countries. The ICCR’s report of activities for the
month of December, 1999 alongwith the expected activities for the
period 1 January 2000 to 31 March 2000 are given below:
(i)

administration of scholarship schemes for overseas students
on behalf of the Government of India ;

(ii)

exchange of exhibitions;

(iii)

organisation of and participation in seminars and symposia;

(iv)

exchange of performing arts and groups;

(v)

establishing and maintaining Chairs and Professorships for
Indian Studies abroad;

126

Annual Report 1999-2000

summer and winter camps for foreign students and the publication
of the student newsletter “At Home in India”.
Indian Cultural Centres Abroad
One of the primary objectives of the Council is to promote greater
awareness of India’s composite cultural heritage abroad. Towards this
end the Council has set up and maintains 14 cultural centres in Cairo
(Egypt), Berlin (Germany), Port Louis (Mauritius), Paramaribo
(Surinam), Georgetown (Guyana), Jakarta (Indonesia), Moscow
(Russian Federation), London (UK), Almaty (Kazakhstan), Tashkent
(Uzbekistan), Durban and Johannesburg (South Africa), Port of Spain
(Trinidad and Tobago) and Colombo (Sri Lanka). All these cultural
centres are functioning under the administrative control of the Indian
Missions in the respective countries.
The activities of these Indian Cultural Centres can broadly be
classified under two categories. Several of the Centres have been set
up in countries having a sizeable Indian population, like the centres
in Trinidad & Tobago, Mauritius, Guyana, Surinam etc. The Centres’
activities there reflect the need of the local Indian population to keep
in touch with Indian traditions through activities such as regular
training in Indian Music, Dance and Yoga.
The Centres’ also organise programmes to observe important
dates and events in the Indian calendar. Other Centres like those in
London, Berlin and Moscow focus more on intellectual activities such
as organising lectures, talks, panel discussions and seminars on subjects
of contemporary and cultural interest, publications of newsletters
etc. These are mainly aimed at increasing an understanding of India
through mutual interaction.
Visiting Professors and Chairs of Indian Studies
Abroad
The Council deputes Visiting Professors abroad to teach Indian

languages and other related subjects. The deputation of Professors
abroad is carried out under Bilateral Cultural Exchange Programmes,
and the Scheme of Propagation of Hindi abroad. ICCR presently has
on deputation 19 Professors teaching Hindi, Sanskrit, Tamil,
Malayalam, Modern Indian History, Indian Civilization, in Helsinki
(Finland), Paramaribo (Surinam), Budapest (Hungary), Moscow
(Russia), Seoul (South Korea), two in Warsaw (Poland), Brussels
(Belgium), two in Port of Spain (Trinidad & Tobago), Sofia (Bulgaria),
Ankara (Turkey), Bucharest (Romania), Beijing (China), Bangkok
(Thailand), Paris (France), Osh (Kyrghystan), Moka (Mauritius) and
Tashkent (Uzbekistan).
Publications
The Council has a major publication programme which has been
growing over the years. The Council brings out seven quarterly journals
in different languages - “Indian Horizons” and “Africa Quarterly”
(both in English), “Gagananchal” (Hindi), “Papeles de la India”
(Spanish), “Rencontre Avec L’ Inde” (French), “Thaqaft-ul Hind”
(Arabic) and “Indien in der Gegenwart” (German).
In the current year, besides publishing theme-based special issues
of Indian Horizons (Literary India), Rencontre Avec L’ Inde (La
Diaspora Indienne a’ Maurice, in two volumes) and Indien in der
Gegenwart (on women’s issues), the Council also brought out a special
issue of Gagananchal on the occasion of theVI World Hindi
Conference held in London in September, 1999.
A revised and updated edition of the book entitled “The United
States and India 1976-1996” edited by Shri M.V. Kamath was
published by the Council and launched in New York in September,
1999 by Shri Jaswant Singh, Minister for External Affairs. A
commemorative volume on Dr. Zakir Husain, the third President of
India, in English, Hindi and Urdu is expected to come out shortly.
127

Cultural Relations

The Council participated in the Australian Book Fair from 2-4
June, 1999 through the National Book Trust.

Rs. 37.00 crores. Expected receipts of the Council are Rs.0.50 crores.

During the period 1 January 2000 to 31 March 2000 two
publications - “Rama Story in South East Asia” by Sh Satyavrat Shastri
and “A Treasury of Sanskrit Literature” by Sh A N D Haksar are
expected to be brought out by the Council.

The expenditure so far booked during the month of December
1999 is Rs.5.49 crores. However, the progressive expenditure so far
booked upto December 1999 is Rs.26.38 crores. The expenditure for
the month of January 2000 to March 2000 would approximately be
Rs.11.00 crores.

Library

Seminars / Symposia / Conferences

The personal collection of books and manuscripts bequeathed
by Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, the Founder - President of the Council,
forms the core of the ICCR Library.
Over the decades the library has grown and presently has
approximately 50,846 books, 195 manuscripts and 47 microfilm rolls.
For the period under review, the library has purchased around 259
titles in English, 223 in Hindi and 186 in Urdu. The library has received
around 55 publications (English, Hindi and Urdu) as gifts and also
subscribes to 18 Newspapers, 44 Magazines and 48 Journals.
A catalogue of the manuscripts and personal books of Maulana
Azad has been printed in book form in three language - Arabic, Urdu
and Persian - and put in circulation.
The Library has joined Delhi Library Network (DELNET) with
the prime objective to optimise resource sharing.
The Library has procured approximately eleven English titles,
hundred issues of Journals and News Magazines during December
1999. Approximately 155 visitors visited the library and one Interlibrary loan request was taken care of during the same period.
The book selection committee meeting is likely to be held during
February 2000.
Accounts
ICCR’s grant for the general activities for the year 1999-2000 is
128

ICCR collaborated and provided financial assistance to the
Jawaharlal Nehru University towards organising a three-day
International Seminar in October to commemorate the Bicentenary
of the Russian Poet, A.S. Pushkin.
On the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the establishment of
Indo-Austrian diplomatic relations, ICCR, in collaboration with
Austrian Embassy, organised a symposium “India-Austria : Yesterday
and Today” on 27 October, 1999 at IIC, New Delhi. Three scholars
from India and an equal number from Austria participated in the
Seminar.
The Council commissioned a 26-minute video film on various
Indian classical dance forms. The major objective is to telecast it
through international T.V. networks to explain the subtleties of Indian
dance forms to non-Indian viewers.
Agency Work on Behalf of Ministry of External
Affairs
The 54th Anniversary of the United Nations was celebrated on
25 October, 1999. Shri Ajit Panja, Minister of State for External Affairs
was the chief guest. The message of the UN Secretary-General was
read by Mr Feodor Starcevic, Director, United Nations Information
Centre (UNIC). Other speakers at the function were Shri H M Haleem,
President, World Federation of United Nations Association

Annual Report 1999-2000

(WFUNA)/Speaker, West Bengal Legislative Assembly and Shri Ram
Niwas Mirdha, President, Indian Federation of United Nations
Associations (IFUNA). The programme was followed by a Kathak
dance recital by Aditi Mangaldas.
A function was organised at Tagore Hall of ICCR to mark the
International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People on 7
December 1999. Sh Nareshwar Dayal, Secretary (E), MEA was the
Chief Guest at the function. His Excellency, Dr Khalid El Sheikh,
Ambassador of the State of Palestine was present on the occasion.
Sh Abdul Halim, Speaker, West Bengal Legislative Assembly and
President, World Federation of United Nations Association
(WFUNA) also spoke on the occasion.
Release of TV Film titled “When the Soul Glows”
A function was organised at the residence of Hon’ble VicePresident of India/President, ICCR on 14 January 2000, at which Sh
Krishan Kant, Vice President of India released a film produced by
the Council and directed by Ms Anita Pratap titled “When the Soul
Glows.” The function was attended by eminent artistes, journalists
and public figures.

by these groups included theatre, folk dance & music, western classical
music and ballet. The performances were arranged in various cities,
viz. Mumbai, Bangalore, Ahmedabad, Dehradun, Mussoorie, Shimla,
Lucknow, Pune, Goa, Kullu, Chandigarh and Bhopal. A major visiting
group was the 25-member Gansu Acrobatic Group from China.
Performances of this group were organised in Calcutta, Delhi and
Mumbai.
Under its prestigious series of Indian art forms viz. “Horizon”
and “Retrospectives”, the Council continued to present performances
by emerging and outstanding artistes in Delhi and other cities. Some
of the eminent artistes who performed under the “Retrospectives”
series were Ustad Allauddin Khan (Esraj), Madhavi Mudgal (Odissi),
Shovana Narayan (Kathak), Ustad Shamim Ahmed Khan (Sitar), Guru
Kelucharan Mohapatra (Odissi), Dr. Mustafa Raza (Vichitra Veena),
Guru Singhajit Singh, and Charu Mathur (Manipuri), Pt. Rajan &
Sajan Mishra (Bhakti Sangeet) and Geeta Chandran (Bharatanatyam).

Performing Arts

The Council sponsored visits of 50 cultural groups to 57 countries
covering all continents of the world. Some of these group participated
in major events/festival, e.g., “Asia in Helsinki” – Festival in Finland;
“Marrakesh” - Festival in Morocco;, “Tyagaraja” – Festival in South
Africa; “Plovdiv” - Festival in Bulgaria; “Bangkok’s International
Festival of Dance” in Thailand; “Islamia” – Festival in Egypt;
“Edinburgh Festival of India” in the UK; “Bosra International
Festival” in Syria; “Cervantes” – Festival in Mexico and the Music
Utsav” in Bangladesh. While sponsoring these visits, special emphasis
was given to holding workshops and lecture-demonstrations with local
artistes in addition to performances. Special emphasis was also given
to sponsoring groups to neighbouring countries.

During the period April-December, 1999 the Council organised
visits to India of 17 cultural delegations from various countries viz.
Myanmar, China, Bulgaria, Uganda, Namibia, Bangladesh, Nepal, Sri
Lanka, Germany, France, Austria, Italy and Egypt. The presentations

Eminent artistes sponsored to various countries during the period
included – Geeta Chandran and Malavika Sarukkai (Bharatanatyam);
Pt. Jasraj, Pt. Rajan & Sajan Mishra, Shubha Mudgal and Wasifuddin
Dagar (Hindustani Vocal); Guru Kelucharan Mohapatra (Odissi);

Maulana Azad Essay Competition 1997-98
The Awardees for the year 1997-98 for the Maulana Azad Essay
Competition in Urdu, Hindi and English have been selected by the
respective juries.

129

Cultural Relations

Amala Shankar (Modern Dance); Ila Arun (Popular / Folk Music);
Shovana Narayan (Kathak); Aruna Sayeeram (Carnatic Music);
Ramayana Group of Shriram Bharatiya Kala Kendra; Theatre Group
of United Players Guild; Seraikela Chhau Group of Ashish Kar and
Pung & Dhol Cholam Group of Manipur.
During the month of December 1999, the Council hosted five
cultural delegations in the field of dance, music and theatre from
Nepal, Sri Lanka, Vietnam, France and Singapore. During the period
January-March 2000 cultural groups from the Netherlands, Japan,
Austria, South Africa, Israel, Greece, Portugal and the UK are likely
to be hosted by the Council. These groups include the 103-member
Vienna Symphony Orchestra from Austria, the Gulbenkian Ballet
from Portugal and theatre groups from South Africa, Greece and the
UK.
Under its prestigious series for Indian art for ms viz
“Retrospectives”, the Council presented a performance by Shubha
Mudgal in December. In January a performance (attended by the
Vice-President of India/President, ICCR) by Ustad Amjad Ali Khan
was arranged in the lawns of Teen Murti House. Retrospectives
presentations during February and March are scheduled to include
Kanaka Srinivasan (Bharatanatyam Choreographic presentation), Pt
Ram Narayan (Sarangi recital) and Pt Bhajan Sopori (Santoor).
During December 1999, the Council sponsored the visit of eleven
cultural groups to five countries. The major events/festivals in which
these groups participated were “Sanskrit Theatre Symposium Natyotsav” in Bangladesh, “China International Year of Ethnic
Culture” in China, and “24-hours Raga Concert of Mandapa” in
France. Pt. Birju Maharaj (Kathak), Pung & Dhol Cholam (Manipuri),
Sh K N Panicker (Theatre) are some of the eminent artistes who
participated in the above festivals.
During the period 1 January 2000 to 31 March 2000, following
groups are scheduled to be sponsored:
130

1-2

6- member Composite Dance and Music group of Ms Chitra
Visweswaran (Bharatanatyam) and Sh R Visweswaran
(Santoor) to Germany and UK (20 January - 20 February
2000)

3

5-member Kuchipudi Group led by Ms Vanaja Uday to Sri
Lanka (22-30 January 2000).

4

10-member Rajasthani Folk Dance Group of Sh Kalu Nath
Kalbelia to UAE and Turkey (22 January - 8 February 2000).

5-6

11-member Composite Dance and Music group of Sh Raja
Radha Reddy (Kuchipudi) x 7 and Pt Bhajan Sopori (Santoor)
x 4 will be visiting Japan for the concerts arranged by the
Min-on Organisation. Thereafter, the Dance group will
proceed to Republic of Korea, Malaysia, Philippines and
Thailand (26 January - 19 February 2000); The Music group
will visit Republic of Korea, Malaysia and Singapore (26
January - 16 February 2000).

7-8

5-member Carnatic Vocal group of Dr Balamurali Krishna
and 6-member Bharatanatyam Dance group of Ms Alarmel
Valli will be visiting Sri Lanka (30 January - 2 February 2000).

9

4-member Music group of Sh Dhrubo Ghosh (Sarangi) to
visit Bangladesh in February 2000 to participate in Dance
and Music Festival (17-20 February 2000).

Distinguished Visitors Programme
As part of its efforts to foster and strengthen cultural relations
and mutual understanding between India and other countries, the
Council facilitates exchanges of scholars, intellectuals, academicians
and artists under its Distinguished Visitors Programme. Under this
programme, ICCR hosts eminent musicians, dancers, writers,
intellectuals, scholars and other eminent personalities from all over

Annual Report 1999-2000

the world. Reciprocally, distinguished Indians from diverse fields of
culture are sent to other countries to interact with their counterparts
and to participate in international seminars, conferences and
workshops or to lecture on various subjects.
During the period, the Council hosted visits of 29 distinguished
visitors/experts in different fields from the UK, Argentina, the USA,
Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Japan, South Africa, Spain, Venezuela,
Indonesia, Turkmenistan, Bangladesh, Jordan and Romania. Some
of the important visiting personalities were - Mr Antonio T Mendez
(renowned sculptor from the USA), Prof. Ana Agud (Sanskritist from
the University of Salamanca, Spain) and Justice Kemaluddin Hossain
(former Chief Justice of Bangladesh). In addition, the Council on
behalf of the Government of India, organised the visit of 10-member
team from World Monlam Tshokehem, Bhutan to India to enable
them to visit Buddhist shrines in connection with publishing of a
book on the subject.
During this period, the Council sponsored visits of 55 eminent
personalities from India to various countries. These included - Prof.
Zafar Imam (School of International Studies, JNU), Dr Vidya Niwas
Mishra (eminent Sanskrit scholar), Prof Sachidanandan Sahai
(Department of Ancient Indian & Asian Studies, Magadh University,
Bihar), Smt Maya Krishna Rao (Kathakali Dancer), Shri Jatin Das
(painter), Shri Kanhaiya Lal Nandan (writer) and Shri Kartar Singh
Duggal (scholar and MP [Rajya Sabha]).
Under its Orientation Grant Scheme for foreign scholars/
researchers, the Council assisted scholars from Venezuela, the USA
and the UK.
During December 1999, the Council hosted the visit to India of
6 distinguished visitors. The eminent personalities among these were
Dr George Anca, President of the Indo-Romanian Cultural
Association from Romania, Mr A Z M Obaidullah Khan, Chairman
of the Bangladesh Centre for Advanced Studies.

The Council is also scheduled to host another fifteen eminent
personalities under the Programme during the period 1 January 2000
to 31 March 2000. These include Ms Bapsi Sidhwa, eminent writer
from Pakistan, Sh Sat Maharaj, Secretary General of Sanatan Dharam
Mahasabha from Trinidad & Tobago, Prof Mumtaz Soysal, Former
Foreign Minister/Scholar from Turkey, Mr Harold N Clapham, Head
of the International Exchanges Division of the Cultural Ministry of
Germany, Dr Forrest McGill of Asian Art Museum from San
Francisco, USA, Prof Crompton Bourne, Pro Vice Chancellor and
Principal of the University of the West Indies from Trinidad & Tobago.
During the month of December, 1999, the Council sponsored
visits abroad of eight distinguished personalities from India. Among
them were Prof Kapila Vatsyayan, Academic Director, IGNCA and
Dr Ram Gopal Bajaj, Director the National School of Drama to
Bangladesh, Prof Veer Bhadra Mishra, Professor & Head, Institute
of Technology and Adyaksh of Sankat Mochan Foundation, Varanasi
to Sweden.
The Council has also approved the sponsorship of visits of seven
eminent Indian scholars/artistes under this programme during the
period 1 January 2000 to 31 March 2000. These include: Sh Raghu
Rai, eminent photographer to Bangladesh; Smt Sonal Mansingh, artiste
to the UK for lectures on Indian dance; and Dr Satyadev Tripathi,
Dr Prakash Udai, Dr Aunesh Neerun and Smt Malini Awasthi to
Mauritius (to attend a Bhojpuri Convention).
Presentations
Under its Scheme of Presentation of Books and Art Objects, the
Council gifted books on Indian art, culture, architecture, cuisine, dance
and music to various visiting foreign dignitaries, libraries, institutions
and schools in various countries. Additionally, the Council, through
its Missions abroad, also gifted Indian music instruments, art objects,
131

Cultural Relations

video/audio cassettes, CD-ROMs and CDs (on Indian classical dances
and music).
Exhibitions
During the period, exhibitions mounted by the Council in India
were the Contemporary Photographic Exhibition of the Indian
International Photographic Council; French Avant Garde - The
Vollard Collection from Leon Dierx Museum, Reunion Island (France)
and works by artists from Brazil and Venezuela.
During the period, the Council commissioned special exhibitions,
viz “Contemporary Graphic of India” to Cuba, Trinidad and Tobago,
Guyana and Peru; “Indian Dolls” to Malaysia, Indonesia, Vietnam
and Thailand and a “Photo Exhibition” on India to Qatar, UAE and
Uganda.
The Council also sent five bronze busts and a statue of Mahatma
Gandhi for installation in Kyrghyzstan, Myanmar, Brazil, Canada,
Italy and the USA.
In the month of December 1999, the Council sent a photo
exhibition entitled “My Land, My People” to Tanzania. It also sent a
bust of Mahatma Gandhi and a Replica of the Ashoka Capital to
Myanmar and a bust of Mother Teresa to San Salvador.

132

During the period January-March 2000, the Council is scheduled
to send five exhibitions viz (i) “Contemporary Prints” to Colombia,
Panama & Venezuela (ii) “Indian Dolls” to Cambodia (iii) “Photo
Exhibition on India” to Sudan & Kenya (iv) “Madhubani Paintings”
to Mauritius, Madagascar, Seychelles and the Reunion Islands and (v)
“Cartoons” to Tanzania, Mauritius and Sri Lanka. Busts of
Rabindranath Tagore, Mahatma Gandhi and Kasturba Gandhi are
being sent to the Czech Republic, Canada and the USA.
The Council On-Line
The Council maintains three websites on the Internet, which
feature extensive archives about the Council’s activities as well as a
spectrum of links to topics on Indian Culture and hyperlinks to the
websites of several empanelled artistes of the Council :
http://education.vsnl.com/iccr
http://members.tripod.com/~iccr
http://iccr.culture.webjump.com
The first ICCR website has been adjusted “Editor’s Choice” by
‘Rediffusion on-the-Net’.
uu

Contents
Chapter
Page No.
Introduction and Synopsis

i-xv

1.

India's Neighbours

1

2.

South-East Asia and the Pacific

15

3.

East Asia

26

4.

Central Asia

31

5.

The Gulf, West Asia & North Africa

35

6.

Africa (South of Sahara)

47

7.

Europe
Eastern Europe
Western Europe

52
57

8.

The Americas
USA
Canada
Latin America and the Caribbean

65
67
67

9.

United Nations and International Organisations
Political Issues in the UN
Disarmament and International Security
Environment and Sustainable Development Issues
Social, Human Rights and Humanitarian Issues
Specialised Agencies
Elections and Appointments
International Law: Developments and Activities

72
72
78
82
83
85
86
86

10.

Foreign Economic Relations

90

11.

Trade and Investment Promotion

100

12.

Policy Planning and Research

103

13.

External Publicity

106

14.

Protocol

110

15.

Passport and Consular Services and Indians Overseas

115

16.

Administration and Organisation

119

17.

Foreign Service Institute

121

18.

Implementation of Official Language Policy and
Propagation of Hindi Abroad

124

19.

Cultural Relations

126

Appendices

133


