   java script is required for this page java script is required for this
   page java script is required for this page java script is required for
   this page java script is required for this page java script is required
   for this page

   Sun, February 08, 2015 at 03:22:25 IST Indian Flag
   Ministry of                      Print Content Small Font Medium Font      
    External       MEA Library      Large Font                                
    Affairs,   Ministry of External   * Sitemap                               
   Government  Affairs, Government    * Contact Us                            
    of India         of India         * Feedback                              
                                      * _____________________           [  ]  

     * Home
     * Director's Office
          * Director Lib & Info
          * Library Officers & Staff
     * Journals
          * Current Journals
          * Online Journals
          * CD-ROMs Databases
     * Online Services
          * Business Monitor Online
          * EIU
          * JSTOR
          * Janes Online Services
          * Kessing World News Archive
          * Marketline MDIC
          * Online Service Links
     * Newspapers
          * E-Newspapers
          * Subscribed Print Newspapers
     * Library Bulletins
          * Foreign Affairs Documentation Bulletin
          * Recent Additions
          * Chronicle of Events
     * Alert
          * Book Alert
          * Article Alerts
     * Important Abbrevations

 Annual Reports Prior to 1999                                                                            
   * Home >   Annual Reports Prior to 1999 >   Annual Report 1988-89                     * Home          
 Annual Report 1988-89                                                                   * Director's    
                                                                                           Office        
                                ANNUAL REPORT 1988-89                                    * Journals      
                                      Contents                                           * Online        
 Introduction                                                                              Services      
                                                                                         * Newspapers    
 S.NO   CHAPTERS                                                          Pages No.      * Alert         
 I.     India's Neighbours                                                1-11           * Important     
 II.    South-East Asia                                                   12-16            Abbrevations  
 III.   East Asia                                                         17-20          * Back          
 IV.    West Asia and North Africa                                        21-25                          
 V.     Africa (South of the Sahara)                                      26-32                          
 VI.    Europe                                                            33-41                          
 VII.   The Americas                                                      42-47                          
 VIII.  United Nations and International Conferences                      48-70                          
 IX.    Foreign Economic Relations                                        71-73                          
 X.     Policy Planning and Research                                      74-76                          
 XI.    External Publicity                                                77-81                          
 XII.   Cultural Relations                                                82-91                          
 XIII.  Indians Overseas                                                  92                             
 XIV.   Protocol                                                          93                             
 XV.    Passport and Consular Services                                    94-97                          
 XVI.   Administration and Organization                                   98-101                         
 XVII.  Foreign Service Training Institute                                102-104                        
 XVIII. Use of Hindi in Official Work                                     105-106                        
        APPENDICES                                                        109-145                        
 Introduction                                                                                            
 INTRODUCTION                                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 THERE was a marked improvement in the international climate during the year.                            
 Confrontation gave way to dialogue presaging a trend towards a saner, safer world.                      
 Both globally and regionally, issues that in previous years. contribute d to tension,                   
 seemed nearer solution. The emergence of detente between, the, Soviet Union and the                     
 United States which had resulted in the INF Agreement raised the expectation of                         
 further important steps towards nuclear disarmament. This emerging detente also set                     
 in motion the process of conflict resolution in diffe rent parts of the world. The                      
 joint statement signed in Moscow by President Gorbachev and President Reagan in June                    
 1988, expressly affirmed their "intentio n to continue US-Soviet discussion at all                      
 levels aimed at helping, parties to reg ional conflicts find peaceful solutions which                   
 advance their independence, freedom and security". Among the more important regional                    
 developments were the Geneva Accord's on Afghanistan, the Agreements on Angola and                      
 Namibia and the prospect of a solution to the Kampuchean issue. The ceasefire in the                    
 war betwe en Iraq and Iran held out the hope for a lasting peace between them. The                      
 bold initiative of the PLO brought nearer the prospect of a just international solut                    
 ion to the Palestinian issue. Hopes were also raised for the restoration of peace in                    
 Central America. India welcomed these positive trends in world affairs with                             
 particular gratification as, it had, unilaterally and, through the fora of the Non-                     
 Aligned Movement and, the United Nations pressed for nuclear disarmament and also                       
 sought a peaceful settlement of these regional issues. The growing recognition of the                   
 interdependence of the modern world and the dawning realisation that the peace,                         
 freedom and prosperity of all nations i s interlinked provided the objective basis                      
 for this positive trend. But the rapi dity with which the international scene was                       
 transformed was also due to the bold initiatives of Soviet President Gorbachev; the                     
 "new thinking" in Soviet foreign policy acknowledges that it relies for its                             
 philosophical underpinning on the November 1986 Delhi Declaration and the ideals of                     
 Non-alignment.                                                                                          
                                                                                                         
 (iii) It may be recalled that the "Delhi Declaration of Principles for a Nuclear                        
 Weapon-Free and Non-Violent World" had expounded core principles that should govern                     
 international relations, including peaceful co-existence, the supremacy of human                        
 life, non-violence, understanding and trust, the right of every State to political                      
 and economic independence and a nuclear weapon-free and non-violent world. The                          
 Non-Aligned Movement had long been urging a return to detente. The "Delhi Six" had                      
 also suggested pract ical steps to promote the process of disarmament. At the Third                     
 Special Session on Disarmament at the UN General Assembly in June 1988, the Prime                       
 Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, presented on behalf of India an Action Plan calling for                    
 a binding commitment by all nations to eliminate nuclear weapons by the year 2010 .                     
                                                                                                         
 The Action Plan urged all States to participate in the process of nuclear dis-                          
 armament to demonstrate good faith and build the required confidence and to bring                       
 about changes in doctrines, policies, and institutions to sustain a worl d free of                      
 nuclear weapons. Soviet initiatives for reduction of conventional forces on the                         
 principle of defence sufficiency have further improved the prospects for turning                        
 swords into ploughshares as advocated by the Conference on Disarmament and                              
 Development held under the UN aegis in June 1988. The Conference in Paris on Chemical                   
 weapons brought forth a rare degree of unanimity on steps to proscribe these weapons                    
 of mass destruction also.                                                                               
                                                                                                         
 In India's neighbourhood, the development of cooperation among Member States of the                     
 SAARC and the successful conclusion of the Fourth Summit in Islamabad underlined the                    
 growing awareness of the countries of South Asia, of the similarity of most of the                      
 problems faced by them and the need to solve them collectively. A highlight of the                      
 Summit was the decision to prepare a regional perspective plan entitled "SAARC 2000:                    
 A Basic Needs Perspective" which is to be an aggregation of development targets set                     
 by individual Member States for the turn of the century in core areas such as food,                     
 clothing, shelter, educatio n, population planning and environmental protection.                        
 Another noteworthy feature in the development of cooperation in the SAARC during the                    
 year was the coming into effect of the Agreement establishing the SAARC Food Security                   
 Reserve and the SAARC Regional Convention on Suppression of Terrorism.                                  
                                                                                                         
 The emergence of democracy in Pakistan helped that country's leadership to start                        
 looking at Indo-Pakistan relations from a more positive angle. During his visit to                      
 Islamabad for the Fourth SAARC Summit, the Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, had                       
 intensive discussions with his counterpart Ms Benazir                                                   
                                                                                                         
 (iv) Bhutto. Though Indo-Pakistani problems which have existed for long, may not lend                   
 themselves to instant solution, the affirmation by the Pakistani Prime Minister to                      
 resolve all bilateral problems within the framework of the Simla Agreement has come                     
 as a welcome prelude to the normalisation of relations. The talks also culminated in                    
 the signing of three important agreements namely: Prohibition of Attack against                         
 Nuclear Installations and Facilities, Cultural Cooperation and Avoidance of Double                      
 Taxation on income derived from International Air Transport. Besides the visit of the                   
 President, Shri Venkataraman, to Pakistan to attend the funeral of General                              
 Zia-ul-Haq, there were a number of important Indo-Pakistan meetings at the level of                     
 senior officials.                                                                                       
                                                                                                         
 In Sri Lanka there was significant progress towards the implementation of the                           
 Indo-Sri Lanka Agreement. The overwhelming turn-out of the voters in the elections to                   
 the North-Eastern Provincial Council in November 1988, under- lined the yearning of                     
 the Tamils of Sri Lanka for a return to peace and normalcy.                                             
                                                                                                         
 With the setting up of the Provincial Council Government, the institutional framework                   
 for greater autonomy for the Tamils of Sri Lanka was in place. In the southern part                     
 of Sri Lanka also the people displayed their courage and commitment to democracy by                     
 defying terrorist threats, to vote in the Presidenti al elections in December 1988.                     
 Frequent exchange of visits between India and Sri Lanka underlined the growing                          
 cordiality of relations between the two countries.                                                      
                                                                                                         
 In keeping with its good-neighbourly policy, India responded to appeals by Bangladesh                   
 for international assistance to cope with the devastating floods tha t inundated its                    
 territory in September 1988. The floods also underlined the continuing relevance of                     
 India's long standing proposal for harnessing the Brahmaputra. This proposal offers                     
 major flood protection and irrigation benefits. India reiterated to Bangladesh its                      
 willingness to cooperate bilatera lly in the field of flood control and optimum                         
 utilisation of river waters.                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 During the year under review, as in the previous years, there was no let-u p in the                     
 pace or degree of Indo-Nepal economic cooperation. India continued to implement a                       
 number of economic development projects in Nepal under its Aid Nepal Programme. The                     
 text of the Indo-Nepal Treaty of Trade was initialled.                                                  
                                                                                                         
 (v) The Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, had wide-ranging discussions with the King                   
 of Nepal, when His Majesty visited india in his capacity as the then Chairman of                        
 SAARC. The important visitors form India to Nepal were the Speaker of the Lok Sabha                     
 and the minister for External Affairs. The latter's visit was in connection with the                    
 first meeting to the indo-Nepal Joint Commissi on. The Commission's work is expected                    
 to result in identifying new areas of cooperation.                                                      
                                                                                                         
 Friendship and cooperation which traditionally have been the hallmarks of                               
 Indo-Bhutanese relations continued to be firm. The Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi,                   
 visited Bhutan in September. Fruitful discussions on subjects of mutual interest were                   
 held. The President, Shri R. Venkataraman, paid a State visit in October, During this                   
 visit, the President and the King of Bhutan jointly inaugurated the Chukha Hydel                        
 Project, the largest and most prestigious Indian aided project in Bhutan.                               
                                                                                                         
 The, Foreign Secretary, Shri K.P.S. Menon, had also visited Bhutan, earlier in 1988.                    
 From Bhutan, the Deputy Minister of Planning had visited India twice in 1988 and the                    
 Bhutanese Foreign Minister in August. Apart from other Indian aided hydroelectric                       
 projects, cooperation also extends to the completion of a cement project in Eastern                     
 Bhutan which is estimated to cost over Rs. 140 crores.                                                  
                                                                                                         
 India continued to assist Bhutan in fields such as education, civil aviatio n,                          
 defence, customs, medicine and engineering. To strengthen bilateral cultural                            
 relations, the two. Governments have agreed to hold a Bhutan week in New Delhi , in                     
 March. India's commitment to peace and stability in the region was reiterated whe n                     
 the Government of, India. responded, to an appeal from, the democratically elec ted                     
 Government of Maldives for military assistance to crush an invasion by foreign                          
 mercenaries on Nov 03, 1988.                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 (vi) The Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi's visit to, China in December 1988, was a                    
 major event that provided a new vitality and impetus to the development of                              
 India-China, relations. It was recognised that the improvement of relations between                     
 the two countries would not only be in the fundamental interest of the two peoples                      
 but be a significant contributory factor to peace in Asia and the world as a whole.                     
 The importance of the Five Principles of Peaceful Co-existen ce, jointly initiated by                   
 India and China, in the establishment of a new internation al political order and the                   
 new international economic order was emphasised. Determination was expressed by both                    
 sides to settle the boundary question through peaceful and friendly consultations and                   
 also to develop relations activ ely in other fields. In a world where confrontation                     
 is giving way to dialogue and tension to relaxation, friendly and durable cooperation                   
 between India and China as two large countries of Asia, strengthens the foundtions of                   
 peaceful co-exist ence and common progress and has major implications for global                        
 peace and detente.                                                                                      
                                                                                                         
 Afghanistan being an area of great importance, India continued to take an active                        
 interest in the developments in that country. The Geneva Accords on Afghanistan                         
 signed in April 1988 was the first important step towards a peacefu l political                         
 settlement of the Afghan problem. This also led to the phased with- drawal of Soviet                    
 troops from Afghanistan. India welcomed these Accords. It took a consistent stand                       
 that Afghanistan should be sovereign, independent and non-aligned and that the                          
 Afghans should be allowed to decide their future without outside interference.                          
 President Najibullah's official visit to India in May was significant in the context                    
 of I ndia's dialogue on the Afghan problem with different shades of opinion.                            
                                                                                                         
 India, maintained good bilateral relations with Afghanistan. It pledged assistance                      
 worth Rs. 10 crores for the relief and rehabilitation of the Afghan refugees.                           
 Amid-term review meeting of the Indo-Afghan Joint Commission on Economic, Technical,                    
 Trade and, Cultural Cooperation was hold in Kabul in June.                                              
                                                                                                         
 Developments in Burma were a cause for concern. It is hoped that the situation will                     
 be resolved soon in accordance with the Wishes of the people of Burma.                                  
                                                                                                         
 (vii) The ceasefire in the war between Iraq and Iran was warmly welcomed by India.                      
 Fifteen Indian military officers have been deputed to serve with the Un ited Nations                    
 Iran and Iraq Military Observer Group established to monitor the cease- fire. Special                   
 envoys from Iraq and Iran had visited India during the period under review to                           
 apprise. the Indian leadership on developments concerning post- war negotiation. An                     
 event of great significance in West Asia, was the historic proclamation of an                           
 independent Palestine State on 15 November 1988 at the extraordinary Palestinian                        
 National Council Session in Algiers. India was among the first countries to recognise                   
 the State. This was in a sense, the culmination of the suffering to which the                           
 Palestinians in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip had bee n subjected to, by the                         
 Israeli occupation authorities. The PLO leader Yasser Arafat had visited India in                       
 October and he had been assured of India's full support.                                                
                                                                                                         
 India is also gratified at the start of direct US-PLO dialogue. It is hoped that the                    
 positive trends in the region will lead to an early convening of an International                       
 Peace Conference under UN auspices with the participation of all the parties to the                     
 Arab-Israeli dispute including the PLO as the sole legitimat e representative of the                    
 Palestinian people.                                                                                     
                                                                                                         
 The traditionally strong political and economic relations between India and the Arab                    
 States were given a fillip by the visit of the Prime Minister, Shri Ra jiv Gandhi, to                   
 Syria and Jordan. Wide-ranging discussions on bilateral, regional and international                     
 issues of common interest were held with the leadership of these countries. The                         
 important visits from India to that region were those of the Minister of State for                      
 External Affairs, Shri K.K. Tewary, and of the Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Shri Balram                    
 Jakhar, to Egypt. The Minister for Commerce, Shri Dinesh Singh, visited Cairo for the                   
 Indo-Egyptian Joint Commission meeting. From the Arab countries, the Crown Prince of                    
 Jordan had come to India in April 1988 as also the Egyptian Minister of State for                       
 Scientific Research. Yet another visitor from Egypt was the Minister of Education.                      
                                                                                                         
 (viii) India maintained close consultations and cooperation with Algeria. The                           
 Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri K.K. Tewary, visited Tunisia in October.                   
                                                                                                         
 Diplomatic relations were restored between India and Morocco. The visit of the                          
 Minister of State in the Ministry of External Affairs, Shri K. Natwar Singh, to Oman                    
 in April 1988, and that of the Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri K.K.                        
 Tewary, to Iraq to participate in the second I nter- national Babylon Festival in                       
 Iraq, offered fora for meaningful discussions on bilateral, regional and                                
 international issues.                                                                                   
                                                                                                         
 There were Ministerial level visits from Saudi Arabia and the People's Democratic                       
 Republic of Yemen (PDRY). Shri Janak Raj Gupta, Member of Parliament represented                        
 India at the Silver Jubilee Celebrations of the Yemeni Revolution Day on 14 October.                    
                                                                                                         
 Cordiality and a spirit of cooperation continued to inform India's relatio ns with                      
 the countries of South-East Asia, There were many exchanges of visits leading to                        
 increased interaction in economic, commercial and other fields. Amo ng the important                    
 visitors from that area were the Foreign Minister of Indonesia, t he Prime Minister                     
 of Singapore and the Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs of the                                         
 Government of the Philippines. From India, besides the visit of the Minister for                        
 Textiles, Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha to Singapore, a delegation from the Confederation of                    
 Engineering Industries had also visited Singapore. India maintained very cordial                        
 relations with the three Indo-China States.                                                             
                                                                                                         
 With Vietnam, the tradition of mutual visits at high levels was kept up. The Prime                      
 Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, paid a one-day official visit to Vietnam in April 1988.                    
 At the invitation of the Prime Minister, Mr Nguyen Van Linh, the General Secretary of                   
 the Vietnamese Communist Party came to India as the Chief Guest at the Republic Day                     
 celebrations.                                                                                           
                                                                                                         
 (ix) The third Indo-Vietnamese Joint Commission Meeting was held in New Delhi in                        
 January. There was a thorough review of many cooperation projects and of credits and                    
 grant assistance. Increasing flexibility and an easing of tension in South-East Asia                    
 are contributing to the process of negotiating a political solution to the Kampuche                     
 an problem. India has been in close contact with the various parties to the confl ict                   
 and has been seeking a political solution which ensures the sovereignty, territ orial                   
 integrity and non-alignment of Kampuchea. In this context, the visit of the                             
 Kampuchean Prime Minister, Mr Hun Sen to India in November, and the visits of the                       
 Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri K. Natwar Singh to Vietnam, Laos,                          
 Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia and Singapore, especially his meetings with Prince                        
 Sihanouk as the Prime Minister's Special Envoy on Kampuchea, were very significant.                     
                                                                                                         
 India also worked through the forum of Senior Officials' Meetings of the Non-aligned                    
 countries held in July and August to advance a peaceful solution. The NAM has                           
 welcomed the Jakarta Meetings under Indonesia's leadership. India's initiatives have                    
 been supportive of the regional initiative. There was a marked increase in exchanges                    
 with Australia in the fields of trade, science and technology, mining, coal,                            
 agriculture, energy and railways.                                                                       
                                                                                                         
 India's participation in the bicentennial celebrations of Australia, the signi ng of                    
 a new Cultural Exchange Programme for the years 1989 to 1991, the eleventh meeting of                   
 the India-Australia Joint Trade Committee in Canberra in May and the discussions held                   
 during the visit of Mr John Kerin, the Australian Ministe r for Primary Industries                      
 and Energy with his counterparts in India culminated in the visit of the Australian                     
 Prime Minister Mr R.J.L. Hawke in February 1989. The Third meeting of the Joint                         
 Business Council took place during that visit.                                                          
                                                                                                         
 The visit of Mr Hawke and his talks with Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi has given a new                    
 impetus to the relationship in accordance with the desire expressed by b oth leaders                    
 during Shri Rajiv Gandhi's visit to Australia in October 1986. Memo- randa of                           
 Understanding in the fields of Railways, Telecommunications and Meteorology were                        
 signed as well as one on Concessional Financing of Develop- ment Projects.                              
                                                                                                         
 (x) India and New Zealand continued to maintain friendly relations. The effects of                      
 the two military coups that had taken place in Fiji in 1987 , continued to plague                       
 that country's political and social life. The Interim Government in Fiji, approved                      
 the draft of the new Constitution which denied equitable representation to the                          
 different communities and which contained certa in provisions which were undemocratic                   
 and discriminatory.                                                                                     
                                                                                                         
 The Government of India besides issuing a statement regretting the undemo- cratic and                   
 unbalanced nature of the new Constitution, continued its trade ban w ith Fiji.                          
                                                                                                         
 India's relations with Japan in the economic, commercial, cultural and scientific                       
 fields registered further progress. During the year, Japan's Offici al Development                      
 Assistance (ODA) to India was to the tune of Yen 87.9 billion which made her the                        
 largest bilateral donor to India in gross terms. President and Smt. Venkataraman,                       
 accompanied by the Minister for External Affairs represented India at the funeral of                    
 the late Emperor Hiro Hito of Japan on 24 February 1989. During his talks with the                      
 Japanese and other leaders, the President noted the widespread desire to foster the                     
 current improvement in the climate of international relations.                                          
                                                                                                         
 The Festival of India was held in more than 30 cities in Japan. This was inaugurated                    
 in Tokyo by the Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi along with the Japanese Prime                         
 Minister, in April 1988. The two Prime Ministers discussed bilateral and                                
 international issues. Greater economic interaction between India and the Republic of                    
 Korea (ROK) characterised their relations. The Minister of Trade of ROK visited India                   
 and a meeting of the India-ROK Joint Economic Council and a meeting of the Joint                        
 Business Cooperation Committee were held in Seoul and in India respectively.                            
                                                                                                         
 India's relations with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) were                            
 characterised by exchange of Ministerial visits. Premier Li Gun Mo of the DPRK                          
 leading a delegation which included the Minister of Foreign Trade visited India. An                     
 MOU was signed to enhance bilateral trade.                                                              
                                                                                                         
 (xi) The Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Shri Balram Jakhar and the Minister for Urban                        
 Development, Smt. Mohsina Kidwai, were the important visitors to DPRK. The President,                   
 Shri R. Venkataraman, visited the Mongolian People's Republic in July; the first ever                   
 Presidential visit from India. An Agreement o n cooperation in Science and Technology                   
 and a Protocol on Agricultural Research and Education were signed during the visit.                     
                                                                                                         
 As in the past, India continued to play a leading role at the United Natio ns and                       
 other international for a in supporting the struggle of the people of South Africa                      
 and the Frontline States against apartheid and the violence unleashed by the racist                     
 South African regime.                                                                                   
                                                                                                         
 India which has been an ardent supporter of Namibian independence, warmly welcomed                      
 the conclusion of the Brazzaville Protocol which established a definite time frame                      
 for Namibian independence. In this context, it is relevant to recall the visit of the                   
 President of SWAPO to India in October, at the invitati on of the Prime Minister,                       
 Shri Rajiv Gandhi, to discuss various issues relating to Namibia's transition to                        
 independence. India is contributing personnel to the civilian component of the UN                       
 Transition Assistance Group.                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 If the number of high-level visits is any indicator, India's relations wit h the                        
 countries of Africa, South of the Sahara marked a significant advance. Amo ng the                       
 distinguished visitors were Mr Jose Eduardo dos Santos, the President of Angola, Mr                     
 Wole Soyinka, the Nobel Laureate of Nigeria, as keynote speaker at the                                  
 Non-Governmental organization Conference "Towards a Nuclear Weapon Free and                             
 Non-Violent World"; Mr Marcelino dos Santos, the Chairman of the National Assembly of                   
 Mozambique; Mr Salim Ahmed Salim, the Deputy Prime Minister of Tanzania; Mr Joaquim                     
 Alberto Chissano, the President of Mozam- bique; Sir Veerasamy Ringadoo, the Governor                   
 General of Mauritius; Dr Kiseka, the Prime Minister of Uganda and Mr Peter Mmusi, the                   
 Vice-President and Minister of Finance and Development Planning of Botswana.                            
                                                                                                         
 (xii) Shri K.R. Narayanan, Minister of State for Science and Technology, participated                   
 in the OAU silver jubilee celebrations in Addis Ababa. The Vice-President of India,                     
 Dr S.D. Sharma, visited Mauritius to parti- cipate in the 20th Anniversary                              
 celebration of the independence of Mauritius. As Chairman of the AFRICA Fund, India                     
 played a key role in mobilising public opinion and raising funds in UK, the continent                   
 and Japan. Opportunities afforded in various international fora were utilised to                        
 disseminate information on the objectives of and the progress on the activities of                      
 the Fund. The Fourth meeting of the Senior Officers of the Fund Committee was held in                   
 New Delhi from 14 to 17 February 1989.                                                                  
                                                                                                         
 There was considerable and wide-ranging interaction between India and the West                          
 European countries covering political, economic, commercial, scientific,                                
 technological and cultural fields. The European Community continued to be India's                       
 biggest trading partner. Greater meaning and content were imparted to those                             
 interactions as a result of several high-level visits from India to and f rom West                      
 European countries. It is expected that with the coming into being of the Single                        
 Market in Europe in 1992, India's share in the imports of the Community would                           
 increase.                                                                                               
                                                                                                         
 The Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi's visit to the Federal Republic of Germany in                     
 June, was the culmination of an on-going dialogue between the two countries. Apart                      
 from holding talks with the top leadership of the Federal Republic, the Prime                           
 Minister met with the leaders of Germany's industrial and business circles.                             
                                                                                                         
 The other noteworthy visits of the Prime Minister were that to Spain and Turkey,                        
 particularly to the former, on account of Spain's membership of the European                            
 Community and the economic progress achieved by it. The visit to Turkey was also                        
 significant in that, apart from paying a return visit to that p aid                                     
                                                                                                         
 (xiii) by the Turkish Prime Minister to India in 1986, it helped increase                               
 Indo-Turkish interaction in the shipping, consular and economic fields. The visit of                    
 Presid ent Evren of Turkey to India in February 1989 helped give a political depth to                   
 the expanding Indo-Turkish relations.                                                                   
                                                                                                         
 The State visits paid by the President, Shri Venkataraman to the Netherlan ds,                          
 Finland and Cyprus, not only helped consolidate political relations but also ga ve a                    
 greater content to the economic relations between India and these countries. The                        
 visit to Cyprus was also by way of affirmation of India's interest in the                               
 preservation of the unity, integrity and sovereignty of Cyprus. The visit of the                        
 Prime Minister of Malta to India in January 1989 gave a fillip to the on-going                          
 process of dialogue and cooperation between Malta and India through the fora of the                     
 Non-Aligned Movement, the Commonwealth and the United Nations. The visit of President                   
 Mitterrand of France and his presence at the inauguration of the Festival of France                     
 in India on 3 February, further consolid ated the foundations of Indo-French                            
 relations in the political, economic and scienti fic- technical fields. It is                           
 recalled, that both India and France have more or loss identical views on important                     
 issues like the North-South dialogue and disarmament.                                                   
                                                                                                         
 The Speaker of the Lok Sabha led Parliamentary delegations to the European Parliament                   
 and to Turkey, while Parliamentary delegations from the European Parliament, Cyprus,                    
 Ireland, Austria and Spain visited India. Indo-Soviet and Indo-East European                            
 relations not only remained stable, but also generated considerable warmth primarily                    
 as a result of exchange of vis its at the highest and other levels.                                     
                                                                                                         
 The President, Shri R. Venkataraman, paid a State visit to the USSR in July. Besides                    
 useful discussions with the Soviet leaders, he participated in th e closing ceremony                    
 of the Festival of India in the USSR.                                                                   
                                                                                                         
 (xiv) President Gorbachev during his visit to India in November participated in the                     
 closing ceremony of the Festival (if the USSR in India. He received the In dira                         
 Gandhi Prize for Peace, Disarmament and Development. Five agreements were signed.                       
                                                                                                         
 The Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri K. Natwar Singh also visited and had                   
 useful discussions with the Soviet leaders. Following the earthquake that devastated                    
 the Republic of Armenia in the Soviet Union, a special fund, the "Prime Minister's                      
 Armenia Earthquake Relief Fund" was opened. Considerable quantities of relief                           
 supplies were airlifted to Armenia.                                                                     
                                                                                                         
 The notable visits to East Europe were the visit of the President to Czechoslovakia                     
 in September and that of the Prime Minister to Hungary and Yugoslavia in June and                       
 July respectively. These occasions were utilised by the Indian leaders to hold                          
 fruitful discussions with their counterparts.                                                           
                                                                                                         
 Important discussions and review of economic, trade, scientific and techn ical                          
 cooperation took place during the meetings of the Indo-Romanian Joint Commis- sion in                   
 Bucharest, and the Indo-Polish, the Indo-Hungarian, and the Indo- Bulgarian Joint                       
 Commissions in New Delhi.                                                                               
                                                                                                         
 A new dimension was added to cultural cooperation between India and Bulgaria with the                   
 holding of the "Days of Indian Culture in Bulgaria" in June, and the "Days of                           
 Bulgarian Culture in India" in January 1989. Both the festiva ls evoked widespread                      
 enthusiasm in the respective countries.                                                                 
                                                                                                         
 With the GDR, India signed the Cultural Exchange Programme for the years 1988-89. A                     
 similar exchange programme in the field of scientific and technical cooperation was                     
 also signed.                                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 (xv) Friendship and cooperation between India and Yugoslavia, two of the important                      
 Non-aligned countries received a further fillip with the visit of the Prime Minister,                   
 Shri Rajiv Gandhi, to Yugoslavia in July. Several agreements especially in the fields                   
 of information, science and technology and sports were signed. The 17th Session of                      
 the Indo-Yugoslav Joint Committee for Economic, Scientific and Technical Cooperation                    
 which was held in June, not only sought to maintain the tempo of growing cooperation                    
 but also to identify new areas of cooperation.                                                          
                                                                                                         
 Another important development during the year was the revival of India's diplomatic                     
 relations with Albania which had been under suspension earlier. The year under review                   
 saw a further consolidation in Indo-US relations. The initiatives taken during the                      
 Prime Minister's visit to Washington in Octobe r 1987 were followed up. There was an                    
 appreciable increase in the exchanges in the economic, scientific and technological                     
 fields. Under the transfer of technology the Cray XMP-14 Super Computer was delivered                   
 to India in October 1988 and which was installed at the Indian meteorological                           
 Department in New Delhi. The Government of India has applied for another Super                          
 Computer, the Cray YMP-132 for the Indian Institute of Science at Bangalore. The                        
 Science and Technology Initiative (STI) which was extended for a three - year period                    
 beyond 1988 during the Prime Minister's visit to USA in October 1987 was signed in                      
 October 1988.                                                                                           
                                                                                                         
 The developing Indo-US relations were also underlined by the exchange of important                      
 visits between the USA and India. Among the notable visits from the US were that of                     
 the Defence Secretary; the Chief of the Army Staff; the Assistant Secretary of                          
 Defence; the Assistant Secretary of State and the Chairm an of the US House of                          
 Representatives Sub-Committee on Asian and Pacific Affairs.                                             
                                                                                                         
 (xvi) During his visit to New York to attend the 43rd Session of the United Nations                     
 General Assembly, the Minister for External Affairs, Shri P.V. Narasimh a Rao met                       
 President Reagan and the then Secretary of State Mr George Shultz.                                      
                                                                                                         
 Indo-Canadian relations continued to be cordial. The Annual Ministerial Consultations                   
 held in Canada in May 1988 covered the entire gamut of Indo- Canadian relations                         
 besides identifying new areas of cooperation. The Canadian Government took a firm                       
 line against terrorists abusing Canadian laws in carryin g on their anti-Indian                         
 activities.                                                                                             
                                                                                                         
 The year under report was marked by a lively interaction between India and the                          
 countries of Latin America and the Caribbean. The main highlight was the visit of the                   
 Vice-President, Dr S. D. Sharma, to Guyana, Suriname and Trinidad & Tobago in May. A                    
 large delegation including Members of Parliament led by the Vice-President,                             
 represented India at the 150th Anniversary of Indian arrival in Guyana. During his                      
 visits to the three countries, the Vice-President held discussions with the                             
 Presidents and th e Prime Ministers of these countries which included matters of                        
 bilateral and international interest.                                                                   
                                                                                                         
 From Latin America, the important visitors to India were the Foreign Minister of                        
 Guyana, the Speaker of the Trinidad & Tobago Assembly, the Foreign Minister of                          
 Nicaragua, and the Governors of Cordoba and Negro in Argentina. The Minister of State                   
 for External Affairs, Shri K. K. Tewary, represented India at the inauguration of                       
 President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, who was elected President of Mexico in July.                       
 Shri K. K. Tewary visited Peru where he delivered a message from the Prime Minister                     
 to President Garcia of Peru. He also represented India at the 30th Anniversary of the                   
 Cuban Revolution in Havana on 2 January 1989. In spite of the easing of tensions in                     
 Central America following the Peace Accord signed by the five Central American                          
 Presidents in August 1987, India showed concern for the situation. In May, India                        
 co-sponsored a UN General                                                                               
                                                                                                         
 (xvii) Assembly Resolution on "The Situation in Central America : Threats to Peace                      
 and International Security and Initiatives for Peace and Special Programmes for                         
 Economic Assistance". This co-sponsorship was deeply appreciated by the countries of                    
 the area. The Joint Declaration of the Presidents of El Salvador, Guatemala, Costa                      
 Rica, Honduras and Nicaragua on 14 February 1989, has carried forward the peace                         
 process. As in the past the Non-Aligned Movement played a crucial role in creating a                    
 better international climate and contributed to the resolution of some of the                           
 regional conflicts, particularly the Kampuchean problem.                                                
                                                                                                         
 The Co-ordinating Bureau of NAM at its meeting in New York in October condemned the                     
 inhuman Israeli practices in the occupied Arab territories and supported the                            
 Palestinian cause. The Movement continued to monitor developments regarding the inde-                   
 pendence for Namibia and expressed indignation and concern at the continued illegal                     
 occupation of Namibia by the South Africa regime. At the NAM Foreign Ministers                          
 conference held at Nicosia in September, the commitment to seek a solution to the                       
 financial crisis faced by the UN was reiterated. It also called for the restructuring                   
 of the present world econ omic order on the basis of equity and justice. The role of                    
 the UN during the year 1988 in contributing to the resolution of conflicts has been                     
 warmly welcomed by India. These included the Geneva Accords on Afghanistan, the                         
 ceasefire in the Iran-Iraq war and the Namibian and Angolan accords. On the                             
 Palestinian issue the stage has been set for the UN to play a constructive role.                        
 India continued to maintain that all Inter- national Peace Conference on the                            
 Middle-East was necessary.                                                                              
                                                                                                         
 India continued its active support for the UN and continued to play ail active role                     
 in it. India also continued to play an active role in the Common- wealth and also in                    
 the Non-Aligned Movement. Despite continuing efforts, however, the lack of progress                     
 in the international economic field was a matter of disappointment.                                     
                                                                                                         
 (xviii) There was no change in India's principled stand regarding convening, of the                     
 Conference on the Indian Ocean latest by 1990. India also maintained that the great                     
 power naval presence in the Indian Ocean was contributing to tension and instability.                   
 India voiced its strong concern at the developments in South Africa and called for a                    
 complete elimination of aparthied and reiterated its appeal for imposition of                           
 comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against the racist regime of South Africa.                        
 India's Permanent Representative was re-elected as Vice- President of the Council for                   
 Namibia. India continued to play a prominent part in the main International fora for                    
 disarmament namely, the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, the UN Disarmament                         
 Commission and the First Committee of the UN General Assembly. The near unanimity                       
 achieved at the Conference on Disarmament and Develop- ment under the UN aegis was a                    
 matter of considerable satisfaction. In the field of disarmament the highlight of                       
 India's efforts during the year was the Action Plan presented by the Prime Minister,                    
 Shri Rajiv Gandhi.                                                                                      
                                                                                                         
 The Indian delegation played a useful role in negotiations leading to the                               
 declarations adopted at the Ministerial Meetings of the Group of 77 and of the                          
 Non-aligned Countries held prior to the 43rd Session of the UN General Assembly. The                    
 General Assembly decided to set up an ad hoc committee of the whole to formulate an                     
 international development strategy for the Fourth United Nations Development Decade.                    
                                                                                                         
 An appreciation of India's positive role in the UN was reflected in her election to                     
 important UN bodies such as the Inter-Governmental Working Group of Experts on                          
 International Standards of Accounting and Reporting; the Commission on Human Rights                     
 and the International Institute for Unifica- tion of Private Law. India was also                        
 elected to the prestigious post of Secreta ry- General of the International Civil                       
 Aviation Organization and President of the international Institute of Cotton.                           
                                                                                                         
 Besides the programmes of bilateral cooperation with neighbouring coun- tries India                     
 continued to foster South-South cooperation by offering technical                                       
                                                                                                         
 (xix) and economic assistance under the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation                       
 (ITEC) programme which is administered by the Ministry of External Affairs. The                         
 expansion of the ITEC programme continued apace. ITEC activities take the form of                       
 project assistance, deputation of experts, training, and the provis ion of relief                       
 supplies such as medicines and pesticides etc. to famine affected cou ntries of                         
 Africa.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                         
 Afghanistan, Mauritius, Vietnam, Kampuchea, Laos, Ethiopia, Kenya and the Seychelles                    
 were the main recipients of project assistance. Requests were received for 127                          
 experts in addition to about 90 long-term Indian experts in position in different                       
 countries. Till the end of December 1988, 358 persons ha d come to India for                            
 training.                                                                                               
                                                                                                         
 A comprehensive programme was drawn up in connection with the birth centenary                           
 celebrations of India's first Prime Minister, Shri Jawaharlal Nehru. Many functions                     
 were organised at several world capitals through Indian Missions with the help of                       
 material on photographic exhibitions and documentaries supplie d from India. Indian                     
 Missions abroad also marked the conclusion of the cele- brations of the Fortieth                        
 Anniversary of India's independence which reinforced the image of a dynamic India                       
 with a rich cultural heritage.                                                                          
                                                                                                         
 The improved climate of international relations and the emerging detente has                            
 vindicated the stands taken by India and by the Non-Aligned Movement over a                             
 wide-range of global and regional issues. The continued relevance of th e Movement to                   
 promote the process of detente and disarmament, the resolution of regional conflicts                    
 and the re-ordering of the global economy places a specia l responsibility on its                       
 members to seize the opportunities and meet the challenge s of transforming the world                   
 order.                                                                                                  
                                                                                                         
 (xx)                                                                                                    
 India's Neighbours                                                                                      
                                                                                   Top                   
 CHAPTER I                                                                                               
                                                                                                         
 INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS                                                                                      
                                                                                                         
 DURING the year under report, India continued to pursue the goals of peace,                             
 friendship and cooperation in relations with its neighbours in South Asia,                              
 bilaterally and through fora like the SAARC, the Non-Aligned Movement and the United                    
 Nations. The Indo-Sri Lanka Agreement continued to be the framework for the                             
 improvement and strengthening of bilateral relations between India and Sri Lank a.                      
 Despite the continued, and often violent opposition of extremist elements on both                       
 sides of the ethnic divide in Sri Lanka, several steps were taken for the further                       
 implementation of the Agreement. The most important of these was the successful                         
 holding of elections to the North-eastern Province on Nov 19, 1988 which completed                      
 the process of creation of Provincial Councils in all the provinces of Sri Lanka.                       
 With these elections, the merger between the Northern and Eastern Provinces became a                    
 reality and the institutional framework for greater autonomy for the Tamils of Sri                      
 Lanka was in place. The Government of Sri Lanka also passed the 16th Amendment to the                   
 Sri Lankan Constitution giving Tamil equal status as an official language along with                    
 Sinhala. Earlier, legisl ative action had been taken to end the vexing problem of                       
 citizenship for Tamils of Indian origin in the Central Highlands. With the                              
 establishment of near normal conditions the displaced persons continued to return to                    
 their homes. More than 34,000 Tamil refugees have returned to Sri Lanka from India                      
 since the signing of the Indo-Sri Lanka Agreement.                                                      
                                                                                                         
 With these developments, the desire of all sections of Sri Lankan society for a                         
 return to peace and normalcy became more and more apparent. Despite LTTE's threats of                   
 violence against anyone participating in the Provincial Counc il elections, and their                   
 calls for a boycott of these polls, an overwhelming number of Tamil voters turned out                   
 to vote for peace and harmony. The commitment of the people of Sri Lanka to                             
 democratic norms was again demonstrated in                                                              
 PG1                                                                                                     
 PG2                                                                                                     
 the Presidential elections in December 1988. These developments enabled the                             
 Government to start withdrawing some elements of the Indian Peace Keeping Force. If                     
 this encouraging trend is maintained in the coming year, it should b e possible to                      
 continue the process of a phased withdrawal of the IPKF.                                                
                                                                                                         
 The year was marked by a continuation of close consultations and exchange of visits                     
 between the two countries. Prime Minister Premadasa made a month- long pilgrimage to                    
 India in March 1988. India's Minister of Defence visited Colombo at the end of May as                   
 part of this continuing exchange of visits.                                                             
                                                                                                         
 India has the most cordial and friendly relations with the Republic of Maldives. When                   
 foreign mercenaries invaded Male in the early hours of 3 November 1988, India had no                    
 hesitation in responding to a request from the democratically elected Government of                     
 the Maldives for immediate military assistance to protect their independence,                           
 non-alignment and sovereignty. India n troops landed in Male in less than fourteen                      
 hours of receiving the appeal from its Government and speedily brought the situation                    
 under control. The Indian Navy conducted a successful commando operation on the high                    
 seas and rescued Maldivian hostages who had been seized by the fleeing mercenaries.                     
                                                                                                         
 Almost every country in the world supported India's action to assist Maldives in its                    
 hour of need. Indian troops started withdrawing the very next day leaving a small                       
 contingent of 275 troops at the express request of the President of Maldives.                           
 President Gayoom paid a two-day visit to India on 7 and 8 December 1988.                                
                                                                                                         
 In his meetings with the Indian Prime Minister, ways and means of further expanding                     
 and consolidating bilateral relations were discussed. Efforts to maintain and further                   
 improve friendly relations with Bangladesh continued. Events in that country were                       
 dominated by the disastrous floods in September 1988. While unprecedented rains and a                   
 freak coincidence of peak floods in several major rivers caused heavy damage all                        
 across the sub-continent , the devastation caused by the floods overshadowed                            
 everything else in that country. In keeping with its responsibilities as a friendly                     
 neighbour, India w as                                                                                   
 PG3                                                                                                     
 the first country to respond to an appeal by the Bangladesh Government for relief.                      
 Four Indian Air Force helicopters were placed at the disposal of the Bangladesh                         
 Government within hours of the appeal and more than 90 tonnes of food, clothing and                     
 medicines were air lifted for relief work.                                                              
                                                                                                         
 Unfortunately, there were attempts by some sections to politicize this tragedy by                       
 blaming India for what the Bangladesh Foreign Minister himself aptly described as "an                   
 aberration of nature". India has been urging Bangladesh to cooperate with it to                         
 harness the Brahmaputra river so that its flood potenti al can be controlled and its                    
 abundant waters harnessed for the benefit of both countries. India's comprehensive                      
 proposal first made in 1978, was renewed to President Ershad when he visited India on                   
 29 September 1988. A Joint Task Force of water resources experts of the two countries                   
 was set up to discuss pos sible cooperation between the two countries for flood                         
 management. Almost 45,000 Bangladeshi Chakma refugees continue to remain in India                       
 almost three years after they first arrived. India continued to urge Bangladesh to                      
 create the necessary conditions so that the refugees gain the confidence to return                      
 voluntarily to their homes. Burma is a close neighbour with whom India shares a long                    
 and sensitive border. Relations between the two countries have traditionally been                       
 cordial and without any major problems. India was, therefore, concerned at the                          
 serious unrest which erupted in that country during 1988. While this was essentially                    
 an internal affair of that country, statements by Indian leaders made clear India's                     
 sympathy for the democratic aspirations of the people of Burma and anguish at the                       
 suffering inflicted on the common people and the large number of deaths of innocent                     
 people. In keeping with India's tradition of not turning away peop le who come to                       
 Indian borders to seek shelter, Burmese citizens crossing into India as a result of                     
 the unrest were allowed to stay in camps in Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh. It is the                    
 earnest hope of the Government of India that the problem in Burma will be resolved                      
 soon in accordance with the wishes of the people of that country.                                       
                                                                                                         
 The tradition of exchanges of high-level bilateral visits between India and Nepal                       
 continued during the year under review. The Prime Minister and the                                      
 PG4                                                                                                     
 King of Nepal had an opportunity for bilateral discussions during the King's visit to                   
 Delhi in September 1988 primarily in his capacity as Chairman of the SAARC. The                         
 Minister for External Affairs visited Kathmandu in August 1988 for a meeting of the                     
 SAARC Ministerial Council. Bilateral discussions followed the SAARC meeting; the                        
 first meeting of the Indo-Nepal Joint Commission was also held. The Nepalese Foreign                    
 Minister made a transit halt in Delhi en route to Islamabad for the SAARC Summit in                     
 December 1988 and held bilateral discussions with the Minister for External Affairs.                    
 The Speaker of the Lok Sabha visited Nepal in September 1988.                                           
                                                                                                         
 Indo-Nepal economic cooperation continued to be close. Negotiations for the renewal                     
 of the Treaty of Trade between the two countries were concluded successfully with the                   
 initialling in October 1988 of the text of the new Treaty of Trade. India continued                     
 to implement a number of economic development projects in Nepal under its Aid Nepal                     
 Programme. Cooperation in the field of water resources was comprehensively reviewed                     
 at the first meeting of the Sub- Commission on Water Resources of Indo-Nepal Joint                      
 Commission. The meeting took important decisions on the Karnali and Pancheshwar                         
 multi-purpose projects and a number of other projects on smaller rivers common to                       
 India and Nepal. Transfer of technology in water resources between India and Nepal                      
 was also discussed. The traditionally close and friendly relations between India and                    
 Bhutan were further strengthened. There were important exchange of visits. From India                   
 , the Foreign Secretary, Shri K.P.S. Menon; the Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi and                   
 the President, Shri R. Venkataraman visited Bhutan from 5 to 8 April 1988, 23 to 27                     
 September 1988 and 18 to 21 October 1988 respectively. From Bhutan, the Deputy                          
 Minister of Planning, Dasho Chenkyab Dorji visited India from 15 to 18 June and on 16                   
 September 1988 and the Bhutanese Foreign Minister, Lyonpo Dawa Tsering, on 28 August                    
 1988. During these visits fruitful discussions on subjects of mutual interest were                      
 held. The discussions were marked by a close identity of views and understanding on                     
 matters of mutual interest reflecting the relationship of trust and cooperation that                    
 prevails between the two countries.                                                                     
 Cooperation flourished in the economic field. On 21 October the prestigious 336 MW                      
 Chukha Hydel Project built entirely with Indian assistance was jointly inaugurated by                   
 the President, Shri R. Venkataraman and His Majesty the King of Bhutan. As per the                      
 1974 Chukha Agreement, India is continuing to purchase                                                  
 PG5                                                                                                     
 power from Chukha which is surplus to Bhutan's internal requirement. The Royal                          
 Government of Bhutan has earned Rs. 30.11 crores from February to October 1988 by the                   
 sale of surplus power to India. A long-term agreement on purchase of power is under                     
 finalisation.                                                                                           
                                                                                                         
 Discussions are continuing (i) for the implementation of Dungsum (Nanglam) Cement                       
 Project in Eastern Bhutan estimated to cost over Rs. 140 crores with the surplus                        
 cement production to be purchased by India;                                                             
 (ii) Kurichu 45 MW Hydro-Electric Project at the estimated cost of over Rs. 100                         
 crores;                                                                                                 
 (iii) Gaylegphug Area Development Project at the estimated cost of over Rs. 5 crores.                   
 The annual bilateral meeting to discuss the Bhutanese Sixth Plan (1987-92 ) was held                    
 in New Delhi in June 1988 at, which progress in the on-going projects and projects                      
 for other mutually beneficial projects were discussed. The Khaling Mi ni Hydel                          
 Project (0. 6 MW; Rs. 1.9 crores) inaugurated on 8 March 1988 in expected to be                         
 handed over to the Royal Government early in 1989 and the Gyetsa Mini Hydel Project                     
 (1.5 MW; Rs. 3.84 crores) commissioned in July 1988 is also expected to be handed                       
 over to Bhutan early in 1989.                                                                           
                                                                                                         
 Other on-going projects are : Chukha Transmission Line Project (Rs. 18 crores); the                     
 River Training Works at Dhoti Khola and Paro (Rs. 1.28 crores); the Taktichu Super                      
 Group Drop Project (Rs. 3.7 crores); the Paro Airfield Extension Project (over Rs. 6                    
 crores) and the Broadcasting Station Project (Rs. 5.9 crores). The                                      
 Bongaingaon-Gaylegphug Transmission Line Project (Rs. 8.55 crores) is expected to be                    
 completed by December 1989 and the Thimphu- Paro Sub-transmission and distribution                      
 systems project (Rs. 11.5 crores) by 1990.                                                              
                                                                                                         
 India continues to provide experts and specialists to Bhutan in the fields of                           
 forestry, industry, telecommunications, hydel-survey and education etc. In education,                   
 India continues to offer opportunities for secondary as wel l as higher education,                      
 for training in various fields such as civil aviation, pol ice, defence, customs,                       
 medicine and engineering. As in the past, about 40 Bhutanese students a year are                        
 availing of Government of India scholarships. In addition a large number of                             
 scholarships are provided to the Bhutanese under the Colombo Plan for studies in                        
 India.                                                                                                  
 PG6                                                                                                     
 In order to strengthen bilateral cultural relations, the two Governments have agreed                    
 to hold a Bhutan week in Delhi which is scheduled to be held from 10 to 16 March                        
 1989. As in the past, delegations from the Bhutan-India Friend- ship Association                        
 (BIFA), Schools etc. visited India during 1988. With effect from 28 November 1988 the                   
 Bhutanese Druk Air has also started its direct twice a week Paro-Delhi-Paro flights                     
 with the newly acquired BAe 146-100 aircraft. It is expected that this would                            
 contribute to greater interaction bet ween the nationals of the two countries and                       
 increase in bilateral trade.                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 India continued to supply at the request of the Royal Government of Bhutan, certain                     
 essential commodities such as wheat, rice, sugar, coal, explosi ves, steel and edible                   
 oil at controlled prices. India has consistently sought to develop friendly and good                    
 neighbourly relations with Pakistan in accordance with the Simla Agreement. India                       
 welcomed the emergence of a democratic government in Pakistan, which hopefully would                    
 facilitate the normalisation of relations between the two countries. In 1988, both                      
 President Venkataraman and Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi had occasion to visit                            
 Pakistan. The President, Shri Venkataraman, led a high- level delegation to Pakistan                    
 for the funeral of the late President Zia-ul-Haq o n 20 August 1988. The Prime                          
 Minister visited Islamabad from 29 to 31 December 1988 in connection with the 4th                       
 SAARC Summit. During the visit be had intensiv e discussions with Prime Minister Ms                     
 Benazir Bhutto on bilateral and other issues of mutual interest. These talks                            
 culminated in the signing of three agre ements with Pakistan, namely;                                   
 (i) Prohibition of Attack against Nuclear Installations and Facilities,                                 
 (ii) Cultural Cooperation Agreement and (iii) Avoidance of Double Taxation of Income                    
 Derived from International Air Transport. The Indian Commerce Minister Shri Dinesh                      
 Singh also visited Islamabad from 1 to 5 October 1988 to attend an informal                             
 Ministerial Meeting oil GATT- related issues. During the visit he held talks with his                   
 Pakistani counterpart Dr Mehboob-ul-Haq on Indo-Pak trade.                                              
 PG7                                                                                                     
 In order to maintain a continuous dialogue with Pakistan with the aim of improving                      
 relations, a number of important bilateral meetings at the official level were held                     
 during the year. Home Secretary and Foreign Secretary level talks were held in New                      
 Delhi from 14 to 16 May and from 1 to 2 June 1988 respectively . During these talks                     
 India's over-riding concern at Pakistan's abetment of terrorist activity directed                       
 against India was again conveyed to them. Two rounds of Defence Secretary level talks                   
 were held in May and September 1988 to arriveata solution to the Siachen issue. Other                   
 important bilateral meetings were Secretary-level talks to resolve the issue of the                     
 Tulbul Navigation Project; the secondr ound of talks to discuss problems arising from                   
 the detention of fishermen and fishing vessels by India and Pakistan and a meeting of                   
 the India-Pakistan Committee to combat drug trafficking and smuggling. India is keen                    
 to work for an accelerated normalisation of relations with Pakistan. It is hoped that                   
 the impetus given to the relations by the meeting between the two Prime Ministers in                    
 December 1988 can be sustained. This will, however, depend in large measure on how                      
 Pakistan responds to India's major concerns particularly its support to terrorist                       
 activities directed against Indi a, its clandestine weapon-oriented nuclear                             
 programme, its acquisition of sophistic a- ted weapons far beyond its genuine defence                   
 requirements, its reluctance to increase people-to-people contacts and its                              
 unwillingness to enter into non- discriminatory trade relations with India. However,                    
 India has taken note of Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto's statements that she wants to                    
 resolve all out- standing bilateral problems within the framework provided by the                       
 Simla Agreement and that Pakistan would not like to interfere in India's internal                       
 affairs.                                                                                                
                                                                                                         
 In view of its vital stakes in Afghanistan, India continued to take an act ive                          
 interest in the rapidly changing situation there. The signing of the UN-sponsored                       
 Geneva Agreements on Afghanistan in April 1988 was an important step towards a                          
 peaceful political settlement of the Afghan problem. India welcomed these accords                       
 maintaining that their sincere implementation by all parties concerned could lead to                    
 restoration of peace and stability in the region. India stands for a sovereign,                         
 non-aligned, independen t Afghanistan and further feels that the Afghans themselves                     
 should be allowed to decide upon their future without external pressures.                               
 PG8                                                                                                     
 President Najibullah paid an official visit to India from 4 to 6 May 1988 for an                        
 exchange of views. The visit took place in the context of India's conti nuing                           
 dialogue on the Afghanistan problem with all concerned including all shades of Afghan                   
 opinion. Earlier, on 3 May the Foreign Secretary, Shri K.P.S. Menon visited Islamabad                   
 as the Prime Minister's special emissary for discussion on th e Afghan situation with                   
 President Zia and other Pakistani leaders.                                                              
                                                                                                         
 Bilateral relations between India and Afghanistan developed satisfactorily . India                      
 remained in close touch with the Government of Afghanistan on all matters of mutual                     
 interest and undertook to provide an assistance of Rs. 10 crores for relief and                         
 rehabilitation of the Afghan refugees. Half of this assistance is t o be provided                       
 bilaterally and the other half through the UN system. In addition Ind ia is                             
 continuing with its cooperation programme in Afghanistan, which is directed at                          
 benefiting the common man in areas such as public health, small scale indust ry,                        
 education etc.                                                                                          
                                                                                                         
 A mid-term review meeting of the Indo-Afghan Joint Commission on Economic, Technical,                   
 Trade and Cultural Cooperation was held in Kabul in June 1988. The Indo-Afghan                          
 Cultural Exchange Programme was extended upto 31 December 1989. SAARC continued to                      
 make progress during the year. The Ministry of External Affairs functioned as the                       
 national focal point and worked closely with all the other Ministries, Departments                      
 and agencies involved with specific aspec ts of India's participation in SAARC                          
 activities.                                                                                             
                                                                                                         
 The Fourth SAARC Summit in Islamabad in December 1988 provided the opportunity for a                    
 complete review of the organization's activities during 1988. The Summit took the                       
 following major decisions : -- Education was included as an area of cooperation and a                   
 Technical Committee set up, to be chaired by Bangladesh. Specific programmes are now                    
 to be devised. -- As a measure to foster closer and more frequent contacts among the                    
 people of the member countries, Supreme Court judges and Members of Parliament of                       
 each member country would be entitled to a special                                                      
 PG9                                                                                                     
 SAARC Travel Document which would exempt them from visas while travelling in the                        
 region. The Council of Ministers is to make recommen- dations regarding other                           
 categories of persons who should be given this facility. -- A regional perspective                      
 plan called "SAARC 2000 : A Basic Needs Perspective" is to be prepared, based on the                    
 aggregation of development targets set by individual member countries for the turn of                   
 the century in core areas of interest such as food, clothing, shelter, education,                       
 primary health care, population planning and environmental protection.                                  
                                                                                                         
 -- A proposal for the establishment of a Centre for Human Resource Development is to                    
 be examined. -- South Asian Festivals are to be held from time to time. India is to                     
 ho st the first such Festival. In areas where activity has been on-going, the Summit                    
 decided as follows -- The comprehensive Study on the Causes and Consequences of                         
 Natural Disasters and the Protection and Preservation of the Environment should be                      
 concluded in the shortest period of time. A joint study would be undertaken on the                      
 "Greenhouse effect" and its impact on the region. -- Specific areas where economic                      
 cooperation in trade, manufactures and                                                                  
 services may be feasible immediately are to be identified. -- 1989 was designated as                    
 the "SAARC Year for Combating Drug Abuse and Drug Trafficking". A concerted campaign                    
 is to be launched. The possibility of drawing up a Regional Convention on Drug                          
 Control is to be examined.                                                                              
                                                                                                         
 -- Member States should adopt enabling measures to implement the SAARC Regional                         
 Convention on the Suppression of Terrorism at the earliest. -- The Year 1990 is to be                   
 the "SAARC Year of the, Girl Child".                                                                    
 PG10                                                                                                    
 The Summit also endorsed the decisions of the Council of Ministers taken at the                         
 latter's fifth session in Kathmandu in August 1988, on : -- The admission of any                        
 country in the region, subscribing to the objective s and principles of the SAARC                       
 Charter, as a member of the Association, by a unanimous decision of the Heads of                        
 State or Government. -- The establishment of contact with organizations with similar                    
 aims and purposes, subject to the approval of the Standing Committee in each case,                      
 with a view to sharing of experiences and exchange of documents and information, and                    
 -- The increased involvement of non-governmental organizations, consisting of                           
 nationals of member countries based in the region, in SAARC activi- ties in agreed                      
 areas of cooperation. There were several other noteworthy developments during the                       
 year                                                                                                    
 (i) The Agreement establishing the SAARC Food Security Reserve became operational                       
 from 12 August 1988. All member countries have earmarked their respective shares for                    
 the Reserve.                                                                                            
 (ii) The SAARC Regional Convention on Suppression of Terrorism came into force on 22                    
 August 1988 after ratification by all member States. Member countries are to pass                       
 national legislation wherever necessary to implement the Convention.                                    
 (iii) The terms of reference and methodology for the comprehensive study on the                         
 Causes and Consequences of Natural Disasters and Protection and Preservation of                         
 Environment have been agreed upon. The objective of the regional study is to provide                    
 a basis for the member countries to draw up policy conclusions and recommendations                      
 and to identify areas, keeping in view the potential and possibilities of evolving a                    
 regional plan of action, for strengthening disaster management capa- bilities and for                   
 the protection and preservation of the environment. Country-wise studies are to be                      
 conducted in the first instance, accor- ding to a standardised format which is to be                    
 finalised.                                                                                              
 (iv) Studies are to be undertaken to identify specific constraints to the growth of                     
 intra-regional trade and economic cooperation. The terms of reference, methodology                      
 and format have been agreed upon. Work is being done on a country-wise basis to start                   
 with.                                                                                                   
 PG11                                                                                                    
 (v) The Third Meeting of Planners held in Kathmandu in November 1988 made several                       
 far-reaching recommendations regarding the role of economic cooperation in developing                   
 a long-term perspective for SAARC activities. The meeting underlined that economic                      
 cooperation would provide the means by which regional cooperation could contri- bute                    
 to fulfilling the basic needs of people in the Member countries. The meeting also                       
 made suggestions regarding regional cooperation in the field of education and human                     
 resource development.                                                                                   
 (vi) The SAARC Agricultural Information Centre at Dhaka started taking shape with the                   
 first meeting of its Governing Board in December 1988.                                                  
 (vii) The SAARC Audio-Visual Exchange (SAVE) completed its first year in November                       
 1988. The first special programme, the SAARC Quiz, was produced by India for telecast                   
 by member countries in February 1989. The Islamabad Summit lauded the smooth                            
 functioning of SAVE and directed that emphasis be given to social, economic and                         
 technical issues.                                                                                       
 (viii) The SAARC Youth Volunteers Programme and the Scheme for SAARC Chairs,                            
 Fellowships and Scholarships were launched. Both are expected to be fully operational                   
 in 1989. Under the Integrated Programme of Action in the 11 areas of cooperation,                       
 some 50 activities were organised between the end of the Kathmandu Summit, in                           
 November 1987, and December 1988. India participated in nearly all the activities and                   
 organised 16. In addition, India hosted two Technical Committee meetings, on                            
 Agriculture and Women in Development to plan activities in these sectors, two                           
 meetings of the SAARC Audio-Visual Exchange Committee to plan and choose programmes                     
 for region-wide broadcast and telecast and two meetings to work out details for the                     
 SAARC Documentation Centre and for the Scheme on SAARC Chairs, Fellowships and                          
 Scholarships respectively.                                                                              
                                                                                                         
 India has announced a contribution of Rs. 20 million for SAARC activities for the                       
 year 1989-90.                                                                                           
 CHAPTER II                                                                                              
                                                                                                         
 SOUTH-EAST ASIA                                                                                         
                                                                                   Top                   
 THE mutual desire to widen and diversify bilateral cooperation between India and the                    
 countries in South-East Asia was evidenced by the exchange of several official                          
 delegations leading to increased interaction in economic, comm er- cial and other                       
 fields.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                         
 Indonesia's Foreign Minister, Mr Ali Alatas visited India in August 1988 and held                       
 discussions on the Kampuchean question. Shri N.D. Tiwari, the then Minister for                         
 Finance and Commerce was in Indonesia in April 1988 to participate in an ADB Meeting.                   
 In August 1988 a senior officials delegation from Indonesia came to discuss the                         
 widening and diversifying of the scope of the Trade Agreeme nt signed in 1978.                          
                                                                                                         
 Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore paid an official visit to India in March                       
 1988. Other important visits included the seventy member business delegation led by                     
 Mr Mah Bow Tan, Singapore's Minister of State for Trade and Industry in November                        
 1988. From the Indian side, Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha, Minister for Textiles paid a brief                   
 visit to Singapore in December 1988 to discu ss further commercial interaction                          
 between the two countries. His visit was preced ed by a delegation from the                             
 Confederation of Engineering Industries in November 1988. A four-member Thai                            
 delegation led by the Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Thailand, visited India                   
 from 19 to 22 April 1988 for annual bilateral consultations. Commercial relations                       
 with Thailand, and indeed the whole ASEAN region expanded considerably. Rice                            
 purchases from Thailand were useful in building up India's buffer stocks depleted                       
 during the prolonged droug ht situation in previous years.                                              
 PG12                                                                                                    
 PG13                                                                                                    
 General Manuel Yan, Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs, Government of the                              
 Philippines paid an official visit to India in December 1988. During th e                               
 discussions, it was agreed to explore cooperation in atomic energy, agricultura l,                      
 technical and economic fields. Sultan Yang Di Pertuan of Brunei, Sultan Hassanal                        
 Bolkiah Muizzaddin Waddaulah would be paying a State visit to India in March 1989.                      
                                                                                                         
 India's relations with the three Indo-China states remain extremely cordia l.                           
 Relations with Vietnam were marked by exchanges of visits at high levels. The Prime                     
 Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi paid a one day official visit to Vietnam on 16 April                        
 1988. He was received by the General Secretary of the Communist Party of Vietnam. On                    
 the Prime Minister's invitation the General Secretary, Mr Van Linh was the Chief                        
 Guest at the celebration of India's Republic Day in January 1989.                                       
                                                                                                         
 The third Indo-Vietnamese Joint Commission Meeting was held from 20 to 23 January                       
 1989. During the meeting, credits, commodity loans and grant assistance were                            
 reviewed. The Work Programmes under the Science and Technology Agreement and in the                     
 field of Atomic Energy were also taken up. Delegations from All India Radio and                         
 Doordarshan visited Vietnam and identified areas of cooperation. The Rice Research                      
 Centre is functioning well.                                                                             
                                                                                                         
 The Indian Ambassador to Vietnam, Shri Arun Patwardhan, his wife and son were killed                    
 along with seven officials from the Department of Education and the regional                            
 representative of Central India Machinery Manufacture Company (CIMMCO) when the Air                     
 Vietnam flight in which they were travelling crashed near Bangkok on 9 September                        
 1988. The Vietnamese leadership conveyed their sincere condolences at this tragic                       
 accident.                                                                                               
                                                                                                         
 A delegation led by Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha, Minister for Textiles repre- sented India                    
 at the celebrations of the Tenth Anniversary of the People's Repub lic of Kampuchea                     
 in January 1989. The restoration of the Angkor Vat in Kampuchea by the Archaeological                   
 Survey of India is continuing to the satisfaction of the Kampuchean Government.                         
 PG14                                                                                                    
 The Kampuchean Prime Minister, Mr Hun Sen was in India for a brief working visit from                   
 16 to 17 November 1988. Apart from discussing bilateral relations, the purpose of the                   
 visit was to consult with Indian leaders on the Kampuchean question. India's friendly                   
 relations and economic cooperation were maintained through the Indian Technical                         
 Cooperation Programme. India provides training in diverse fields such as Science and                    
 Technology, Agriculture, Animal Husbandry , classical dance and music, etc. to                          
 nominees from Vietnam, Laos and Kampuchea.                                                              
                                                                                                         
 Indian experts are also deputed to these countries for training purposes as wel l as                    
 to work on projects. In December 1988, Shri K. Natwar Singh, Minister of State for                      
 External Affairs toured Vietnam, Laos, Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia and Singapore as                   
 the Prime Minister's Special Envoy on Kampuchea to discuss progress in the resolution                   
 of the Kampuchean problem. The Minister also briefed the Govern- ments on the                           
 important visit of President Gorbachev to India and held consulta- tions on the                         
 historic visit of the Prime Minister to China. India's contributi on to the process                     
 of resolution of the Kampuchean problem was deeply appreciated and an interest was                      
 evinced in working with India towards this end.                                                         
                                                                                                         
 Apart from meeting with the various parties including Prince Sihanouk, Kampuchean                       
 Prime Minister Hun Sen and leaders in the Indo-Chinese and ASEAN countries, India                       
 participated in the Senior Officials' Meetings of the Non-alig ned countries the                        
 first of which was held in New Delhi from 15 to 16 July. This wa s followed by a                        
 second meeting at Harare from 15 to 17 August 1988. The NAM Foreign Ministers'                          
 Conference at Nicosia considered the Report of the Senior Officials' Meeting and set                    
 up a NAM Committee on Kampuchea which now has fourteen members. The Non-Aligned                         
 Movement welcomed the Jakarta Informal Meetings chaired by Indonesia and regarded its                   
 own efforts as supportive and complementary to the regional initiative. There was a                     
 marked increase in exchanges with Australia in the fields of trade, science and                         
 technology, mining, coal, agriculture, energy and railways.                                             
                                                                                                         
 India's participation in the bicentennial celebrations of Australia, the signin g of                    
 a new Cultural Exchange Programme for the year 1989 to 1991, the eleventh meeting of                    
 the India-Australia Joint Trade Committee in Canberra in May and                                        
 PG15                                                                                                    
 the discussions held during the visit of Mr John Kerin, the Australian Minister for                     
 Primary Industries and Energy with his counterparts in India culminated in the visit                    
 of the Australian Prime Minister Mr R.J.L. Hawke in February 1989. The, Third meeting                   
 of the Joint Business Council took place during that visit. The visit of Mr Hawke and                   
 his talks with Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi has given a new impetus to the                               
 relationship in accordance with the desire expressed by both leaders during Shri                        
 Rajiv Gandhi's visit to Australia in October 1986. Memoranda of Understanding in the                    
 fields of Railways, Telecommunications and Meteorology were signed as well as one on                    
 Concessional Financing of Development Projects. Delegations of the Members of                           
 Parliament visited Australia in the month of September 1988 to attend the World Women                   
 Parliamentarians' Peace Confe- rence and the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association                     
 Conference. The Minister of State for Science and Technology, Shri K. R. Narayanan                      
 visited Australia from 17 to 29 October 1988. The Chief of Army Staff, General V.N.                     
 Sharma, paid a goodwill visit to Australia from 20 to 26 November 1988.                                 
                                                                                                         
 India and New Zealand have also been maintaining friendly relations. The situation in                   
 Fiji deteriorated further as the effect of the two milit ary coups of 1987 seeped                       
 into the fabric of daily life. The Internal Security Decre e and the Sunday                             
 Observances Decree were the instruments that constrained the activities of Fijians of                   
 Indian origin and strained relations between the diffe rent races. The draft of a new                   
 Constitution was approved by the Interim Government despite protests by the deposed                     
 Prime Minister, Dr Bavadra and the Indian ethnic members of the Fijian Parliament.                      
 The Government of India issued a statement regretting that the draft had not given                      
 just and equitable representa - tion to the different communities and contained                         
 several provisions that were undemocratic and discriminatory and detrimental to the                     
 interests of peace, stability and racial harmony in Fiji. The Interim Government set                    
 up a Constitu - tion Enquiry and Advisory Committee which was supposed to receive                       
 submissions from all sections and communities and generate debate on the proposed                       
 Consti- tution. In actual fact, Dr Bavadra's Coalition members were prevented from                      
 organising public meetings to debate the provisions of the draft Constitution.                          
 Nevertheless, leaders of the Indian community have rejected the draft as blatan tly                     
 PG16                                                                                                    
 discriminatory, seeking to deprive them of their guaranteed Constitutional righ ts.                     
 While institutionalising ethnic Fijian political dominance, it also discriminat es                      
 against Commoner Fijians. Through letters to the editors of newspapers and                              
 submissions to the Constitution Enquiry Committee, in their private capacities, the                     
 Coalition leaders, both Indian and Fijian, have highlighted the racist, feu dal and                     
 authoritarian character of the proposed Constitution. The Government of India has                       
 issued several statements on the provisions of the draft Constitution , sporting                        
 contacts between Fiji and South Africa etc. and calling for the restor a- tion of the                   
 democratically elected Government, the revocation of the Internal Security Decree and                   
 the return to racial harmony in Fiji. India continued its trade ban with Fiji.                          
 East Asia                                                                                               
                                                                                   Top                   
 CHAPTER III                                                                                             
                                                                                                         
 EAST ASIA THE year under review saw the first visit by a Prime Minister of India to C                   
 hina in thirty-four years. The Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi's visit to China,                      
 from 19 to Dec 23, 1988 was recognised as an event of major importance and historic                     
 significance. The visit marked a new beginning in India-China relations. The                            
 enhancement of mutual understanding between India and China, and their joint                            
 reaffirmation of the Five Principles of Peaceful Co-existence, not only conforms to                     
 the fundamental interests of the peoples of both countries, but actively contributes                    
 to peace and stability in Asia and the world where als o there is some movement                         
 towards the replacement of confrontation by dialogue. The Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv                    
 Gandhi held discussions on bilateral, regional and international issues with the                        
 Chinese Premier, Li Peng, Chairman o f the Central Military Commission, Deng                            
 Xiaoping, General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party, Zhao Ziyang, and the                        
 Chinese President Yang Shangkun. During the visit, the two Governments signed an                        
 Agreement on Cooperation in Science and Technology, an Agreement relating to Civil                      
 Air Transport, and an executive programme for the years 1988, 1989 and 1990 under the                   
 Agreement for Cultural Cooperation.                                                                     
                                                                                                         
 Earnest and in-depth discussions were held on the boundary question. It was agreed                      
 that this question should be settled through peaceful and friendl y consultations                       
 between India and China. There was recognition that a favourable climate and                            
 conditions for a fair and reasonable, and mutually acceptable solut ion of the                          
 question, should be created through sincere and unremitting efforts by both                             
 countries. It was decided to establish a joint working group on the question. The                       
 Group will address the question of an overall boundary settlemen t, as well as ensure                   
 the maintenance of peace and tranquillity in the border areas . it was also agreed to                   
 develop relations actively in other fields. A joint grou p on economic relations,                       
 trade, and science and technology, would be set up at the Ministerial level.                            
 PG17                                                                                                    
                                                                                                         
 The Minister for External Affairs, Shri P.V. Narasimha Rao, who accompanied the Prime                   
 Minister during his visit to China, held discussions on a wide-range of regional and                    
 international issues with the Chinese Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen. These                              
 discussions were held in a cordial and frank atmosphere. The Minister for Commerce,                     
 Shri Dinesh Singh, also held discussion s with the Chinese Minister for Foreign                         
 Economic Relations and Trade, Zheng Tuobin.                                                             
                                                                                                         
 The Prime Minister extended an invitation to the Chinese Premier, Li Peng, to visit                     
 India. The invitation was accepted. A Cultural Agreement between India and China was                    
 signed in May 1988. An annual Trade Protocol for 1988-89 was also signed in June                        
 1988, during the visit of the Commerce Secretary, Shri A.N. Varma, to Beijing. During                   
 the year, delegations that visited India from China included those in the fields of                     
 electronics, biotechnology, forestry, buffalo breeding and the film industry. A                         
 five-member delegation from the State Planning Commission of China also visited India                   
 in June 1988. Delegations that visited China from India included a delegation from                      
 the Communist Party of India led by Shri Rajeswara Rao, a Congress (I) delegation led                   
 by Shri B.R. Bhagat, MP, a CPI (M) delegation led by Shri Jyoti Basu, Chief Minister                    
 of West Bengal, and all All India Forward Bloc delegation led by Shri Chitta Basu,                      
 MP.                                                                                                     
                                                                                                         
 India's relations with Japan in the economic, commercial, cultural and scientific                       
 fields registered further progress. India-Japanese relations had re ceived a new                        
 impetus with the visit of the Japanese Prime Minister to India in 1984 an d the visit                   
 of the Indian Prime Minister to Japan in 1985. The Festival of India was held in                        
 Japan from April to October 1988. This was held in more than thirty cities in Japan.                    
 The highlights were the rendition of Indian music and display of paintings, sculpture                   
 and tribal art. The Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, visited Tokyo on 15 April to                     
 inaugurate the Festiv al along with the Japanese Prime Minister. During his visit                       
 discussions were held between the two leaders on bilateral and international issues.                    
 It was agreed t hat Japan would assist India in the modernisation of the Indian Iron                    
 and Steel Company in Burnpur.                                                                           
 PG19                                                                                                    
 The Minister of State for Railways, Shri Madhavrao Scindia visited Japan in December                    
 to discuss possibilities of cooperation in the railway sector especially, the                           
 upgradation of some railway workshops and intra-city traffic movement.                                  
                                                                                                         
 Japan's Official Development Assistance (ODA) to India was Yen 87.9 billion. This was                   
 a 25 per cent increase over the previous year's and made Jap an the largest bilateral                   
 donor to India in gross terms. In India-Japan trade, the deficit declined to a lower                    
 level than in the previous year. The noticeable features in trade were a considerable                   
 increase i n Indian exports of diamonds to Japan and the high Yen-induced decline in                    
 imports of Japanese machinery and equipment. The Twenty-first Joint Meeting of the                      
 India-Japan Business Cooperation Committee was held in New Delhi from 5 to 7                            
 December. Measures to promote trade, investment, joint ventures and other                               
 collaborations were discussed. The Second meeting of the Joint Committee on Science                     
 and Technology took place in Tokyo in July.                                                             
                                                                                                         
 With the Republic of Korea (ROK) and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK)                   
 there was further intensification of cooperation and dialogue. Mr Ahn Byong Wha,                        
 Minister of Trade of ROK visited India from 28 September to 1 October alongwith a                       
 purchase mission. Several new products were identified for future trade.                                
                                                                                                         
 The meeting of the India-ROK Joint Economic Council which is coordinated on the                         
 Indian side by the Confederation of Engineering Industry (CEI) and the ROK side by                      
 FKI was held in Seoul from 24 to 26 August. A meeting of the Joint Business                             
 Cooperation Committee, coordinated on the Indian side by FICCI and on the ROK side by                   
 KCCI was held in India from 31 May to 4 June 1988.                                                      
                                                                                                         
 Shri P.R. Dasmunshi, Minister of State for Commerce visited ROK in July.                                
 PG20                                                                                                    
 From the DPRK, Premier Li Gun Mo accompanied by a 30-member delegation including the                    
 Minister of Foreign Trade visited India. A Memorandum of Understanding was signed                       
 which envisaged an increase in bilateral trade. Mr Hwang Yang Yop, Secretary of the                     
 Central Committee of the Korean Workers Party visited India in December as a guest of                   
 the AICC.                                                                                               
                                                                                                         
 Visitors from India to DPRK were the Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Shri Balram Jakhar and                   
 the Secretary-General, Dr S.C. Kashyap. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai, Minister for Urban                         
 Development visited, DPRK to participate in the Fortieth Anniversary celebrations of                    
 the establishment of DPRK. Relations between India and the Mongolian People's                           
 Republic were brought to a new level by the first ever Presidential visit from India                    
 which to ok place from 13 to 16 July 1988. During this visit, an Agreement on                           
 Cooperation on Science and Technology was signed. An Indo-Mongolian Protocol on                         
 Agricultural Research and Education was also signed.                                                    
 West Asia And North Africa                                                                              
                                                                                   Top                   
 CHAPTER IV                                                                                              
                                                                                                         
 WEST ASIA AND NORTH AFRICA DURING                                                                       
 the year under review, India's relations with the countries of the West Asia and                        
 North Africa region saw a further intensification and consolidation in all the                          
 important areas including political, economic and cult ural. An important development                   
 in the region was the renewed international focus on the Palestinian question as a                      
 result of the Palestinian uprising in th e West Bank and the Gaza Strip against                         
 continued Israeli occupation. The "intifida" was largely responsible for the decision                   
 to establish the State of Palestine. In October 1988 Chairman Yasser Arafat visited                     
 India to brief the Indian leaders on the then Prevailing situation in the occupied                      
 territories and the various options that were under consideration by the PLO. He was                    
 assured of India's full support. The historic proclamation of an independent                            
 Palestine State was made on Nov 15, 1988 at the end of the extraordinary Palestinian                    
 National Council Sessions in Algiers during which a wide-ranging political statement                    
 aimed at creating a positive climate for resumption of the Middle- East peace process                   
 was also adopted. India was among the first countries to recognise the newly declared                   
 Palestinian State.                                                                                      
                                                                                                         
 India continued with its firm and unequivocal support for the Palestinian cause                         
 bilaterally and in the relevant international fora. Israeli atrocities a gainst                         
 unarmed Palestinian civilians in the occupied territories were strongly condemn ed.                     
 India had expressed regret at the US refusal of a visa to Chairman Arafat to address                    
 the UN General Assembly Session in New York. India welcomed the emergence of positive                   
 political trends in the region and it is India's hope tha t these will lead to the                      
 early convening of the International Peace Conference under UN auspices with the                        
 participation of all the parties to the Arab-Israeli dispute including the PLO as the                   
 sole legitimate representative of the Palestin ian people. India feels that such a                      
 conference provides the only viable forum for effective Middle-East peace                               
 negotiations and has been actively supporting all efforts to bring this about.                          
 PG21                                                                                                    
 PG22                                                                                                    
 The Speaker of the Palestinian National Council, Sheik Abdul Hameed El-Sayeh visited                    
 India in March 1988. India had deplored the assassination in Tunis in April 1988, of                    
 Khalil Al Wazir (Abu Jihad), Deputy Commander-in- Chief of Palestine Revolutionary                      
 Forces. The Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi visited Syria in June 1988. Wide-                         
 ranging discussions on bilateral, regional and international issues of common                           
 interest with Syrian leaders gave a renewed impetus to bilateral ties. From th e                        
 Syrian side, a Parliamentary delegation visited India in August 1988 and an Indian                      
 Parliamentary delegation visited Syria in January 1989. The Prime Minister's visit to                   
 Jordan in July 1988 provided an opportunity for further strengthening bilateral                         
 economic cooperation and continuing the close political dialogue between the two                        
 countries. Earlier, the Crown Prince of Jordan visite d India in April 1988. From the                   
 Indian side, the visits of the Minister of State for Health, Kumari Saroj Khaparde in                   
 September and of the Chief Justice of India, Shri R. S. Pathak and a high-level                         
 Science and Technology delegation in October 1988 added to the growing content of                       
 Indo-Jordanian relations. An Agreement on Civil Aviation was signed between India and                   
 Jordan in May 1988. A Manpower agreement was signed during the visit of Mr Marwan                       
 Akram Issa Dudin, Jordanian Labour Minister in October 1988. The release on 4 October                   
 1988 of Dr Mithileshwar Singh who was kidnapped in Beirut in January 1987 was another                   
 welcome development. The Government of India had maintained constant pressure for his                   
 release. Relations between India and Egypt witnessed further intensification. The                       
 Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri K.K. Tewary visited Egypt in Octob er                      
 1988 and had very useful discussions with Egyptian leaders on various international,                    
 regional and bilateral issues of mutual interest. The second Se ssion of the Joint                      
 Commission also took place in October 1988. The Minister for Commerce, Shri Dinesh                      
 Singh, visited Cairo for this meeting at which intensifi- cation of bilateral                           
 economic interaction was discussed. A Parliamentary delega - tion led by the Speaker,                   
 Shri Balram Jakhar, visited Egypt in December 1988. T he Egyptian Minister of State                     
 for Scientific Research, Dr Adel Abdel Hamid Ezz visited India in April 1988. During                    
 the visit, a work plan for scientific and techno- logical cooperation between the two                   
 countries for the period 1988-91 was signed .                                                           
                                                                                                         
 The Egyptian Minister of Education, Dr Ahmed Sirour visited India in September 1988.                    
 Apart from discussions on cooperation in the field or education, a Cultu ral Exchange                   
 Programme was also signed during the visit.                                                             
 PG23                                                                                                    
 India's relations with Sudan, Somalia and Djibouti in the Horn of Africa remain                         
 friendly. India sent relief assistance amounting to Rupees five lakhs t o Sudan in                      
 the wake of severe floods in the Blue Nile basin in August 1988. The Foreign Minister                   
 of Djibouti visited India in January 1989. During his visit an agreement on cultural,                   
 scientific and technical cooperation was si gned. In February 1989, a Special Envoy                     
 of the President of Somalia visited India with a message from the President.                            
                                                                                                         
 In the Maghreb region, India maintained its close consultations and cooperation with                    
 Algeria. The meeting of the Indo-Algerian Joint                                                         
 Commission was held in March 1988. The Algerian Minister of Light Industries, Mr                        
 Zitauni Messaoudi visited India in this connection. With Tunisia also, bilateral                        
 conta cts were strengthened both in the political and economic spheres. The Minister                    
 of State for External Affairs, Shri K.K. Tewary, visited Tunisia in October 1988.                       
                                                                                                         
 This was the first high-level visit from India since the present Tunisian Gover nment                   
 came into power. India's relations with Libya remained good. Efforts to resolve the                     
 problem of outstanding payments to Indian companies continued. Diplomatic relations                     
 were restored between India and Morocco on 21 October 1988. The respective Embassies                    
 started functioning from 21 November 1988. Shri Anand Sharma, MP, participated in the                   
 celebrations of the Fifteenth Anniversary of Polisario Front in May 1988. A Special                     
 Envoy of the Saharawi Arab Democratic Repub- lic (SADR) President visited India in                      
 June 1988. A consignment of relief items was sent to the Saharawi Red Cross Society                     
 during 1988. The Head of the Arab League, Mr Chadli Klibi visited India in May 1988                     
 for discussions with the Indian leaders. India continued with its efforts to bring an                   
 early end to the Gulf confli ct through regular contacts with Iraq, Iran and all                        
 other concerned countries. The escalation of foreign Naval presences in the Gulf had                    
 caused concern. Indi a deplored the shooting down of an Iranian civilian aircraft by                    
 the US Navy on 3 July 1988. The ceasefire in the war on 20 August 1988, was warmly                      
 welcomed and it was hoped that negotiations under UN auspices to implement UN                           
 Security                                                                                                
 PG24                                                                                                    
 Council Resolution 598 would lead to the establishment of a just and durable peace                      
 and the strengthening of the forces of non-alignment in the region. Indi a has                          
 deputed 15 military officers to serve with the United Nations Iran and Iraq Military                    
 Observers Group established to monitor the ceasefire. Special envoys from Iraq and                      
 Iran visited India during the period under review to brief the leadership on                            
 developments concerning the war and the post-war negotiations. India has been invited                   
 to and hopes to participate actively in the post-war reconstruction of Iran and Iraq.                   
 Though the Indo-Iranian Joint Commission did not meet during 1988, efforts continued                    
 to be made to expand bilateral economic interaction. Efforts were made to increase                      
 trade through the purchase of Iranian crude oil and intensive negotiations were                         
 undertaken to evolve a mutually acceptable settle- ment of the long pending problem                     
 of the Kudremukh Iron Ore Project. The Eleventh Session of the Indo-Iraqi Joint                         
 Commission held in October 1988, in Baghdad, identified areas for intensified                           
 bilateral economic coopera- tion. Indian companies which continued to operate in Iraq                   
 throughout the war have been assured of preferential treatment for participation in                     
 Iraq's ambitio us post-war reconstruction programme.                                                    
                                                                                                         
 Shri K. K. Tewary, Minister of State for External Affairs, participated in the Second                   
 International Babylon Festival and undertook a review of bilateral, regional and                        
 international matters with the Iraqi leadership.                                                        
                                                                                                         
 The ability of India to maintain its share of the labour market despite a degree of                     
 economic recession through the presence of about a million expatriate s has furnished                   
 a valuable link between India and the Gulf region. India has als o secured a larger                     
 share of the industrial market in these countries and there is growing interest in                      
 joint investment in the region and in India.                                                            
                                                                                                         
 Shri K. Natwar Singh, Minister of State for External Affairs visited Oman from 8 to                     
 12 April 1988. During this visit intensive discussions were held wit h the leadership                   
 in Oman on regional and international issues and the areas in which bilateral                           
 cooperation could be intensified were identified. This visit served to underscore the                   
 growing political and economic entente between India and the Gulf region.                               
 PG25                                                                                                    
 Dr Kayyal, Minister of Posts and Telegraphs of Saudi Arabia visited India in November                   
 1988, to explore the further expansion of Indian participatio n in the                                  
 telecommunications sector in the Kingdom.                                                               
                                                                                                         
 Dr Abdul Aziz Al-Daly, Foreign Minister of the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen,                   
 paid an official visit to India in December 1988. Apart fro m holding discussions on                    
 bilateral, regional and international issues with his In dian counterpart he was                        
 received by the Vice-President and the Prime Minister to who m he delivered a message                   
 from the Secretary-General of the Yemeni Socialist Party. The PDRY has sought Indian                    
 assistance in the petroleum sector. The Yemeni request is being examined and an                         
 exploratory visit by a delegation from Hydrocarbons India Limited has taken place.                      
 There are good prospects of cooperation with the PDRY in the petroleum sector and in                    
 other areas of economi c and industrial development. Shri Janak Raj Gupta, Member of                    
 Parliament, represented India at the Silver Jubilee Celebrations of the Yemeni                          
 Revolution Day on 14 October 1988.                                                                      
 Africa (South Of The Sahara)                                                                            
                                                                                   Top                   
 CHAPTER V                                                                                               
                                                                                                         
 AFRICA (SOUTH OF THE SAHARA) INDIA'S friendly relations with the countries of Africa                    
 (South of the Sahara) were further strengthened during the year under review. India                     
 continued to play a leading role at the United Nations and other international fora                     
 in supporting the struggle of the people of South Africa and the Frontline States in                    
 Southern Africa against the abhorrent system of apartheid in South Africa.                              
                                                                                                         
 The second meeting of the Commonwealth Committee of Foreign Ministers on South Africa                   
 of which India is a member, was hold in Toronto in August 1988. The Indian delegation                   
 was led by the Minister for External Affairs. India along with other like-minded                        
 countries ensured that the question of sanctions against the Pretoria regime remained                   
 in the forefront. In a message on the occasion of the 70th birth anniversary of                         
 Nelson Mandela, the Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi demanded his immediate                            
 unconditional release and reiterated the call for imposition of comprehensive                           
 mandatory sanctions against South Africa. India continued to support the demand for                     
 immediate Namibian indepen- dence as envisaged in the UN Security Council Resolution                    
 435 of 1978. In this context, India warmly welcomed the conclusion of the Brazzaville                   
 Protocol which laid a definite framework for the implementation of Resolution 435.                      
 The President of SWAPO visited India in October 1988 at the invitation of the Prime                     
 Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi to discuss various issues relating to Namibia 's                            
 transition to independence and to share views on what assistance India could offer to                   
 SWAPO and Namibia. India is contributing personnel to the civilian component of the                     
 United Nations Transition Assistance Group which is headed by an Indian, General Prem                   
 Chand (Retd.).                                                                                          
 PG26                                                                                                    
 PG27                                                                                                    
 At the invitation of the Nine Minister, the President of Angola, Mr Jose Eduardo dos                    
 Santos visited India in October 1988 with a high-powered delegation at a time when                      
 the negotiations on Namibia were at a crucial stage. Wide- ranging discussions                          
 between the two sides led respectively by the Prime Ministe r of India and the                          
 President of Angola, covered bilateral and other matters of mutual interest. The                        
 evolving situation in South-western Africa was discussed in detail. In the bilateral                    
 sphere, diverse areas such as transport and commun i- cation, agriculture, trade and                    
 commerce and defence were identified for cooperation.                                                   
                                                                                                         
 India is contributing officials to the United Nations Angola Verificatio n Mission                      
 which would oversee the return of Cuban forces from Angola. At the Non-Governmental                     
 Organizations (NGOs) Conference "Towards a Nuclear Weapon Free and Non-Violent World"                   
 held in New Delhi in November 1988, Mr Wole Soyinka of Nigeria, a Nobel Laureate, was                   
 the keynote speaker. The Chairman of the National Assembly of Mozambique, Marcelino                     
 dos Santos and the Deputy Prime Minister of Tanzania, Mr Salim Ahmed Salim were                         
 amongst the distinguished participants.                                                                 
                                                                                                         
 The Vice-President and Minister of Finance and Development Planning of Botswana, Mr                     
 Peter Mmusi visited India in April 1988 in his capacity as Chairma n of the Southern                    
 African Development Co-ordination and Co-operation (SADCC) Council of Ministers. Mr                     
 Mmusi called on the Prime Minister during his stay here. The Organization of African                    
 Unity (OAU) celebrated its silver jubilee th is year. Shri K. R. Narayanan, Minister                    
 of State for Science and Technology participated in the OAU silver jubilee                              
 celebrations in Addis Ababa in May 1988. Mr Ide Omuarou, Secretary-General of the OAU                   
 visited India in September 1988 to attend a seminar "OAU at 25". India continued to                     
 cooperate with the United Nations Economic Commis- sion for Africa (UNECA). An                          
 agreement for promotion of small-scale indus- tries in the African region was signed                    
 earlier in January 1988 and the Executiv e Secretary of the UNECA visited India in                      
 August 1988.                                                                                            
 PG28                                                                                                    
 India continued to assist the countries in Africa to the extent possible.                               
                                                                                                         
 A team of experts from the Archaeological Survey of India has undertaken the                            
 renovation of the Armed Forces Museum in Luanda (Angola). The project is funded by                      
 the Ministry of External Affairs. A number of high-level visits were exchanged with                     
 the countries in Africa. The existing friendly relations with Mozambique were further                   
 strengthened with the visit of Mr Joaquim Alberto Chissano, President of Mozambique                     
 and Madam Chissano in May 1988. The President was accompanied by a delegation of                        
 senior Mozambican Ministers and officials and held wide-ranging discussions on                          
 bilateral, regional and international issues. President Chissano's visit was preceded                   
 by the visit of the Minister of Transport and Communications of Mozambique, Armando                     
 Emilio Guebuza at the invitation of the Minister of State for Railways, Shri                            
 Madhavrao Scindia.                                                                                      
                                                                                                         
 Mr Guebuza discussed matters relating to cooperation in the areas of railways,                          
 surface transport and communications with the concerned officials and organi- zations                   
 and visited a number of public sector undertakings.                                                     
                                                                                                         
 The Governor General of Mauritius, Sir Veerasamy Ringadoo visited India with Lady                       
 Ringadoo in November 1988. During his stay be exchanged views on bilateral relations                    
 and other matters of interest with the President, the Vice-President and the Prime                      
 Minister. Bilateral relations with Ethiopia received an impetus with the visits of                      
 Ethiopian Ministers of Planning; Labour and Social Affairs; Information; and Tea and                    
 Coffee Development. Extensive discussions on exchange of informa- tion in various                       
 areas and exploring avenues for increasing cooperation in agriculture were held                         
 during these visits.                                                                                    
                                                                                                         
 Mr Remi Clement Tiandraza, Member of the Supreme Revolutionary Council and Chairman                     
 of the CSR Commission on Agriculture, Livestock and Forests of Madagascar, during his                   
 visit in April 1988 exchanged views on cooperation in agriculture and science and                       
 technology.                                                                                             
 PG29                                                                                                    
 The Prime Minister of Uganda, Dr S. M. Kiseka, utilised his unofficial visit in July                    
 1988 to explore possibilities of economic and commercial cooperat ion particularly In                   
 the field of establishment of small-scale industries in Uganda. The Ugandan Minister                    
 of Information and Broadcasting also visited India in June 1988. Nigeria's Minister                     
 of Labour, Employment and Production visited India in September 1988 to observe and                     
 study the employment-generating schemes of the Government of India. He exchanged                        
 views on these subjects with the Indian Minister for Labour. The Secretary of State                     
 for Foreign Affairs of Zaire visited India in Nove mber 1988 and exchanged views with                   
 the Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri K. K. Tewary. A Trade Agreement was                    
 signed during his visit. Shri N. Krishnan, Special Envoy of the Prime Minister for                      
 Africa visited Tanzania in April 1988.                                                                  
                                                                                                         
 At the invitation of the Government of Mauritius Dr S. D. Sharma, Vice- President                       
 visited Mauritius with a delegation of MPs and a cultural troupe in March 1988 to                       
 participate in the 20th Anniversary Celebrations of the Indepen- dence of Mauritius.                    
 During his stay in Mauritius, the Vice-President met the Governor General, the Prime                    
 Minister and other Ministers of Mauritius and hold wide-ranging discussions on                          
 bilateral and international issues. The Vice-Presi dent also inaugurated the tea                        
 machinery factory which has been established with Indian financial and technical                        
 assistance. The AFRICA Fund which was constituted by the 8th Summit of the Heads of                     
 State/Government of the Movement of Non-aligned countries in Harare in September                        
 1986, has so far received pledges in cash, kind and project assistanc e equivalent to                   
 US $ 413 million from 52 countries the world over. The actual cash contributions                        
 received by the Fund are approaching US $ 1 million.                                                    
                                                                                                         
 After launching the appeal, contributions were received from individuals as well as                     
 organizations in India. A society called AFRICA (Public Contri- butions-India) Fund                     
 to manage these contributions in Indian Rupees was set                                                  
 PG30                                                                                                    
 up. The Society has received contributions totalling Rs. 2.36 crores including Rs. 1                    
 crore each presented by Coal India and the State Bank of India to the Pri me Minister                   
 on Dec 10, 1988; the 40th Anniversary of the Human Rights Day. Out of the                               
 contributions received by the Society, medicines worth Rs. 25 lakhs have been                           
 supplied to Mozambique. India had, at the AFRICA Fund Summit of January 1987,                           
 announced a contribution of Rs. 50 crores spread over a period of three years. For                      
 this, s everal projects have been selected. Out of the identified projects, material                    
 supplies have been arranged for ANC, about 300 vehicles have been delivered to                          
 Tanzania and a consignment of medical equipment has reached Botswana. Angola has re-                    
 ceived medicines from India under the AFRICA Fund and some Angolan students are                         
 receiving higher education in Indian universities.                                                      
                                                                                                         
 Zimbabwe has received a supply of tarpaulins. Transport vehicles, ambulances, X-ray                     
 machine s and an electric generator have been sent to SWAPO. One hundred railway                        
 wagons for delivery to Zambia are currently being manufactured and would be shipped                     
 by February/March 1989. Software for the Mozambican Railway Protection Force and                        
 consumer durables to Mozambique are expected to reach Mozambique by March/April 1989.                   
 By the end of the financial year 1988-89, about 50 % of the total Indian                                
 contributions is expected to be utilised or firmly committed. Negotiations are                          
 underway with suppliers such as STC, PEC, TATAs, Mohan exports, MECON, HSCC and NSIC                    
 for the remaining projects. Agreements on the implementation of Indian AFRICA Fund                      
 projects have been signed with Botswana, Tanzania, Angola and Mozambique. Agreements                    
 with Zimbabwe are being worked out. Several other donor countries also have already                     
 initiated a number of projects. Projects being taken up or under consideration                          
 include assistance in transport, human resource development covering diverse sectors,                   
 agro-industry, agricultural sector and supply of food-stuffs, medicines and other                       
 essential commodities. A brochure on AFRICA Fund for distribution in USA and Europe                     
 financed by the United Nations Centre Against Apartheid was released in New York on                     
 28 July 1988. An Inter-Agency meeting of different UN organizations to discus, ", the                   
 ways of assisting AFRICA Fund was also held in New York under the Chairmanship of the                   
 Under Secretary-General of the United Nations.                                                          
 PG31                                                                                                    
 As Chairman of the Fund, India has been in touch with anti-Apartheid Movements of UK,                   
 the Continent and Japan. These organizations have expressed keen interest to                            
 cooperate with the AFRICA Fund in mobilising public opinion and raising funds.                          
 Support for AFRICA Fund has also been specially sought in pamphlets distributed in UK                   
 by the anti-Apartheid Movement of UK.                                                                   
                                                                                                         
 The Third meeting of the AFRICA Fund Committee at the level of Senior Officials was                     
 held in Lima, Peru, from 2 to 5 August 1988. The donor and the UN and several other                     
 international agencies were invited to attend the meeting along with recipients, the                    
 Frontline States and Liberation Movements. The meeting reviewed the progress on the                     
 activities of the Fund including utilisati on of contributions, mobilisation of                         
 public opinion and additional financial resou rces. Among the important results of                      
 the meeting was a decision to donate a modest but symbolic sum of US $ 50,000 to the                    
 International Conference on the Plight of Refugees, Returnees and Displaced Persons                     
 in Southern Africa held under UN and OAU auspices. In addition, the meeting                             
 considered and adopted a                                                                                
 report which was submitted on behalf of the AFRICA Fund Committee to the Conference                     
 of the Foreign Ministers of Non-aligned countries held from 5 to 9 September 1988 in                    
 Nicosia, Cyprus. A comprehensive report on the AFRICA Fund was submitted by Shri N.                     
 Krishnan, Special Envoy of the Prime Minister on behalf of the AFRICA Fund Committee                    
 to the Conference of the Foreign Ministers. The final declaration of the conference                     
 made appreciative reference s to the progress made so far by AFRICA Fund and called                     
 for support to the Fund and also early fulfilment of the pledges made.                                  
                                                                                                         
 Opportunities afforded in various international fora are being utilised to                              
 disseminate information regarding the objectives and progress on the activities of                      
 the AFRICA Fund. Shri N. Krishnan, Special Envoy of the Prime Minister for Africa was                   
 invited to attend a twin conference on Apartheid hosted by Association of West                          
 European Parliamentarians for Action Against Apartheid (AWEPPA) in Harare in March                      
 1988. He addressed the European Parliamen- tarians and presented a paper on AFRICA                      
 Fund. The Special Envoy also par- ticipated in an international North-South Round                       
 Table Conference held in Harare under the aegis of UNICEF from 1 to 3 December 1988.                    
 A presentation on the progress of the activities of the AFRICA Fund was also made at                    
 the Conference.                                                                                         
 PG32                                                                                                    
 The Fourth meeting of the Senior Officers of the AFRICA Fund Committee was hold in                      
 Now Delhi from 14 to 17 February. The meeting took stock of the progress of the Fund,                   
 emphasised the need for urgent implementation of projects planned, put the donors and                   
 recipients in direct touch with each other and decided about the future of the Fund.                    
 Europe                                                                                                  
                                                                                   Top                   
 CHAPTER VI                                                                                              
                                                                                                         
 EUROPE WESTERN EUROPE INDIA values its relations with West European countries. A                        
 dense network of political, economic, commercial, scientific, technological and                         
 cultural contacts exists between India and countries in this region. The European                       
 Community is India's biggest trading partner. In the area of joint ventures, flow of                    
 investments, transfer of technology, the West European presence in Indi a is                            
 increasing. A significant role is played by them also in terms of bilateral assis-                      
 tance through multilateral organizations.                                                               
                                                                                                         
 In 1988 there were significant positive developments in India's relations with the                      
 West European countries as a result of an exchange of several high- level visits. The                   
 Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi visited the Federal Republic of Germany in June                       
 1988. The last visit by an Indian Prime Minister to that count ry had taken place in                    
 1971. Apart from holding talks with Chancellor Kohl and other political leaders, the                    
 Prime Minister met and addressed a select group of top German industrialists,                           
 businessmen and bankers. The establishment of rapport at the highest political level                    
 between the two countries, the decision to maintain a political dialogue on a regular                   
 basis and stimulating the interest o f the German business community in India were                      
 some of the positive results of the visit. Prior to it, in March 1988, signalling its                   
 increasing interest in I ndia as an economic partner, the Federal Republic organised                    
 a major exhibition "Technogerma" hi India.                                                              
 PG33                                                                                                    
 PG34                                                                                                    
 The Prime Minister visited Spain and Turkey in July 1988. This was the first visit to                   
 Spain by an Indian Prime Minister. It was a timely visit in the con- text of Spain's                    
 membership of the Community and the significant economic progress achieved by that                      
 country in recent years which has opened up prospects of fruitful economic and                          
 commercial exchanges between India and Spain. The visit laid the groundwork for                         
 positive developments in Indo-Spanish relations. In the last few years relations with                   
 Turkey have developed very rapidly. Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi's visit was in                          
 response to that of Turkish Prime Minister Ozal's to India in 1986. During the visit                    
 a shipping agreement and two agreements in the consular field were signed apart from                    
 a railway contract between IRCON and Turkish Railways. Several decisions on promoting                   
 cooperation in diverse areas were taken with a view to establish a wider framework of                   
 relations. Earlier, the Indo-Turkish Joint Commission had met in Ankara in May 1988                     
 with the basic objective of not only expanding commercial and economic ties between                     
 the two countries but also developing the necessary infrastructure to support an                        
 expanding relationship.                                                                                 
                                                                                                         
 The President, Shri R. Venkataraman paid State visits to three West European                            
 countries in 1988: the Netherlands, Finland and Cyprus. The Dutch participation in                      
 several important areas of India's economy is noteworthy and t his visit served to                      
 confirm the friendship and understanding between the two countr ies and their shared                    
 interest in developing mutually beneficial ties. The Finnish President, Mr Koivisto                     
 had visited India in 1987 and President Venkataraman's return visit continued the                       
 political dialogue which was established between the two countries and which has                        
 served to create a better understanding between the two, besides opening up prospects                   
 on the commercial/economic side in the light of the considerable economic progress                      
 made by Finland in recent years. India has traditional ties of friendship and                           
 understanding with Cyprus and the political dialogue and cooperation between the two                    
 through exchange of visits and interaction in various fora is well-established and                      
 mutually appre- ciated. President Venkataraman's visit marked a continuation and                        
 consolida- tion of this dialogue and an affirmation of India's interest in the                          
 preservatio n of the unity, integrity and sovereignty of Cyprus.                                        
 PG35                                                                                                    
 As against the outward visits from India to West European countries,- du ring the                       
 year, there were incoming visits to India by West European leaders also. T he Prime                     
 Minister of Malta visited India from 7 to Jan 13, 1989, the last such visit from the                    
 Maltese side being in the year 1968. Between Malta, a strategica lly placed                             
 non-aligned country, and India there has been interaction within the Non - Aligned                      
 Movement, the Commonwealth and the United Nations. During the visit, possibilities of                   
 expanding bilateral economic cooperation were explored. It was agreed that an                           
 economic mission from India including rpresentatives from the Government and the                        
 private sector would visit Malta in the near future.                                                    
 French President Mitterrand visited India from 1 to 4 February 1989. He was present                     
 at the inauguration in Bombay on 3 February of the year-long Festival of France, the                    
 first return festival by a West European country. Indo - French relations have over                     
 the years acquired a solid base. French participatio n in key and sophisticated                         
 sectors of India's economy has been valuable and to mutual advantage. Apart from                        
 discussions on issues of global interest such as the North-South dialogue and                           
 disarmament, President Mitterrand's visit served to renew a dialogue at the highest                     
 level between the two countries in an atmosphere of cordiality and mutual                               
 understanding with the aim of imparting new dynamism and substance to mutual                            
 cooperation between the two. President Evren of Turkey paid the first ever State                        
 visit by a Turkish President to India (22 to 26 February 1989). This visit                              
 constituted an importan t step forward in giving a political depth to relations                         
 between the two countries .                                                                             
                                                                                                         
 Earlier, in October 1988, Prime Minister Lubbers of the Netherlands made a transit                      
 halt in Delhi and this provided a useful occasion for the two countries to have an                      
 exchange on matters of bilateral and international interest. The first round of                         
 discussions for the implementation of the provisions of the Memorandum of                               
 Understanding on economic, industrial and technological cooperation between India and                   
 Norway was held in Oslo in October 1988. It was decided to initiate measures to                         
 strengthen trade, economic and industrial cooperation for which several specific                        
 areas were identified.                                                                                  
 PG36                                                                                                    
 Contacts with Parliamentarians of West European countries continued to be maintained.                   
 The Speaker of the Lok Sabha led Parliamentary delegations to the European Parliament                   
 and to Turkey. Parliamentary delegations from the European Parliament, Cyprus,                          
 Ireland, Austria and Spain visited India during the year. Within the West European                      
 region, India's relations with the Economic Community have special importance. The                      
 Community is India's largest trading partner, accounting for the largest chunk of                       
 India's international trade defici t. India's interest in expanding her exports to                      
 the Community with a view to achieve a better balance of trade is manifest. The                         
 progress towards greater European integration through the establishment of a Single                     
 Market in 1992 and its possible implications for the long standing economic partners                    
 of the Community such as India is a subject of considerable interest. India naturally                   
 hopes that the result of the integrated Community will mean more and not less Indian                    
 exports to West Europe. The Indo-EEC Troika meeting was held in Bonn in June 1988 at                    
 which international developments of interest to the two sides were reviewed. India is                   
 one of the few individual countries with which the Community has arrangement for                        
 Troika meetings and it is recognised that the importance of this dialogue will                          
 increase as political cooperation within the Community under the aegis of the                           
 European Political Cooperation grows.                                                                   
 THE USSR AND EASTERN EUROPE                                                                             
                                                                                                         
 India's traditionally close and friendly relations with the USSR and the other                          
 socialist countries of Eastern Europe further strengthened. There were many exchanges                   
 of visits at the highest levels with these countries. These visi ts, as well as                         
 exchanges at the lower levels and the decisions taken by the Joint Commissions with                     
 many of these countries, gave added stimulus and invested greater content to India's                    
 bilateral economic, scientific-technical and cultura l ties with these countries. The                   
 President, Shri R. Venkataraman paid a State visit to the USSR in July 1988 in the                      
 course of which he had discussions on bilateral matters and international issues with                   
 the Soviet leadership and participated in the closing ceremony of the Festival of                       
 India in the USSR. President Gorbachev visited                                                          
 PG37                                                                                                    
 India in November 1988. Apart from extensive discussions with the President and the                     
 Prime Minister, he participated in the closing ceremony of the Festival of Soviet                       
 Union in India and received the Indira Gandhi Prize for Peace, Dis- armament and                        
 Development. Mr Gorbachev's visit in November 1988, his first visit abroad after                        
 becoming President, provided the opportunity to both sides to reiterate their mutual                    
 desire to maintain the tradition of regular hig h- level exchanges which have given a                   
 new character and dynamism to Indo-Soviet relations in recent years. During the                         
 visit, the Prime Minister and Mr Gorbache v signed a Joint Summit Statement that sets                   
 out shared perceptions on bilateral and international matters. Five agreements were                     
 signed during the visit.                                                                                
                                                                                                         
 These are : an agreement on the construction of a nuclear power station in India, a                     
 framework agreement on the construction of hydro and thermal power stations with a                      
 capacity of 6000 MW by 2000 AD, an agreement on economic and technical credit for                       
 Vindhyachal Thermal Power Station (II), an agreement on avoidance of double taxation                    
 and an agreement on cooperation in the field of outer space.                                            
                                                                                                         
 There were frequent contacts at the Ministerial level too during this peri od. These                    
 included visits of Shri K.C. Pant, the Defence Minister, Shri M.L. Foteda r, Minister                   
 of Steel and Mines, Shri H.K.L. Bhagat, Minister for Information and Broadcasting,                      
 Shri B. Shankaranand, Minister for Water Resources, Shri Madhavrao Scindia, Minister                    
 of State for Railways and Shri K. Natwar Singh, Minister of State for External                          
 Affairs, from the Indian side. From the Soviet side, First Deputy Prime Minister                        
 Maslyukov, Deputy Prime Minister Kamentsev and Defence Minister Yazov visited India.                    
                                                                                                         
 Bilateral trade rapidly increased during this period to reach a level of Rs. 5200                       
 crores in 1988. It was agreed that this accelerated growth in trade should be                           
 maintained in the coming years. The Trade Plan for 1989 has a target of Rs. 7000                        
 crores. In view of the modernisation and changing character of the economies of the                     
 two countries, both sides felt that full advantage shou ld be taken of the emerging                     
 complementarities in the economies of both the countri es and changes brought about                     
 in the structure of trade and new strategies for futu re cooperation. These include                     
 greater involvement of Indian private sector in business with the USSR, direct ties                     
 between enterprises, promotion of joint ventures and production cooperation, Indian                     
 participation in the development of the Soviet Far East and Siberia, and greater                        
 sharing of the latest technologies.                                                                     
 PG38                                                                                                    
 The implementation of the Integrated. Long Term Programme (ILTP) of Science and                         
 Technology Cooperation signed by the Prime Minister and President Gorbachev in July                     
 1987 has given a new momentum to Indo-Soviet cooperation in this field through                          
 intensified scientific exchanges and setting up of a Join t Council to monitor                          
 implementation and coordination of the ILTP. Eighty specific projects have been                         
 identified and over 100 scientists' visits have tak en place from each side.                            
                                                                                                         
 The unprecedented and unique Festivals of India and the USSR in each other's                            
 countries gave a fresh impetus to all aspects of bilateral relations. It was agreed                     
 that this momentum should be maintained. A new Cultural Exchange Programme envisaging                   
 more intensive and innovative exchanges was signed in November 1988. It was agreed to                   
 set up an Indo-Soviet Nehru Foundation in order to provide a forum for greater                          
 interaction between scholars and scient ists of the two countries. Following the                        
 earthquake which devastated Armenia, relief supplies con- taining Arctic tents;                         
 blankets, woollens, hospital beds, stretchers, various ca te- gories of medicine and                    
 medical equipment, were airlifted to Armenia. A special Fund called "Prime Minister's                   
 Armenia Earthquake Relief Fund" was opened to receive contributions from                                
 organizations and individuals. A National Relief Committee under the Chairmanship of                    
 the Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri K. Natwar Singh was set up to                          
 coordinate relief supplies from India.                                                                  
                                                                                                         
 Relations between India and Czechoslovakia were further strengthened with the visit                     
 of the President, Shri R. Venkataraman to Czechoslovakia from 20 to 22 September                        
 1988. The President had meetings with his Czechoslovak counterpart, Mr Gustav Husak                     
 as well as with the General Secretary of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia, Mr                      
 Milos Jakes. It was agreed that there was considerable unutilised potential for                         
 strengthening bilateral economic and other ties. The Minister for Information and                       
 Broadcasting, Shri H.K.L. Bhagat led India's delegation to the Karlovy Vary Film                        
 Festival in Czechoslovakia in July 1988 where the Indian entry Anantram was awarded a                   
 prize.                                                                                                  
 PG39                                                                                                    
 Indo-Hungarian relations received a major impetus with the visit of the Prime                           
 Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi to Hungary from 10 to 12 June 1988. During the visit, he                    
 held talks with the Hungarian Prime Minister and General Secretar y of the Hungarian                    
 Socialist Workers' Party, Mr Karoly Grosz, and also met the President of the HSWP, Mr                   
 Janos Kadar. Both international and regional issues were discussed as also methods to                   
 intensify bilateral economic cooperation. An agreement for cooperation between the                      
 television organizations of the two countries was signed during the visit.                              
                                                                                                         
 The 8th Session of the Indo-Hungarian Joint Commission took place in New Delhi from                     
 24 to 28 October 1988. The Indian delegation was led by the Industry Minister, Shri                     
 J. Vengala Rao and the Hungarian delegation by the Hungarian Deputy Prime Minister,                     
 Dr Petar Medgyessy. The major recommen- dations of the Joint Commission include                         
 enlarging cooperation in industrial, economic, scientific and technical fields and                      
 wider contacts between the two countries for transfer of technology. It is expected                     
 that more non-traditional items would be traded.                                                        
                                                                                                         
 Shri K.C. Pant, the Minister for Defence visited Hungary from 9 to 13 October 1988 at                   
 the invitation of his Hungarian counterpart. The 40th anniver- sary of the                              
 establishment of diplomatic relations between India and Hungary was celebrated in                       
 both countries in November.                                                                             
                                                                                                         
 Traditionally friendly relations continued to develop with Yugoslavia. Close                            
 cooperation in the bilateral and international fields, particularly in th e Non-                        
 Aligned Movement, was further consolidated with the Prime Minister's visit to                           
 Yugoslavia in July 1988. Agreements for cooperation in the fields of informatio n,                      
 science and technology and sports were signed, while the agreements in the fiel d of                    
 peaceful uses of nuclear energy was extended. A Commercial-level shipping agreement                     
 was signed during the year. On the economic side, the 17th Session of the Joint                         
 Committee for Economic, Scientific and Technical Cooperation held                                       
 in June 1988, explored prospects for sustaining the tempo of growing commercial and                     
 scientific-technical cooperation by devising new forms and areas of cooperation. The                    
 9th Session of the Indo-Bulgarian Joint Commission for Economic, Scientific and                         
 Technical Cooperation was held in New Delhi from 15 to 18 Novem- ber 1988, at which                     
 the Indian delegation was led by the Agriculture Minister,                                              
 PG40                                                                                                    
 Shri Bhajan Lal. The Bulgarian delegation was led by Mr Ognian Doinov, Deputy Prime                     
 Minister and Member of the Politburo of the Bulgarian Communist Party.A protocol                        
 signed on this occasion spelt out the wide-range of possibilities of co- operation                      
 between the two countries especially in high technology areas includi ng computers,                     
 electronics, etc. An agreement for cooperation in the field of tourism was also                         
 signed during this Session. A new dimension was added to cultural cooperation between                   
 India and Bul- garia with the holding of "Days of Indian Culture in Bulgaria"                           
 inaugurated by the then Minister for Human Resource Development, Shri P.V. Narasimha                    
 Rao in June 1988. This festival of Indian culture proved extremely popular in Bul-                      
 garia and aroused widespread interest and enthusiasm towards India among the people                     
 at large. A reciprocal "Days of Bulgarian Culture in India" was also held in India in                   
 January 1989. Folk troupes and exhibitions from Bulgaria visited numerous Indian                        
 cities. The Minister for Defence, Shri K.C. Pant visite d Bulgaria from 13 to 17                        
 October 1988. Bilateral relations with the GDR were strengthened in all fields. The                     
 Ind o- GDR Cultural Exchange Programme for the years 1988-89 was signed between the                     
 two Governments in New Delhi in June 1988. A similar exchange programme in the field                    
 of scientific and technical cooperation was signed in December 198 8, The Indo-GDR                      
 bilateral committee on shipping also met in 1988 to review bilateral shipping                           
 agreements.                                                                                             
                                                                                                         
 The 12th Session of the Indo-Polish Joint Commission was held in New Delhi from 10 to                   
 17 January 1989. The Indian delegation was led by the Union Energy Minister, Shri                       
 Vasant Sathe, and the Polish delegation by Mr A. Kwasniewski, Minister and Member of                    
 the Presidium of the Polish Council of Ministers.                                                       
                                                                                                         
 The Minister of State for Commerce, Shri P.R. Dasmunshi visited Poland in June 1988                     
 and held discussions with the Polish leaders on measures to increa se and expand                        
 bilateral trade. The Third Session of the Indo-Polish Joint Committe e on Shipping                      
 met in India in December 1988 to review the bilateral shipping arrangements,                            
 PG41                                                                                                    
 The Indo-Romanian Joint Commission held its session in the first half of 1988 in                        
 Bucharest. The Indian delegation was led by Shri N.D. Tiwari the then Minister of                       
 Commerce. It was agreed to widen the trade basket and to enhance Indo-Romanian                          
 economic cooperation on a balanced basis. Shri P.R. Dasmunshi, Minister of State for                    
 Commerce also visited Romania in March 1988 to discuss economic matters. India's                        
 diplomatic relations with Albania which had been under suspension were revived during                   
 the year with the presentation of credentials by the Albani an Ambassador in August                     
 1988.                                                                                                   
 The Americas                                                                                            
                                                                                   Top                   
 CHAPTER VII                                                                                             
                                                                                                         
 THE AMERICAS NORTH AMERICA THE main thrust in Indo-US relations during the period                       
 under review was towards consolidating the positive trends that have developed in                       
 recent years. Initiatives taken during the Prime Minister's visit to Washington in                      
 Oct ober 1987 were followed up. These facilitated an expansion of exchanges in the                      
 economic, scientific and technology transfer fields. An indication of the improving                     
 climate in Indo-US relations was the num- ber of high-level political and official                      
 exchanges which took place during the year. From the US side, Defence Secretary Frank                   
 Carlucci visited India in April 1988; Chief of the Army Staff, General Carl E. Vuono                    
 visited in October 1988; and Ass is- tant Secretary of Defence, Richard L. Armitage                     
 and Assistant Secretary of State Richard W. Murphy visited in December 1988. Chairman                   
 of the US House of Re- presentatives Sub-Committee on Asian and Pacific Affairs,                        
 Stephen Solarz and tw o other members of the Sub-Committee visited India and had                        
 wide-ranging discus- sions on regional and bilateral issues with the Prime Minister,                    
 the External Affairs Minister, Minister of State, Shri K. Natwar Singh and the                          
 Foreign Secre tary. They also visited Punjab. An invitation was sent by the Minister                    
 of Commerce, to the US Commerce Secretary Mr R. Mossbacher to attend the Engineering                    
 Trade Fair in February 1989 at which USA is a partner country with the Confederation                    
 of Engineering Industry of India. The Minister for External Affairs visited New York                    
 to attend the UN General Assembly Session in September/October 1988 and met President                   
 Reagan and Secretary of State George Shultz.                                                            
                                                                                                         
 Review meetings of the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) procedures on Technology                       
 Transfer were held with the US government in January 1988 and again in March 1988 and                   
 January 1989. Several details and modalities of the                                                     
 PG42                                                                                                    
 PG43                                                                                                    
 technology transfer arrangements were worked out and a comprehensive system has been                    
 put in place. There is a continuous dialogue underway to streamline exchanges and to                    
 facilitate easier access of Indian industry to sophisticated t echno- logies and                        
 products. It is expected that the value of US export licences issued for controlled                     
 technology items in 1988 would be close to US$ 1 billion.                                               
                                                                                                         
 The Cray XMP-14 Super Computer was received in India in October 1988 and has been                       
 installed at the National Centre for Medium Range Weather Fore- casting (NCMRWF) on                     
 the premises of the Indian Meteorological Department in New Delhi. The Government of                    
 India has applied for an export licence for another Super Computer-the Cray YMP-132                     
 for the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore. During the Prime Minister's visit in                    
 October 1987, the Science and Tech- nology Initiative (STI) was extended for an                         
 additional three years beyond 1988 . The formal extension of the STI till 30                            
 September 1991 was signed by Dr W.R.                                                                    
                                                                                                         
 Graham, Science Adviser to President Reagan and the Minister of State for Science and                   
 Technology, Shri K.R. Narayanan in October 1988. An important issue pursued during                      
 the year was the conclusionof a treaty on avoidance of double taxation. Most of the                     
 issues have been sorted out and it is expected that an Agreement will be signed in                      
 1989.                                                                                                   
                                                                                                         
 The period under review continued the trend of cordial relations between India and                      
 Canada. The whole range of issues in Indo-Canadian relations were reviewed at the                       
 Annual Ministerial Consultations (AMC) held in Canada in May 1988 and new areas of                      
 cooperation were identified. Growing economic coopera- tion and Canadian assistance                     
 for various projects in India were also assessed. An important aspect in bilateral                      
 relations was the problem of Canada-based Sikh extremists. Prime Minister Brian                         
 Mulroney and Secretary of State Joe Clark followed a firm policy in suppressing                         
 terrorism and abuse of Canadian laws and rights by terrorists. The Punjab issue has                     
 acquired a certain domestic politic al dimension in Canada and the Canadian                             
 government came under considerable pressure for the release of two Canadians of                         
 Indian origin, Balkar Singh and Da ljit Singh Sekhon, who were apprehended in Punjab                    
 for involvement in extremist activities.                                                                
 PG44                                                                                                    
 CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN During the period under review India's                      
 traditionally friendly relations wi th the countries of Latin America and the                           
 Caribbean continued to develop satis- factorily. Exchange of high-level visits and                      
 signing of bilateral agreements, c on- tinued cooperation in international fora and                     
 India's support for the aspiration s of the people of the region contributed to the                     
 strengthening of bilateral ties. At the invitation of the Government of Guyana, India                   
 participated in Com- memoration of the 150th Anniversary of the Indian arrival in                       
 Guyana on , 1838 505 o, . the 150th Anniversary of the Indian arrival in Guyana on                      
 @@18380 A high-level d elegation led by the Vice-President, Dr Shanker Dayal Sharma                     
 visited Guyana from 4 to 9 May 1988. The delegation included six Mem- bers of                           
 Parliament, senior officials of the Ministry of External Affairs and representatives                    
 of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, Projects and Equipment Corporation                      
 and the National Small Industries Corporation.                                                          
                                                                                                         
 A composite manifestation of Indian performing arts, a food festival, exhibitions of                    
 arts and crafts, science and technology, books, photographs of Jawaharlal Nehru,                        
 selected cartoons by Abu Abraham, a fashion show and a festival of Indian films were                    
 held in Georgetown and other towns. The scale of public and Government participation                    
 in various events was impressive. Durin g the visit the Vice-President met with                         
 President Hoyte, Prime Minister Green and other Guyanese leaders. Mr Rashleigh                          
 Jackson, the Foreign Minister of Guyana visited India between 23 and 27 August 1988.                    
 He met the Prime Minister and the Minister for External Affairs and discussed matters                   
 of bilateral and international interest.                                                                
                                                                                                         
 Following his visit to Guyana, the Vice-President paid a visit to Suriname                              
 (9 to 11 May 1988) and had wide-ranging discussions with President Ramsevak Shankar                     
 and Prime Minister H. Arron. Possibilities of Indian cooperation in developmental                       
 activities in various areas in Suriname were discussed- The Vice- President also                        
 addressed a special session of the National Assembly of Suriname . During his visit                     
 to Trinidad & Tobago (1 to 4 May 1988), the Vice-Presiden t had bilateral discussions                   
 with President Noor Hassanali, Prime Minister Robinso n                                                 
 PG45                                                                                                    
 and other leaders. During his visit to the Parliament House in Port of Spain, the                       
 Speaker's Chair gifted by India was installed for the first time. The Speaker of the                    
 Trinidad & Tobago Assembly, Mr Nizam Mohammed visited India from 26 September to 3                      
 October 1988. He called on the President, the Vice-President, the Prime Minister and                    
 the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs. Central America continued to be an area of                      
 tension. However, following the Guatemala Peace Accord signed by the five Central                       
 American Presidents in August 1987 and their meeting in Costa Rica in January to                        
 review its compliance and implementation, there has been a certain defusion in the                      
 situation.                                                                                              
                                                                                                         
 On 23 March 1988, a ceasefire agreement was signed between the Nicaraguan Govern-                       
 ment and the Contras in the presence of President Ortega providing for freeing of all                   
 political prisoners, guaranteed freedom of expression and the return of exiles.                         
 Subsequent rounds of negotiations have, however, been inconclusive. In May 1988 India                   
 co-sponsored a UN General Assembly Resolution on "The Situa- tion in Central America:                   
 Threats to Peace and International Security and Initia - tives for Peace and Special                    
 Programmes for Economic Assistance". The Vice- President of Guatemala conveyed the                      
 gratitude on behalf of the Central American Governments for India's co-sponsorship                      
 and support.                                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 A welcome development was a Joint Declaration signed by the Presidents of the five                      
 Central American States namely, El Salvador, Guatemala, Costa Rica, Honduras and                        
 Nicaragua, on 14 February 1989, at La Paz which analysed the situation of the peace                     
 process in Central America and adopted a resolution to ensure its validity. The                         
 Declaration also endorsed the measures proposed by Nicaraguan President Ortega to                       
 evolve a process of democratisation and national reconciliation in Nicaragua. This                      
 holds out the prospect of promoting the peace process in Central America.                               
                                                                                                         
 Dr Carlos Salinas de Gortari, the candidate of the ruling PRI (Institution al                           
 Revolutionary Party) was elected President of Mexico in July winning 50.4% of the                       
 votes. The Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri K.K. Tewary represented India                   
 at the inauguration of President Salinas in Mexico on                                                   
 PG46                                                                                                    
 1 December 1988. President Salinas granted an exclusive audience to Shri Tewary who                     
 handed over a letter from Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi. President Salinas expressed                      
 Mexico's keen desire to promote, intensify and expand bilater al relations with                         
 India.                                                                                                  
                                                                                                         
 India and Mexico signed a Cultural Exchange Programme for the years 1988-90. The                        
 Programme envisages exchanges between the two countries in the fields of education,                     
 art and culture, radio and television, cinema, sports and youth affairs.                                
                                                                                                         
 The Foreign Minister of Nicaragua, Dr Miguel D'Escoto Borckmann visited India from 20                   
 to 23 August 1988. He delivered a letter from President Daniel Ortega to the Prime                      
 Minister. He also met the Minister for External Affa irs and had discussions on a                       
 wide-range of issues.                                                                                   
                                                                                                         
 Hurricane `Joan' hit Nicaragua on 22 October 1988 causing extensive damage throughout                   
 the country. The Prime Minister sent a message to President Daniel Ortega expressing                    
 sympathy for those affected by the disaster. Medical                                                    
 relief supplies were despatched to Nicaragua as a token of India's solidarity.                          
                                                                                                         
 The Prime Minister sent a message to Prime Minister Eduard Seaga of Jamaica                             
 expressing sympathy for the victims of hurricane `Gilbert' which caused extensive                       
 destruction in Jamaica in October 1988. As a measure of relief a gif t of medical                       
 supplies was despatched. The Governors of the Argentine States of Cordoba and Negro,                    
 Dr Eduardo Angelos and Dr Horacio Massaccesi visited India in the last week of March                    
 with a commercial delegation. They called on the Vice-President, the Prime Minister,                    
 the Speaker and the Minister of State for External Affairs.                                             
                                                                                                         
 As in previous years, India once again co-sponsored a Resolution in the UN General                      
 Assembly calling upon Argentina and the UK to hold negotiations with a view to                          
 resolve their dispute over Falklands/Malvinas. The Resolution was adopted by 109                        
 votes to 5 with 37 abstentions.                                                                         
 PG47                                                                                                    
 In January 1988, Dr Rodrigo Borja Cavallos was elected as the President of Ecuador in                   
 succession to Febres Cordero. The President and the Prime Ministe r sent                                
 congratulatory messages to the President-elect. In a Presidential plebiscite held on                    
 5 October 1988, the Chilean voters decisively rejected General Pinochet's bid for                       
 eight more years as President. In an official statement, the Government of India                        
 welcomed the democratic process instituted in Chile and hoped that the process of                       
 restoration of democracy in Chile would go forward smoothly. Under the, present                         
 Constitution, Presidential elections on a multi-candidate basis are due at the end of                   
 1989.                                                                                                   
                                                                                                         
 The Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri K.K. Tewary visited Peru from 4 to 8                   
 December 1988. He delivered a message to President Garcia from Prime Minister Gandhi.                   
 President Garcia expressed his special affection and regard for India. International                    
 issues and bilateral cooperation were discussed in the Minister's meetings with the                     
 President and the Foreign Minister of Peru.                                                             
                                                                                                         
 The Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri K.K. Tewary led a delega- tion                         
 representing India at the 30th Anniversary of the triumph of Cuban Revolution in                        
 Havana on 2 January 1989. He delivered a letter from the Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv                     
 Gandhi to President Fidel Castro conveying the Prime Minister's personal greetings                      
 and good wishes. The Minister of State also met, among others, Mr Carlos Rafael                         
 Rodriguez, Vice-President of the Council of State and Ministers and Foreign Minister                    
 Malmierca and held discussions on bilateral and international matters.                                  
                                                                                                         
 The Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi sent a message of felicitations to t he                           
 President-elect Carlos Andres Perez of Venezuela who was elected as the candi- date                     
 of the ruling Accion Democratic Party in December 1988 to assume office on 2 February                   
 1989. He was earlier President during 1974-79.                                                          
 United Nations And International Conferences                                                            
                                                                                   Top                   
 CHAPTER VIII                                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES                                                            
                                                                                                         
 1988 was the year of the United Nations. The UN Peace Keeping Operations was awarded                    
 the Nobel Prize for Peace. The Jawaharlal Nehru Peace Prize was also awarded to the                     
 Secretary-General of the UN, Mr Perez de Cuellar. The patient and persistent                            
 diplomacy of the United Nations was capped in 1988 by the signing of the Geneva                         
 Accord on Afghanistan, the agreement on a cease- fire in the Iran-Iraq war, renewal                     
 of intercommunal talks in Cyprus, the creati on of an environment conducive to the                      
 resolution of the problem of Western Sahara and the beginnings of the solution to the                   
 Namibia problem.                                                                                        
                                                                                                         
 India welcomes the reaffirmation of faith in the UN and its ability to con - tribute                    
 to peace. India's active and constructive role in the United Nations as well as in                      
 major international conferences organised by the United Nations and its specialised                     
 agencies in 1988 was geared to provide a boost to the return of multilateralism. and                    
 the revival, of the active diplomacy of the UN. The Minis ter for External Affairs,                     
 Shri P.V. Narasimha Rao, who led the Indian delegation to the Forty-third Session of                    
 the General Assembly, summarised the Indian position on the principal issues on the                     
 UN agenda in his speech to the General Assembly which was addressed in Hindi on Oct                     
 04, 1988. The dramatic improvement in relations between the Super Powers benefited                      
 the deliberations of the Forty- third Session and was applauded in his speech.                          
                                                                                                         
 Both the Commonwealth and the Non-Aligned Movement benefited greatly from India's                       
 active participation and the interest India took in enhancing the effectiveness of                      
 both NAM and the Commonwealth on issues of primary concern. While welcoming the                         
 detente and its positive impact on the role of the United Nations in the political                      
 arena, particularly of regional conflicts, Indi a was disappointed at the lack of                       
 progress in the international economic field.                                                           
 PG48                                                                                                    
 PG49                                                                                                    
 It is India's hope that the United Nations which has contributed positively to the                      
 peace process in 1988 will give equal attention to the solution of the many eco -                       
 nomic problems faced by the developing countries in the immediate future. Political                     
 Issues India welcomed the adoption of the draft resolution on Afghanistan at the 43rd                   
 General Assembly without vote and without debate. Earlier, while addres- sing the                       
 Plenary, the Minister for External Affairs had said: "The Geneva Accor ds (on                           
 Afghanistan) have established a framework which would enable the people of                              
 Afghanistan to decide on their future free from foreign interference or inte r-                         
 vention. While the withdrawal of Soviet troops has proceeded as per schedule, we are                    
 greatly perturbed at the persistent report of violation of the Geneva Ac cords and                      
 hope that the Accords will be implemented faithfully by all parties. In ad di- tion                     
 to restoring peace and stability to the region, the implementation of the Geneva                        
 Accords would also remove the ostensible cause for the introduction of sophisticated                    
 arms into the area."                                                                                    
                                                                                                         
 India termed Chairman Arafat's speech to the General Assembly meeting at Geneva as                      
 "one of courage and foresight". India welcomed the three-point framework of the                         
 Palestinian peace initiative put forward by Chairman Arafat and hoped that it would                     
 evoke a simultaneous and constructive response from Israel. Earlier, India had                          
 supported the United Nations General Assembly resolu- tion which shifted the venue of                   
 the UNGA debate on the Question of Palestine from New York to Geneva, following the                     
 decision of the Host Country for the UN Headquarters, to deny a visa to Chairman                        
 Arafat of PLO who had wished to travel to New York to address the General Assembly.                     
                                                                                                         
 India continues to maintain that an International Peace Conference on the Middle-East                   
 was the most feasible and credible framework to resolve the Arab- Israel conflict.                      
 This Conference should address the fundamental issues involved : attainment by the                      
 Palestinian people of their inalienable right to self-determi na- tion and the                          
 recognition that all States in the region, including the States of Palestine and                        
 Israel and other neighbours, have the right to live in peace and security within                        
 internationally recognised borders.                                                                     
 PG50                                                                                                    
 India welcomed the ceasefire between Iran and Iraq which came into effect on 20                         
 August 1988. The External Affairs Minister said in his Plenary Statement to the 43rd                    
 Session of the UN General Assembly that the: "Ceasefire is an impor - tant first step                   
 and must be consolidated. The negotiations between the two coun - tries currently                       
 underway, under UN auspices, must be pursued."                                                          
                                                                                                         
 India has also contributed a contingent of 15 military officers to the Uni ted                          
 Nations Iran-Iraq Military Observer Group set up pursuant to Security Council                           
 Resolution 619 of 1988, to verify, confirm and supervise the ceasefire and with -                       
 drawal to internationally recognised boundaries.                                                        
                                                                                                         
 The draft text of the resolution presented to the General Assembly this ye ar was                       
 different from the resolution passed in the earlier year. The draft did not thrust                      
 legitimacy upon a group which had no claims to it. It underlined support to regional                    
 initiatives. The draft was more balanced in its identification of t he ele- ments                       
 required for a just and lasting Kampuchean solution. India particularly welcomed the                    
 call for "non-return to the universally condemned policies and practices of a recent                    
 past" contained in the resolution. However, the draft contained certain provisions                      
 which India could not support. India was also disappointed that no determined effort                    
 had been made to find consensus among the delegations principally concerned. While                      
 abstaining on the resolution, India underlined that this would in no way detract from                   
 its support to the diplomatic efforts underway at the time to find a political solu                     
 tion to the Kampuchean problem.                                                                         
                                                                                                         
 India continued to support the convening of the Conference on the Indian Ocean at an                    
 early date but not later than 1990, as stipulated in the General As sem- bly                            
 resolution on the subject. India believes that the continued Great Power na val                         
 presence in the Indian Ocean remains a factor contributing to tension and in-                           
 stability. India reiterated the call for the withdrawal of all military forces of                       
 out- side powers from the Indian Ocean, so that it can emerge as a Zone of Peace. it                    
 is India's view that the International Conference on the Indian Ocean as a Zone of                      
 Peace must be attended by all major powers which have military presence in the Indian                   
 Ocean if the Conference is to achieve success.                                                          
 PG51                                                                                                    
 The Ad hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean had finalised a consensus report and draft                     
 resolution for recommendation to the First Committee. The resolution was subsequently                   
 adopted without vote both in the First Committee and in the Plenary. As in 1987,                        
 negotiations between treaty parties and non-treaty members failed to produce a                          
 consensus text for a draft resolution on Antarctica in the UN General Assembly in                       
 1988. Two resolutions were subsequently introduced in the First Committee.                              
                                                                                                         
 Consistent with its anti-apartheid policy, India voted for the draft resol ution                        
 calling for the exclusion of South Africa from all meetings of the Antarctic Tr eaty                    
 Consultative Parties. As for the substantive draft resolution on Antarctica, India                      
 joined other Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties in not participating in the debate                   
 on thi s resolution.                                                                                    
                                                                                                         
 After six years of negotiations, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties adopted a                    
 convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resources by con- sensus, on 2 June                   
 1988, at Wellington, New Zealand. India was a party to the consensus. The Convention                    
 seeks to ensure that there is no damage to the fragil e Antarctic environment in the                    
 event that mining activity should ever take place on the icy continent. Disarmament                     
 Issues During 1988 India played a leading role in the three main multilateral dis -                     
 armament fora, viz., the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, the UN Dis- armament                      
 Commission and the First Committe of the UN General Assembly. At the Third Special                      
 Session of the General Assembly devoted to Disarmament held in June 1988, the Indian                    
 delegation led by the Prime Minister put forward a number of new proposals including                    
 a far-reaching Action Plan for ushering in a Nuclear Weapon Free and Non-Violent                        
 World Order. The initiatives taken by                                                                   
 PG52                                                                                                    
 India arose out of the deeply held conviction that global nuclear disarmament i s                       
 necessary for the very survival of mankind. India has consistently maintained that                      
 the arms race, in particular the nuclear arms race, will be finally ended only when                     
 the doctrine of deterrence and the balance of terror that goes with it, is given up.                    
 Only then will it be possible to work towards freeing this world from                                   
 nuclear weapons.                                                                                        
                                                                                                         
 Over the past decade, the arms race has proceeded at a progressively accelerating                       
 pace. The world has been brought to the very edge of a precipice. Increasingly, the                     
 realisation grew that such a situation could not be allowed t o continue. The INF                       
 Treaty and the relative relaxation in East-West tension constituted a good augury for                   
 the Special Session of the General Assembly on Disarmament. Our assessment was that                     
 SSOD-III provided a good oppor- tunity to seriously consider changes in doctrines,                      
 policies, attitudes and inst itu- tions required to manage a nuclear weapon-free                        
 world order, rooted firmly in non-violence and faithful to the principle of peaceful                    
 co-existence. Our large r objective was to further the multilateral process of                          
 disarmament negotiations within the framework of a time-bound programme and to move                     
 towards re- structuring international relations based upon justice, equity,                             
 universality an d respect for diversity. It is to further these objectives that India                   
 tabled a ti me- bound and phased Action Plan at the Special Session.                                    
                                                                                                         
 The Action Plan contains a package of measures that structurally link the entire                        
 range of issues presently on the world disarmament agenda. The Plan calls upon the                      
 international community to negotiate a binding commitment to general and complete                       
 disarmament-a commitment which should be total and without reservation. The most                        
 essential feature of the Action Plan is the achievement of the objective of                             
 elimination of nuclear weapons by the year 2010 at the latest. The Action Plan is                       
 based on the premise that the process of disarmament could not be confined to the USA                   
 and the USSR. There should be a binding commitment by all nations to eliminate                          
 nuclear weapons. All nuclear weapon States must join the process without delay. Those                   
 States which are capable of crossing the nuclear threshold should also assume                           
 corresponding obligations for doing so. India specifically proposed that negotiations                   
 must commence                                                                                           
 PG53                                                                                                    
 immediately for a new Treaty to replace the NPT which lapses in 1995 unless it is                       
 extended. This new Treaty should give legal effect to the binding com- mitment by the                   
 entire international community to eliminate all nuclear weapons by the year 2010. In                    
 addition, two other initiatives were proposed by India relating to "New Technologies                    
 and the Qualitative Arms Race" and "Disarma- ment of the Warheads of Nuclear Missiles                   
 Covered by the INF Treaty between the USA and the USSR".                                                
                                                                                                         
 In the Conference on Disarmament, the sole multilateral negotiating body, India                         
 maintained its position of principle and played a leading role in the Gro up of                         
 neutral and Non-aligned countries. The Indian delegation coordinated the Group's                        
 positions on the issues of "Cessation of the Nuclear Arms Race and Nuclear                              
 Disarmament" and "Prevention of Nuclear War and Other Related Matters". India                           
 continued to press for commencement of negotiations in these areas as also for a                        
 comprehensive Nuclear Weapons Test Ban Treaty. In the Ad hoc Committee on Prevention                    
 of an Arms Race in Outer Space proposals on strengthening the existing legal regime                     
 were made which attracted wide- spread support. Indian experts also participated in                     
 UN-sponsored meetings of seismologists for monitoring a Nuclear Test Ban and                            
 negotiations on a conven- tion prohibiting chemical weapons. The Minister of State                      
 Shri K. Natwar Singh addressed the Conference on Disarmament highlighting India's                       
 commit- ment and contribution to the multilateral disarmament process. The Action                       
 Plan on disarmament tabled at SSOD-III was submitted as a document to the Conference                    
 on Disarmament to be considered in negotiations on a "Compre- hensive Programme of                      
 Disarmament".                                                                                           
                                                                                                         
 In the First Committee of the UN General Assembly, India introduced a new resolution                    
 on "Impact of Scientific and Technological Developments on International Security".                     
 This resolution calls for an assessment of scientific and technological trends and                      
 evaluation of their impact on the international security environment with a view to                     
 ensure that scientific and technological developments are used solely for peaceful                      
 purposes and for the common benefit                                                                     
 of mankind. The resolution was adopted by an overwhelming majority. In addition,                        
 India also presented a resolution on a Convention on Non-Use of Nuclear Weapons                         
 which, as in previous years, was strongly supported by a large number of States. The                    
 Indian resolution on Freeze on Production of Nuclear Weapons and Fissionable Material                   
 intended for Nuclear Weapons was merged with a similar resolution by Mexico enabling                    
 us to increase our co-sponsorship as also the support in the General Assembly. In                       
 addition to these, the Indian                                                                           
 PG54                                                                                                    
 delegation negotiated on other issues especially those relating to chemical wea -                       
 pons and confidence building measures where the resulting resolutions were adopted by                   
 consensus. An International NGO Conference "Towards a Nuclear Weapon Free and                           
 Non-Violent World" was held in New Delhi from 14 to 16 November 1988. The Conference                    
 constituted one of the first important events marking the com- mencement of                             
 Jawaharlal Nehru's birth centenary celebrations. The Con- ference, in which most of                     
 the important international peace movements and dis- armament related organizations                     
 were represented, unanimously adopted a Joint Statement which endorsed the Action                       
 Plan presented by India at SSOD-III. The Joint Statement contains a number of new                       
 disarmament ideas and propo- sals, many of which were put forward for the first time                    
 in any international gathering.                                                                         
                                                                                                         
 Economic Issues The Ord Session of the UN General Assembly was not able to sustain                      
 the momentum generated by the positive outcome of the 7th Session of the UN                             
 Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD VII). In spite of the con- tinuation of                     
 modest growth in the industrialised countries, the developing countries continued to                    
 face serious problems. These included, among others, the external debt crisis,                          
 protectionism and continuing depressed commodity prices, stagnation in resource flows                   
 and adverse external environment. The Second Committee in the Ord Session did not                       
 achieve any meaningful progress in the areas of traditionally held importance to                        
 developing countries.                                                                                   
                                                                                                         
 The 43rd Session of the UN General Assembly also addressed the issue of the financial                   
 crisis facing the UN due to pendency of arrears of dues from some member States, some                   
 long-term measures for increasing the liquidity of the UN such as issuance of                           
 interest-free bonds, were under consideration of the Secret ary- General. However,                      
 with a partial release of US arrears of contribution, the financial situation had                       
 eased somewhat. The Secretary-General is keeping the situation under review.                            
 PG55                                                                                                    
 The overall standstill in international economic negotiations in the UN fo ra                           
 continued in 1988. The developed countries persisted in their strategy of rega rd-                      
 ing the role of the UN as a forum for exchange of views rather than serious                             
 negotiations on development issues which are left to the domain of specialised fora                     
 such as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the In- ternational                          
 Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank. The major industria- lised countries also                       
 maintained the tendency to consult and reach agreements on far-reaching issues among                    
 themselves without the involvement of the deve- loping countries. India's efforts in                    
 such circumstances were restricted to preventing any erosion of fundamental positions                   
 of developing countries. The Indian delegation played a useful role in negotiations                     
 leading to the declarations adopted at the Ministerial Meetings of the Group of 77                      
 and of the Non-aligned Countries, both held prior to the 43rd Session. Discussions in                   
 the Second Committee were mainly on external debt crisis and related issues, en-                        
 vironmental matters and the proposal of the Group of 77 to convene a special session                    
 of the General Assembly to reactivate growth and development in the developing                          
 countries. Regrettably the resolution on debt had to be voted upon for the second                       
 year in succession; in addition to the negative vote of the Unit ed States, Japan                       
 abstained. The Indian delegation played an active role in facili- tating consensus on                   
 the resolutions on environment. A major achievement this year was in obtaining                          
 agreement on the "main responsibility" of develop- ed countries for combating                           
 pollution.                                                                                              
                                                                                                         
 The General Assembly decided to set up an ad hoc committee of the whole to formulate                    
 the international development strategy for the Fourth Unit- ed Nations Development                      
 Decade. It also decided to meet in a resumed session in February 1989 to take a                         
 decision on the proposal of the Group of 77 to convene a special session on the                         
 reactivation of growth and development. The resolution on fulfilment of target for                      
 official development assistance (ODA) was another achievement of the 43rd Session.                      
 Wherever the action sought was of a limited procedural nature such as in the case of                    
 new and renewable sources of energy, global strategy for shelter to the year 2000,                      
 international decade f or natural disaster reduction, consensus was achieved fairly                     
 quickly.                                                                                                
                                                                                                         
 At the request of the Chairman of the Group of 77, India coordinated the negotiations                   
 on the resolution on the report of the Trade and Development Board . India also                         
 played an active role in the resolution on the preparations for an international                        
 development strategy for the Fourth United Nations Development Decade. We lent strong                   
 support to the Nordic countries in their initiative on the resolution on ODA. India's                   
 role in facilitating a consensus on the resoluti on on food and agriculture by                          
 proposing balanced formulations to take into account the interests of both food                         
 exporting and food importing developing countries was highly appreciated. India was a                   
 member of ECOSOC during 1988 and played an active role in the second regular session.                   
 Important initiatives were taken by the Group of 77 during the second regular session                   
 in the area of environment. These included resolutions on additionality of resources                    
 and increase in technical cooperation , strengthening of the environment fund,                          
 traffic in toxic products and wastes and dumping of nuclear wastes. The Group of 77                     
 also took the initiative in negotiat - ing a resolution on the revitalisation of the                    
 Council itself. The role played b y India in amending the resolution presented by the                   
 United States on entrepreneur - ship to reflect national entrepreneurs including                        
 public sector and the role of entrepreneurship in employment generation and                             
 acquisition of technologies earned the appreciation of delegations from all sides.                      
 The Pledging Conference for Operational Activities for Development for 1989 showed an                   
 increase in nominal terms in the pledges for the major funds and programmes of the                      
 United Nations. This was in part attributable to exchange rate variations. However,                     
 the United States continued to withhold contributions to the UN Population Fund                         
 (UNFPA). India attended the first meeting of the Standing Ministerial Committee on                      
 Economic Cooperation which had been set up by the Eighth Non-aligned Summit in                          
 Harare. The Committee had extensive discussions on new approaches to revive the                         
 North-South Dialogue and means to intensify economic cooperation amongst developing                     
 countries. It adopted a Declaration and issued a Press Communique which highlights                      
 the salient concerns of the developing countries in the present world economic                          
 situation.                                                                                              
                                                                                                         
 India also participated actively in the negotiations on the economic decla ra- tion                     
 of the NAM Ministerial Meeting in Cyprus. Several of our ideas, particularly on                         
 monetary and financial issues and the international development                                         
 PG57                                                                                                    
 strategy for the Fourth UN Development Decade 1991 to 2000 had been included by                         
 Cyprus in the initial draft document. India also had extensive pre-conferenc e                          
 discussions with delegations which have been active on economic issues. The Cyprus                      
 Ministerial Meeting adopted a detailed paragraph on the Uruguay Round on Multilateral                   
 Trade Negotiations. This was for the first time that all Non-aligned countries                          
 identified and accepted specific elements which can constitute a common position of                     
 developing countries in the negotia- tions. India played a leading role in the                          
 negotiations leading to this outcome.                                                                   
                                                                                                         
 In October 1988, India hosted the first Inter-Governmental Consultative Conference of                   
 Experts, of Non-aligned and Developing Countries on New and High Technologies in New                    
 Delhi. This is a new area of cooperation in an emerging field. The meeting was                          
 attended by experts of 20 developing countries. Programmes of cooperation were                          
 identified in each of the five theme areas of th e Conference. It was also decided                      
 that this programme would be coordinated by the NAM Centre of Science and Technology                    
 when it came into being. Till then the participants requested the Government of India                   
 to coordinate these activiti es. It is proposed to hold the first meeting of the                        
 Governing Council of the NAM Centre of Science and Technology in March 1989. The                        
 meeting is expected to approve the programme of work, the budget and a formula for                      
 sharing of the expenses of the Centre.                                                                  
                                                                                                         
 The Ministry also participated actively in all preparatory meetings and finalisation                    
 of briefs for delegations attending international conferences in t he economic field.                   
 In particular the Ministry was largely involved in discussions relating to GATT,                        
 UNCTAD and ESCAP. Administrative and Budgetary Matters The Fifth Committee agreed to                    
 by consensus on a revised estimate of US 8 865.1 million for the United Nations                         
 regular budget for 1989. Since 1946, it w as the first time that the budget of the                      
 organization as a whole was not voted upon;                                                             
 PG58                                                                                                    
 in the past, one or the other major contributors have either voted against or                           
 abstained from supporting the overall budget. The agreement on the budget was                           
 facilitated by continuing progress in the administrative and financial refo rms in                      
 the organization including agreement by consensus in the Fifth Committee on the                         
 preliminary estimate of 1990-91 budget at US$ 1767 million (at 1988 rates) and its                      
 recommendation to address further in 1989 the question of settin g up a reserve to                      
 deal with additional expenditures due to inflation and currency fluctuation for                         
 1990-91. The negotiations on the latter item were chaired by th e Indian delegation.                    
 The Indian delegation, alongwith other developing countries, made efforts to improve                    
 the geographical balance of the Committee on Conferences. The newly reconstituted                       
 Committee on Conferences shall have proportionately higher seats allocated to the                       
 African and Asian groups in accordance with their larger numbers.                                       
                                                                                                         
 The Indian delegation together with other developing countries was also able to                         
 include a paragraph in the resolution on implementation of General Assembly                             
 resolution 41/213 requesting for review of the proposed high-level posts reduction in                   
 smaller offices of the Secretariat in the areas of disarmame nt, economic and social                    
 development, UNEP, and UN Centre for Human Settlement. All the four Indian candidates                   
 to the various expert committees related to the Fifth Committee were                                    
 elected/re-elected for a new three-year term beginning 1 January 1989 by acclamation.                   
 These are: Shri B.K. Nehru (UN Investment Committee), Ambassador Samar Sen (UN                          
 Administrative Tribunal), Shri M.A. Vellodi (International Civil Service Commission)                    
 and Shri Yogesh Gupta (UN Staff Pension Committee). Social and Humanitarian Issues As                   
 in previous years, and in keeping with its principled commitment to human rights and                    
 social justice, India continued to play an active role in rega rd to the                                
 consideration of Social and Humanitarian issues in the UN General Assembly, the                         
 Commission on Human Rights and other related fora in the United Nations. In                             
 recognition of this role, India was re-elected to the Human Rights                                      
 PG59                                                                                                    
 Commission. Shri Murlidhar Bhandare, MP was also elected to the Sub- Commission on                      
 the Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities. Shri Bhandare is                         
 currently serving as Chairman of the Sub-Commission. Indian representatives                             
 participated actively in the 44th Session of the Commission on Human Rights held in                     
 Geneva in February-March 1988 and the 40th Session of the Sub-Commission on                             
 Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities held in Geneva in                             
 August-September 1988 and also contributed to the discussion on different aspects of                    
 standard setting in the f ield of human rights. At the 44th Session of the Commission                   
 on Human Rights, India made statements and moved resolutions on the most serious                        
 human rights situations in the world arising from apartheid in South Africa, the                        
 continued colonisation of Namibia and the occupation by Israel of Arab territories,                     
 including Palestine. India also continued to contribute positively to the on- going                     
 exercise of drafting conventions relating to the Rights of the Child and the Rights                     
 of Migrant Workers and also the on-going discussion on the practical measures for                       
 implementing the Declaration of the Right to Development which was adopted at the                       
 41st Session of the UN General Assembly.                                                                
                                                                                                         
 The situation in Sri Lanka came up for discussion during the 44th Session of the                        
 Commission on Human Rights. The Indian delegation stressed that the situation had                       
 undergone a change following the signing of the                                                         
 Indo-Sri Lanka Agreement to establish peace and normalcy in Sri Lanka on 29 July                        
 1987, and that there was Widespread consensus that the Agreement's full and                             
 satisfactory implementation would be of universal benefit. It was also pointed out                      
 that the Agreement was structured to meet the legitimate demands and aspirations of                     
 the Tamils of Sri Lanka through an adequate and durable devolution of power within                      
 the framework of Sri Lanka's unity and integrity and that it provided the framework                     
 for a political solution. The Indian delegation emphasised that no lasting solution                     
 could be achieved by violence or use of force and appealed to all those who were                        
 opposed to the Indo-Sri Lanka Agreement to give up their opposition, to eschew                          
 violence and to join the peaceful democratic process which would enable all                             
 communities in Sri Lanka to live in harmony and dignity.                                                
                                                                                                         
 The year 1988 marked the 40th Anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human                         
 Rights. At a ceremony held in New York to mark this occasion, one of the five United                    
 Nations Human Rights prizes was awarded to Baba Amte for his outstanding contribution                   
 to humanitarian causes.                                                                                 
 PG60                                                                                                    
 Apartheid The deteriorating conditions in Southern Africa continue to be a focal poi                    
 nt of international concern and indignation. The racist Pretoria regime on the one                      
 hand escalated its repression within the country in an attempt to stifle di ssent and                   
 opposition while on the other it stepped up its terrorist activities across the                         
 frontiers against the neighbouring independent States. Renewal of the state of                          
 emergency and a series of repressive measures adopted against leading anti- apartheid                   
 movements and individuals, as well as domestic and foreign media, demonstrated once                     
 again Pretoria's desperate attempts to sustain its illegal re gime through                              
 indiscriminate use of force and State-sponsored terrorism. India voiced its strong                      
 concern at the developments in Southern Africa in various international fora                            
 including the United Nations General Assembly. It called for complete dismantling of                    
 apartheid and also reiterated its appeal for imposition of comprehensive and                            
 mandatory sanctions againt the racist regime of South Africa.                                           
                                                                                                         
 India also continued to play an active role in the Special Committee again st                           
 apartheid and was re-elected as its Rapporteur. India was also re-elected to th e                       
 sub- committee on Implementation of United Nations resolutions and collaboration with                   
 South Africa, the Task Force on Women and Children under Apartheid and the Task Force                   
 on Political Prisoners. The 43rd Session of the United Nations General Assembly                         
 adopted eleven resolutions on the Policies of Apartheid of the Government of South                      
 Africa of which India co-sponsored nine. Each of these resolutions was adopted by a                     
 large majority. The resolution relating to International Solidarity with the                            
 Liberation Struggle in South Africa called for increased support and contributi ons                     
 to the AFRICA Fund of which India is the Chairman.                                                      
                                                                                                         
 Decolonization In the activities of the United Nations Bodies relating to the                           
 Decolonizat ion, India was particularly active in the Special Committee of 24 and the                   
 United                                                                                                  
 PG61                                                                                                    
 Nations Council for Namibia. India's Permanent Representative was re-elected as                         
 Vice-President of the Council for Namibia and India was also elected Chairma n of the                   
 Drafting Committee and Working Group of the Body. India reconfirmed the availability                    
 of Major General (Retd.) Prem Chand to lead the military component of the United                        
 Nations Transitory Assistance Group in Namibia, and to provide Observers to the                         
 United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM) to verify the withdrawal of Cuban                   
 forces from Angola.                                                                                     
                                                                                                         
 Elections to UN Bodies and other International Organizations India's role in the                        
 United Nations was reflected in the results of electio ns to important bodies. India                    
 was elected by acclamation to another term to the Inter-Governmental Working Group of                   
 Experts on International Standards of Accounting and Reporting, Commission on Human                     
 Rights and International institute for Unification of Private Law (UNIDROIT). India's                   
 Permanent Representative was re-elected as Vice-President of the United Nations                         
 Council for Namibia and India was also elected Chairman of the Drafting Committee and                   
 Working Group of the UN Body relating to Decolonization.                                                
                                                                                                         
 India successfully contested elections to the posts of Secretary-General o f the                        
 International Civil Aviation Organization and President of the Internationa l                           
 Institute of Cotton. Activities of the Non-Aligned Movement The changed international                   
 environment resulting from the Super Power detente and the increasing consensus among                   
 members of the Non-Aligned Movement to reform its practices and procedures with a                       
 view to increase its effectiveness were the major pre-occupations of NAM during 1988.                   
 The Move- ment also took a creditable initiative on the Kampuchean question. Its                        
 focus on disarmament and economic issues was maintained.                                                
 PG62                                                                                                    
 An extraordinary Ministerial meeting of the Coordinating Bureau was convened in                         
 Havana in May 1988 to prepare for the Third Special Session of the UN General                           
 Assembly devoted to Disarmament. This enabled the members to coordinate their                           
 positions during the Special Session. The Coordinating Bureau in conjunction with the                   
 Committee of 9 on Palestine continued to monitor the developments in the Middle-East.                   
 On 29 January 1988, it issued a communique in-support of the popular uprising of the                    
 Palestinian people in the Occupied Territories. It called upon the Security Council                     
 to provide safety and protection to the Palestinian people in these territories. The                    
 Coordinating Bureau of NAM in its meeting held on 26 October 1988 in New York again                     
 condemned the brutal Israeli practices in the occupied territories. The Committee of                    
 9 first met on 7 September 1988 in Nicosia prior to the meeting of the Non-aligned                      
 Foreign Ministers. It issued a communique supporting the "intifada" (popular                            
 uprising) of the Palestinian people and issued a communique calling for the                             
 termination of Israeli occupation of these territories and the creation of a UN Force                   
 to administer the Palestinian territ ories over a transitional period pending                           
 creation of a Palestinian State. The Commi- ttee of 9 also decided to continue to                       
 work for the convening of an internationa l peace conference on the Middle-East. The                    
 Committee of 9 met again in Geneva on 14 December 1988 to support the three-point                       
 programme suggested by Mr Yasser Arafat for the creation of a Palestinian State The                     
 Non-aligned countries played an active role in arousing global opinion on the issue                     
 of closure of the PLO Observer Mission in New York by the USA and on the question of                    
 issuance of visa to the PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat to participate in discussions on                     
 Palestine at the 43rd UN General Assembly.                                                              
                                                                                                         
 The Non-aligned Coordinating Bureau closely followed the developments relating to the                   
 issue of independence for Namibia. During the 43rd UNGA, Ministers and Heads of                         
 Delegations of all Non-aligned countries expressed their indignation and concern at                     
 the continued illegal occupation of Namibia. They urged the Security Council to                         
 categorically declare that Walvis Bay and Offshore Islands are an integral part of                      
 Namibia and as such, should not be the subject of negotiations between South Africa                     
 and independent Namibia. The Non-aligned Security Council caucus was united in its                      
 efforts to prevent a scal ing                                                                           
 PG63                                                                                                    
 down of the UN Peace Keeping Force to be deployed in Namibia. In October 1988, the                      
 Coordinating Bureau of the NAM also declared the municipal elections held in South                      
 Africa based on an apartheid Constitution, to be null and void. The Coordinating                        
 Bureau of NAM, in April 1988, focussed on South Africa's violation of Botswana's                        
 sovereignty and territorial integrity, by its raid on Gaberone on 28 March 1988. On 9                   
 March 1988, the Bureau issued a communique calling upon the US to desist from any                       
 actions that violated Panama's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.                     
 The Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement, as mandated, by the 8th Summit, set up a                      
 Senior Officials' Group to explore the possibilities of NAM contributing towards the                    
 search for a peaceful settlement of the Kampuchean question. These officials met                        
 twice, in New Delhi on 15 and 16 July 1988 and in Harare from 15 to 17 August 1988                      
 and submitted their recommendations to the Chairman. The NAM Foreign Ministers                          
 Conference in Cyprus in September 1988, set up a NAM Committee of 13 on Kampuchea.                      
 This was mandated to work for the promotion of an international conference on                           
 Kampuchea. Economic issues continued to receive special attention of the Movement.                      
 The second Consultative Meeting of Experts on the question of External Debt was                         
 convened in Casablanca, Morocco from 22 to 25 February 1988. This meeting reiterated                    
 the call for the convening of an International Conference on Money and Finance for                      
 Development. The first substantive meeting of the Standing Ministerial Committee for                    
 Economic Cooperation was held in Harare from 4 to 7 July 1988. A document entitled                      
 "Assessment of the current state of North-South dialogue and proposals for its                          
 revitalisation" was adopted. A meeting of experts was held in Pyongyang from 16 to 20                   
 July to consider the statute for the Centre for Irrigation and Drainage. Action is                      
 also in hand for                                                                                        
 opening of a NAM Centre for Science and Technology in India.                                            
 PG64                                                                                                    
 The NAM Foreign Ministers' Conference held in Nicosia from 5 to 10 September 1988                       
 noted that despite the detente between the USA and the USSR, international relations                    
 were still characterised by the use of force, intervention and interference. The need                   
 for the current detente to be widened in scope, content and participation was                           
 stressed. Recalling NAM's consistent support to multilateralism, particularly with-                     
 in the framework of the UN, NAM Foreign Ministers noted the initiatives taken by the                    
 UN during 1988. NAM's commitment to seek a solution to the financial crisis being                       
 faced by the UN was reiterated. The Ministers also calle d for the transformation of                    
 the present world economic structure through coopera- tive action on the basis of                       
 equity and justice. They expressed their readiness to engage in dialogue for finding                    
 solutions in the crucial and inter-related areas of debt, money, finance and trade.                     
 The Ministers recognised that South-South cooperation would help stimulate the                          
 economic growth of developing countries, facilitate the achievement of collective                       
 self-reliance and enhance their counte r- vailing power in international                                
 negotiations.                                                                                           
                                                                                                         
 The Ministers decided that the 9th Conference of the Heads of State or Government of                    
 NAM would be held in Belgrade in Yugoslavia in 1989. They decided to establish a                        
 Ministerial Committee to examine the preparation and organization of NAM meetings,                      
 the content and format of the documentation, forms and methods of action as well as                     
 the effectiveness of its instrumentaliti es. The Ministers also agreed to hold an                       
 extraordinary Ministerial Conference of NAM countries on Peace and International Law                    
 to commemorate the 90th Anniversary of the First World Conference on Peace.                             
                                                                                                         
 The NAM Meeting on Reforms and Methodology appointed by the Foreign Ministers held in                   
 Nicosia from 13 to 16 January 1989, evaluated the rol e and methodology of NAM. In                      
 keeping with their mandate, the Committee dis- cussed the various suggestions on                        
 meetings, documentation, decision-making and related issues. The Committee's work                       
 will be carried on by Chairman Cyprus who will prepare a working paper for eliciting                    
 the views of all members. The final report to be submitted to the 9th Summit                            
 Conference in Belgrade would be based on suggestions received on that working paper.                    
 This working paper would be discussed by the Committee on Reforms and Methodology at                    
 Harare in May 1989 just prior to the Coordinating Bureau meeting.                                       
 PG65                                                                                                    
 Commonwealth India was in the forefront of the Commonwealth activities aimed at                         
 imple- mentation of the decisions taken at the Vancouver Summit of the Common- wealth                   
 in 1987. As a member of the Commonwealth Committee of Foreign Ministers on Southern                     
 Africa which was set up by the Vancouver Summit with a view to follow up the                            
 recommendations of the Summit relating to Southern Africa, India contributed                            
 positively to the Committee's deliberations on sancti ons against South Africa.                         
 The four main areas of activity of the Committee pertain to the widen- ing and                          
 strengthening of sanctions against South Africa, the special needs of t he Frontline                    
 States, the need to reach out to all sections of anti-apartheid opini on within South                   
 Africa and the issues relating to Namibia. As a member of the Committee, India has                      
 agreed to make demarches both individually and jointly with those countries which                       
 have been found to be increasing their bilateral trade with South Africa. India has                     
 contributed to a joint study on South Africa's links with international financial                       
 instituti ons with a view to curtail such links. A number of important suggestions                      
 made in the study have been recommended for adoption by Governments. These include                      
 the banning of new lending, including new trade credits to South Africa as well as a                    
 ban on insurance cover provided by official credit agencies for lo ans to South                         
 Africa. The role played by anti-apartheid and other NGO's in pressurising financial                     
 institutions to cut off links with South Africa has been emphasised. The Committee                      
 also examined in detail ways and means of strengthening the arms embargo against                        
 South Africa. The Committee also considered a report on the security needs of                           
 Frontline States as well as the question of providing technical and other assistance                    
 to Mozambique through the Special Fund. In response to the Canadian strategy paper                      
 for counter- acting South African censorship and propaganda, India offered to provide                   
 additional scholarships to South African journalists at appropriate institution s in                    
 India as well as to conduct a feasibility study in regard to a possible shor t wave                     
 radio facility to be established in one of the Frontline States for broad- casting to                   
 South Africa. The question of Namibia was reviewed in some detail by the Committee.                     
 At its last meeting in Harare the Committee hoped that the differences in regard to                     
 the implementation of Security Council Resolution                                                       
 PG66                                                                                                    
 435 would be resolved without impairing the ability of the UN Secretary- General to                     
 hold free and fair elections. It was hoped that the Commonwealth members would                          
 respond favourably to requests from the Secretary-General for personnel in                              
 constituting observer components of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group                      
 (UNTAG). The meeting of Senior Officials of the Commonwealth was held in Seychelles                     
 from 23 to 25 November 1988. The meeting reviewed progress in the implementation of                     
 decisions adopted by the Vancouver Summit and made preparations for the forthcoming                     
 Summit in Kuala Lumpur in October 1989. The Indian delegation was among the prominent                   
 participants.                                                                                           
                                                                                                         
 India also participated in the meetings of the Commonwealth Youth Affairs Summit held                   
 in Samoa in May 1988, the Commonwealth Finance Ministers' meeting in Cyprus in                          
 September 1988 and the Commonwealth Health Ministers' meeting in Geneva in May 1988.                    
 India is actively involved in the preparations which resulted in the setting up of                      
 the Commonwealth of Learning at Vancouver, Canada. This institution is mandated to                      
 promote Common- wealth-wide cooperation in the field of distance learning.                              
                                                                                                         
 International Law : Development and Activities During the year under review, India                      
 ratified the SAARC Convention on Suppression of Terrorism. Significant features of                      
 this SAARC Convention were already reported in the Ministry's Annual Report of last                     
 year. All the other countries of the SAARC have also ratified the same and the                          
 Convention has come into force with effect from 22 August 1988. Necessary steps are                     
 also being taken to implement the Convention under Indian law through enactment of                      
 appropriate legislation. The 30th Session of the International Law Commission was                       
 held in Geneva from 9 May to 29 July 1988. The Commission discussed the Fourth Report                   
 on International Liability, the Watercourses, the Sixth Report on the Draft Code of                     
 Crimes Against the Peace and Security of Mankind and the Eighth Report on the Status                    
 of the Diplomatic Courier and the Diplomatic Bag not                                                    
 PG67                                                                                                    
 accompanied by Diplomatic Courier. In addition, the Commission also had a Preliminary                   
 Report on the Jurisdictional Immunities of States and their Pro- perty and on State                     
 Responsibility. As a result of its work, the Commission discussed 9 draft Articles on                   
 International Liability, completed the first reading of upto 21 Articles on the Law                     
 of Non-Navigational Uses and adopted Articles 4, 7, 8, 10, 11 and 12 with com-                          
 mentaries thereto on the subject of draft Code of Crimes. It also completed th e                        
 second reading of the 33 draft Articles on the Status of Diplomatic Courier and the                     
 Diplomatic Bag.                                                                                         
                                                                                                         
 The United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) after completing                    
 its work on the draft Convention on International Bills of Exchange, transmitted the                    
 draft Convention to the General Assembly with the recommendation that the General                       
 Assembly consider the draft Convention with a view to its adoption or any other                         
 suitable action to be taken. The Indi an delegation supported the proposal for                          
 adoption of the draft Convention on International Bills of Exchange by the General                      
 Assembly. The draft Convention is designed to overcome difficulties arising from the                    
 present disparities betwe en major legal systems of the world. The draft Convention                     
 on International Bills of Exchange and International Promissory Notes embodies a                        
 uniform legal regime for International Negotiable Instruments. The new Convention                       
 would allow International Bills of Exchange and Promissory Notes to be denominated as                   
 payable in monetary credits of accounts such as the Special Drawing Rights. The                         
 United Nations General Assembly (Sixth Committee) at its 43rd Session considered 14                     
 agenda items during its deliberations from 23 September to 1 December 1988. Out of 19                   
 Resolutions/Decisions that were adopted, ten were adopted without vote and nine by                      
 vote. India voted in favour of the Resolutions along with a large majority of                           
 non-aligned and other developing countries. Ind ia co-sponsored three Resolutions in                    
 the Sixth Committee on (1) Peaceful Settle- ment of Disputes between States, (2)                        
 Report of the Ad hoc Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention Against                   
 Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries and (3) Report of the                           
 Committee on Relations with Host Country. It also co-sponsored two resolutions on                       
 items (i) Co- operation between United Nations and AALCC and (ii) Law of the Sea,                       
 dealt directly within the Plenary of the General Assembly.                                              
 PG68                                                                                                    
 Among the main highlights of the Work of the Sixth Committee of the General Assembly                    
 at its 43rd Session, are:                                                                               
 (i) Adoption of a draft Convention on International Bills of Exchange and                               
 International Promissory Notes by consensus. This is the result of the work of the                      
 UNCITRAL on this subject over a period of 10 years.                                                     
 (ii) While adopting the Report of the Special Committee on the Charter Review, the                      
 General Assembly adopted by consensus a declaration on the prevention and removal of                    
 disputes and situations which may threaten international peace and security and on                      
 the role of the United Nations in this field.                                                           
 (iii) The General Assembly also adopted by consensus a draft Body of Principles for                     
 Protection of All Persons under any form of Detention or Imprisonment, thus                             
 completing the consideration of this Agenda item which was under consideration since                    
 1975.                                                                                                   
 (iv) The Sixth Committee recommended by a vote as part of the considera- tion of the                    
 item "Report of the Committee on Host Country Relations" to shift the venue of the                      
 General Assembly temporarily to Geneva from New York to enable Mr Yasser Arafat, PLO                    
 Chief, to address the General Assembly as he was refused visa to visit New York for                     
 this purpose. As a result of the decision taken by the General As- sembly, Mr Yasser                    
 Arafat was able to address the General Assembly which was specially convened for this                   
 purpose in Geneva. During the visit of the Prime Minister to Turkey in July 1988                        
 India and Turkey signed two agreements on Mutual Judicial Assistance covering civil                     
 and criminal law matters. The Agreement on Civil Law matters provides for the issue                     
 of summons and letters of request for examination of witnesses in eac h other's                         
 countries. The Agreement on criminal law matters provides for exa- mination of                          
 witnesses and transfer of documents and articles seized during crim i- nal                              
 proceedings. These agreements will come into force in India upon issue of Gazette                       
 Notifications under suitable provisions of the Indian Civil Procedure Code and the                      
 Indian Criminal Procedure Code. The Legal Sub-Committee of the Committee on the                         
 Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPUOS) held its twenty-seventh session at Geneva from                    
 14 to 31 March 1988 and considered legal issues relating to the extension of the arms                   
 race into                                                                                               
 PG69                                                                                                    
 outer space, the use of neclear power sources in outer space, the definition an d                       
 delimitation of outer space, the geostationary orbit and the adoption of a new agenda                   
 item.                                                                                                   
                                                                                                         
 Expressing their grave concern over the threat of extending the arms race into outer                    
 space, some delegations stressed that every effort should be made to avert that                         
 danger and that COPUOS, as well as its Sub-Committees could make important                              
 contributions in that regard, playing a supportive role for othe r international fora                   
 dealing with the problem of preventing an arms race in oute r space. India also                         
 favoured this view but there was no general agreement on the matter with some                           
 delegations expressing the view that disarmament questions did not fall within the                      
 competence of COPUOS. On nuclear power sources, the Sub-Committee considered a set of                   
 seven draft principles relating to safety assessment and notification; guidelines and                   
 criteria for safe use; notification of re-entry; assistance to States; responsi                         
 bility of States; applicability of international law and compensation. During consi-                    
 deration by the Sub-Committee, two more principles regarding the relationship with                      
 other international treaties and settlement of disputes were added. Regarding                           
 definition and delimitation of outer space many countries including India stressed                      
 that it was a practical and legal necessity in view of the different legal principles                   
 that were applicable and considered the USSR working paper of 1983 to be a good basis                   
 for a solution to the issue. Some delegations reiterated their view that the lack of                    
 such definition or delimitation had not created any practical problems in the                           
 peaceful exploration of outer space and therefore there was no immediate need for                       
 definition and delimitation.                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 Regarding the geostationary orbit, some delegations expressed the view that there                       
 were converging opinions among many delegations on the following points: that the                       
 geostationary orbit was a part of outer space and was a limite d natural resource                       
 which should accordingly be used in a rational and economic way; that the                               
 geostationary orbit was not subject to national appropriation by claim of                               
 sovereignty, by means of use or occupation or by any other means; and that all States                   
 should have equitable access to the utilisation of the geos ta- tionary orbit. These                    
 delegations expressed the view that these converging opin ions could form a basis of                    
 agreement on which further work could proceed.                                                          
 PG70                                                                                                    
 The Sub-Committee also adopted by consensus a new agenda item entitled "Consideration                   
 of the legal aspects related to the application of the principle that the exploration                   
 and utilisation of outer space should be carried out for t he benefit and in the                        
 interests of all States, taking into particular account the needs of developing                         
 countries" based on the proposal of the Group of 77 and subsequen t consultations.                      
 The 27th Annual Session of the Asian African Legal Consultative Com- mittee was held                    
 in Singapore from 14 to 19 March 1988. The Session was successful in electing Mr                        
 Frank X Njenga of Kenya as Secretary-General for a term of three years. He assumed                      
 office with effect from 10 May 1988. Mr Nje nga thus replaced Shri B. Sen of India                      
 who worked as Secretary-General of the AALCC mostly in honorary capacity since its                      
 inception in 1956 until 1987. The Sessio n also considered several legal items                          
 concerning the work of the International Law Commission, international trade law, law                   
 of the sea, law of refugees, law of extradition and the concept of peace zones.                         
                                                                                                         
 A list of treaties and agreements entered into by India during 1988 is giv en at                        
 Appendix II.                                                                                            
 Foreign Economic Relations                                                                              
                                                                                   Top                   
 Jan 01, 1988                                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 CHAPTER IX                                                                                              
                                                                                                         
 FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS                                                                              
                                                                                                         
 Bilateral Cooperation through ITEC INDIA remained firmly dedicated to the cause of                      
 South-South cooperation and continued to actively foster cooperation with fellow                        
 developing countries, inter-alia, by offering technical and economic assistance under                   
 the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) Programme administered by the                      
 Ministry of External Affairs. A tangible evidence of this objective is found in the                     
 expanding nature of activities under this scheme largely as a result of pressing                        
 demand from the beneficiary countries necessitating progressively high er financial                     
 commitment year after year. The ITEC Programme when first launched in 1964 had a                        
 modest outlay of Rs. 4.6 crores; during 1988-89 it crossed the mark of Rs. 20 crores,                   
 excluding expenditure on similar activities in respect o f Bangladesh, Sri Lanka,                       
 Nepal, Bhutan and Maldives. The major components of the Programme, which has so far                     
 covered over 70 developing countries across Asia, Africa and Latin America, consist                     
 of project aid, techno-economic surveys, deputation of technical experts in diverse                     
 fields, and training in spe cialised fields, both civilian and defence, of foreign                      
 nationals. A brief summary of ITEC activities that took place during the current year                   
 in each of these fields is as follows : Project assistance In this area Afghanistan,                    
 Mauritius, Vietnam, Kampuchea, Laos, Ethiopia, Kenya and the Seychelles were the main                   
 recipients. Decisive progress was achie ved towards supply of equipment/consultancy                     
 services in respect of                                                                                  
 (a) Construction                                                                                        
 PG71                                                                                                    
 PG72                                                                                                    
 of the Indira Gandhi Institute of Child Health Expansion Project, Kabul, Afghanistan,                   
 and Jawaharlal Nehru and Moka (Eye) hospitals in Mauritius,                                             
 (b) Common Facility Centres (small-scale industry) set up with India's assistan ce in                   
 Ethiopia and Afghanistan,                                                                               
 (c) Buffalow and Forage and Rice Research Projects , Vietnam, and                                       
 (d) Pilot Weaving Project in Ethiopia. A team of 16 experts from Archaeological                         
 Survey of India was also despatched to complete Phase III of the prestigious Angkor                     
 Vat Restoration Project. Order was placed for the supply of 4 Patrol Boats to                           
 Mauritius worth over Rs. 2 crores, apart from taking in band of fresh proposals from                    
 a number of friendly countries, including the Philippines, Laos and Afghanistan.                        
                                                                                                         
 Deputation of Experts At the beginning of the year there were about 90 long-term (for                   
 two or mor e years) Indian experts in position in various countries, entirely at                        
 India's exp ense, except that expenditure on accommodation was mostly borne by the                      
 host country. So far requests for 127 additional experts have been received of which                    
 selectio n of 64 experts has been finalised and 23 have actually left for their                         
 respective assign- ments. Other cases remain under various stages of consideration.                     
 Besides long-term experts, a total of 21 short-term experts have also been deputed on                   
 short-term assignments to countries such as Mauritius, Afghanistan, Panama, Vietnam,                    
 Ethiopia and Nicaragua.                                                                                 
                                                                                                         
 Training As in the previous years, training facilities continued to be provided in                      
 India under the ITEC Programme to nominees of other developing countries. Till                          
 December 1988, 358 persons had come for training for periods varying from                               
 six weeks to three years. Another 80 persons are expected during the remaining part                     
 of the year. Besides, 96 persons, who came last year, also continued for various                        
 periods during 1988-89 to complete their courses. Some of the areas in which training                   
 facilities are provided under ITEC Programme are., Agriculture and Rural Development                    
 including Development of Water Resources, Education, Health, Industry, Manpower                         
 Development, Banking, Meteorology and other fields. The civilian fields apart,                          
 nominees from a selected number of friendly                                                             
 PG73                                                                                                    
 countries also received training in the defence field under the ITEC Programme, as                      
 well as, on self-financing basis. This defence training has proved immensel y popular                   
 and is in great demand. Beginning this year, the Ministry also started looking after                    
 training of foreign nationals under SCAAP and is expected to receive over 300                           
 trainees from the Commonwealth and other developing countries covered by the scheme.                    
 The scheme, hitherto with the Ministry of Finance with a budget provision of Rs. 50                     
 lakhs, was given added impetus by augmenting financial commitment to exceed Rs. 1.21                    
 crores this year, expanding greatly training facilities to cove r a larger number.                      
                                                                                                         
 Other assistance India continued to provide relief supplies consisting of                               
 milk-powder, medicines, irrigation pump sets and pesticides to famine affected                          
 countries of Africa. The Government of Yemen Arab Republic was supplied with 200                        
 tonnes of improved wheat seeds at the cost of Rs. 12 lakhs and Vietnam gifted with                      
 forage seeds of a number of plants. To Afghanistan medicines worth Rs. 20 lakh s per                    
 annum. continued and several feasibility studies and techno-economic survey s were                      
 either completed or proposals mooted in respect of Mauritius, Vietnam and others                        
 following receipt of formal proposals through our Missions.                                             
                                                                                                         
 Delegations from abroad With a view to create a better awareness about India's                          
 scientific and technological capabilities in Industry and Agriculture and other                         
 sectors, senio r- level official delegations from 6 fellow developing countries                         
 including Malawi, Uganda, Ghana, Yemen Arab Republic, Afghanistan and Vietnam were                      
 invited. Over a period of time, this initiative is likely to go a long way in                           
 generating political goodwill for India and lead to a better appreciation of the                        
 suitabili ty of our technical knowhow and developmental experience to requirements of                   
 other developing countries and thus open up ways towards greater and more meaningful                    
 South-South interaction.                                                                                
 Policy Planning And Research                                                                            
                                                                                   Top                   
 CHAPTER X                                                                                               
                                                                                                         
 POLICY PLANNING AND RESEARCH THE Policy Planning Division of the Ministry continued                     
 to function under t he overall guidance of the Foreign Secretary and the supervision                    
 of Secretary (E & ER). During the year under review the Policy Planning Division                        
 interacted with other Divisions of the Ministry and the officials participated on a                     
 regula r basis in inter-Ministerial and inter-departmental meetings. The Division                       
 continued to maintain active contacts with the Area Study Centres of various                            
 Universities specialising in international affairs. A numbe r of seminars and                           
 symposia were partly financed by the Policy Planning Division and among them,                           
 particular mention may be made of the followings :                                                      
 (i) A meeting and an exhibition was organised at Vigyan Bhavan on 1- Jul 06, 1988 to                    
 celebrate the 70th birth anniversary of Nelson Mandela by the World Youth Action                        
 Against Apartheid (WYAAA). It was inaugurated by the Vice-President of India.                           
 (ii) The 7th Congress of Afro-Asian Peace Solidarity Organization was held at Vigyan                    
 Bhavan in New Delhi from 24 to 28 November 1988. It was inaugurated by the Prime                        
 Minister and addressed by the Minister for External Affairs. It was widely attended                     
 by a number of delegates from Afro-Asian countries.                                                     
 (iii) A Seminar on "Security Problems in Asia and the Pacific in the 1990s" was held                    
 in New Delhi on 12 and 13 November 1988 by the Inter- national Institute for Asia                       
 Pacific Studies, New Delhi. The Minister of State in the Ministry of External                           
 Affairs, Shri K.K. Tewary inaugu- rated this Seminar.                                                   
 (iv) A Seminar on "Current Situation in Afghanistan" was organised at Hyderabad by                      
 the Institute for Asian Studies, on 26 September 1988. The Seminar was also addressed                   
 by Secretary (E & ER).                                                                                  
 PG74                                                                                                    
 PG75                                                                                                    
 Mention may also be made of other Seminars supported by the Division :                                  
 (i) A Seminar on "India's Role in Reducing World Tension" was organised by the Indian                   
 Council of International Affairs, in New Delhi in July 1988. Another Seminar on                         
 "India & Apartheid" by Indian Council of International Affairs, New Delhi was also                      
 held in November 1988.                                                                                  
 (ii) The Indian Centre for Regional Affairs, New Delhi organised a Seminar on                           
 "Current Development in Pakistan and its Nuclear Capability" on 6 and 7 August 1988.                    
 (iii) A Seminar on "Afghanistan and Implementation of Geneva Agree- ment" was                           
 organised by the Indian Centre for Regional Affairs on 24 and 25 September 1988.                        
 (iv) The Institute of Defence Studies & Analysis organised a Seminar on "Delhi                          
 Declaration & After" on the occasion of the second anniversary. of the Delhi                            
 Declaration on 27 November 1988.                                                                        
 (v) (a) A Seminar on "Indo-Guyanese Relations" by Antar Rashtriya Sahyog Parishad,                      
 Bharat was organised in May 1988.                                                                       
 (b) Another Seminar on "Fiji at Patna" by Antar Rashtriya Sahyog Parishad, Bharat was                   
 organised on 30 November 1988.                                                                          
 (vi) An International Workshop on "Iran, Iraq and Afghanistan" was organised by the                     
 International Peace Academy on 6 and 7 December 1988 and was co-hosted by the India                     
 International Centre, New Delhi.                                                                        
 (vii) A Seminar on "India's Foreign Policy Through the Ages" by Bihar Puratativ Evam                    
 Sanskriti Parishad is being organised and will be inaugurated by the Minister of                        
 State for External Affairs, Shri K.K. Tewary. Studies : A grant was provided to the                     
 United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR) for its study project on                     
 Security for Third World Countries with the Institute of Defence Studies & Analysis                     
 as Coordinator. The study is expected to be completed by June 1989. Studies on                          
 neighbouring countries have also been undertaken.                                                       
 PG76                                                                                                    
 The Research Organization of the Ministry of External Affairs, the Histori cal                          
 Division prepared a number of research and background papers on important subjects                      
 pertaining to international affairs. The Division interacted with the various                           
 territorial divisions of the Ministry and also with other Ministries. The Division                      
 also made available documents and information on request to other departments of the                    
 Government of India and to Indian Missions abroad.                                                      
                                                                                                         
 The Historical Division performs the function of scrutinising the maps published in                     
 India and abroad to ensure that India's external boundaries are correctly depicted.                     
 In many cases, inaccuracies were found and remedial action was taken to get them                        
 corrected. The Division assisted Indian delegations which negotiated boundary issues                    
 with some of the neighbouring countries.                                                                
                                                                                                         
 The Historical Division also scrutinises and vets records of the Ministry in the                        
 National Archives of India before they are released to scholars for study.                              
 External Publicity                                                                                      
                                                                                   Top                   
 CHAPTER XI                                                                                              
                                                                                                         
 EXTERNAL PUBLICITY THE year longcelebrations of the birth centenary of Jawaharlal                       
 Nehru, Indi a's first Prime Minister and maker of modem India and one of the founders                   
 of the Non-Aligned Movement started on Nov 14, 1988. These celebrations, along with                     
 the 40th Anniversary of India's Independence on 15 August 1988, served as catalysts                     
 to the continuing efforts of the External Publicity (XP) Di vision to project the                       
 image of a modern and dynamic India with a rich cultural heritag e. The main thrust                     
 was to bring out India's foreign policy perspectives, promote widespread awareness of                   
 India's political resilience, economic, scientific and technical progress already                       
 achieved, and counter anti-India propaganda through misrepresentation of political                      
 developments in the country. The XP Division continued to regularly brief the foreign                   
 and Indian press about India's policy on various issues. The Division continued to                      
 offer hospita - lity to select mediamen from all over the world, and local                              
 hospitality to visit ing foreign mediamen, and assist in their travel within the                        
 country to enable them to meet a cross section of the Indian people. Indian Missions                    
 abroad kept in regul ar touch with foreign media to brief them about the current                        
 developments in India and provide them with factual material on matters of current                      
 interest. To that end, the XP Division provided information bulletins mainly by twice                   
 daily transmissions to 75 missions/posts abroad. Besides, 48 missions received bi-                      
 weekly press cables and 16 posts received regular information bulletins by diplomatic                   
 bag.                                                                                                    
                                                                                                         
 The XP Division continued to undertake the printing and publication of high quality                     
 publicity literature on India depicting different facets of India' s national life in                   
 the English, Arabic, French, German and Spanish languages. These publications have                      
 been widely circulated by Indian Missions abroad and have been found to be extremely                    
 popular and useful.                                                                                     
 PG77                                                                                                    
 PG78                                                                                                    
 For the year long birth centenary celebrations of Jawaharlal Nehru which started on                     
 14 November 1988, the XP Division has chalked out a comprehensive programme to make a                   
 world wide impact :                                                                                     
 (a) A photographic exhibition (in five sets) on Nehru's life and times and his                          
 contribution to the making of a modern and dynamic India is being organised in                          
 selected capitals/centres of the world. The Missions are being supplied with                            
 publicity material including folders and catalogues for distribution during the                         
 exhibition.                                                                                             
 (b) A 30-minute special documentary, `Jawaharlal Nehru', has been prepared in U-matic                   
 and VHS cassettes and is being supplied to all Indian Missions abroad.                                  
 (c) A large number of special photographs and portraits for issuing postage stamps                      
 abroad, and for other uses by local organizations, have been sent to Missions abroad.                   
 (d) Missions have been supplied with a model advertisement announcing the beginning                     
 of the Nehru Centenery.                                                                                 
 (e) Children's films have been supplied to a number of Missions. Indian Missions                        
 shall also be organising film weeks as part of the Centenary celebrations.                              
 (f) A 16-mm documentary on Jawaharlal Nehru has been supplied to a number of                            
 Missions.                                                                                               
 (g) Articles on Jawaharlal Nehru with matching photographs have been supplied for                       
 bringing out special issues/supplements/articles by news- papers and journals being                     
 published abroad. These have also been used by Indian Missions for their journals.                      
 (h) India-Perspectives, the elegant monthly journal of the XP Division, devoted its                     
 November 1988 issue to Jawaharlal Nehru.                                                                
 (i) Tributes paid to Jawaharlal Nehru at the time of his death by world leaders and                     
 leading newspapers/journals/magazines have been collected and supplied to Missions                      
 abroad for their selective use.                                                                         
 (j) Nehru-folders brought out by Jawaharlal Nehru Implementation Committee are being                    
 purchased in bulk for supply to Indian Missions abroad.                                                 
 PG79                                                                                                    
 The XP Division helped to bring into international focus, the operations of the                         
 Indian forces at the invitation of the Maldives Government in November 1988 to                          
 suppress the coup attempt by mercenaries. The Division took 35 Indian                                   
 and foreign mediamen to Male during the operations for on the spot reporting. The                       
 coverage in the international media has been extensive and on the whole extremely                       
 positive. The Division continued to get in focus the on-going ethnic problem in Sri                     
 Lanka and the operations of the Indian forces there. On the first anniversary of the                    
 signing of Indo-Sri Lanka Agreement, the XP Division brought out an attractive                          
 publication in English, Arabic, French, German and Spanish, and another publication                     
 of high quality highlighting ethnic issues in the English and Tamil languages.                          
                                                                                                         
 From July 1988, the XP Division started bringing out a high quality monthl y journal                    
 in colour and black and white, namely, India-Perspectives in the Englis h, French and                   
 Spanish languages. The earlier fortnightly magazine Indian and Foreign Review and its                   
 French counterpart Courrier de L'Inde were discontinued. Apart from the publication                     
 of monthly Foreign Affairs Record, the XP Division brought out about a dozen high                       
 quality publications in the English, Arabic, French, German and Spanish languages as                    
 the occasion demanded, some of these of regular nature like the Prime Minister's                        
 statements on foreign policy, some others of a general nature and some relating to                      
 specific occasions to achieve optimum results.                                                          
                                                                                                         
 The External Publicity Division is placing increasing emphasis on the cir- culation                     
 of audio-visual material by Indian Missions abroad. They have been equipped with TV                     
 sets and Video Cassette Recorders. Missions abroad have also been provided with video                   
 libraries depicting India's agricultural, industr ial, scientific and technological                     
 progress and different facets of India's cultural heritage, apart from topics of                        
 contemporary interest. In close cooperation with Door- darshan, the External                            
 Publicity Division is regularly sending a weekly Televisi on capsule titled India                       
 Magazine to Indian Missions abroad about developments in India. The capsules have                       
 been widely welcomed and are also being used by the national television stations in a                   
 number of countries, for viewing by their public. These programmes are also being                       
 lent by Indian Missions abroad to individuals, cultural organizations and educational                   
 institutions for wider impact. The programmes have proved to be particularly useful                     
 in catering to the needs of the Indian community and the people of Indian origin                        
 abroad.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                         
 PG80                                                                                                    
 The weekly India Magazine TV capsules are being used extensively by the Indian ethnic                   
 television programmes in the USA and Canada. A monthly news summary Dateline is                         
 especially prepared with the cooperation of Doordarshan and sent for use by the                         
 ethnic TV stations in these countries. These are being viewed not only by the Indian                    
 community but also by others. Missions in five of India's neighbouring countries have                   
 been provided with dish antennae to enable these Missions to tune into programmes                       
 telecast by the different stations of Doordarshan. These are in Indian Missions in                      
 Bhutan, Nepal, Burma, Sri Lanka and Afghanistan. The installation of dish antennae at                   
 the Mission in Islamabad is being processed. To meet the increasing demand for Indian                   
 films across the world, the XP Division is getting sub-titled in the English, Arabic,                   
 French and Spanish langu ages, 17 titles of films for wider circulation and screening                   
 by Missions abroad. The XP Division also provided the Missions with documentary films                   
 produced by Films Division on different aspects of India's national life. The                           
 Division is assisting in the production of two documentaries namely, India within                       
 India, and India-Continuity in Change. Another documentary on Jawaharlal Nehru has                      
 already been produced and is in circulation. The XP Division has obtained                               
 distribution rights of M/s Asian Films Production Mahatma Gandhi's Vision : India's                     
 Tryst with Freedom, for wider viewing through Indian Missions abroad.                                   
                                                                                                         
 The photo libraries of Missions abroad containing photographic slides on different                      
 facets of development of India are being continuously strengthened. The Missions are                    
 being regularly supplied with photographs of current develop- ments in India. During                    
 nine months ending December 1988, about 24,000 news photographs and 100 colour                          
 transparencies were sent to Indian Missions abroad.                                                     
                                                                                                         
 During the year under review, the XP Division made complete logistical arrangements                     
 with the help of Indian Missions abroad and of other agencies wher e necessary, for                     
 the media parties which accompanied the following Indian leaders on their visits                        
 abroad : the President on his visit to the USSR and Mongolia 6 to 20 July 1988;                         
 Netherlands, Czechoslovakia, Cyprus and Finland 12 to 23 September 1988; Bhutan 18 to                   
 21 October 1988; of the Vice-President to Guyana 4 to 14 May 1988 and the Prime                         
 Minister to Japan 15 to 17 April 1988; Yugoslavi a, Jordan, Spain and Turkey 11 to 20                   
 July 1988; Bhutan 23 to 25 September 1988; China 19 to 23 December 1988 and Pakistan                    
 29 to 31 December 1988. On these                                                                        
 PG81                                                                                                    
 occasions press kits and audio-visual material were sent to Indian Missions abr oad                     
 in the countries concerned for a pre-publicity build-up. Similarly, the XP Div ision                    
 made logistical arrangements including press conferences for visiting dignitari es                      
 and the accompanying media parties.                                                                     
                                                                                                         
 The XP Division continued to subscribe to the feature news services of new s agencies                   
 and commissioned special articles on the occasion of the Republic Day and the                           
 Independence Day for dissemination abroad. The publication of special supplements on                    
 India by foreign newspapers/journals/magazines were facilitated.                                        
                                                                                                         
 With the assistance of the Ministry of Home Affairs, the XP Division con- tinued to                     
 regularly brief Indian Missions abroad on the developments in the Punjab and to                         
 counter extremist propaganda against India. The Missions abroad have adopted a                          
 multi-pronged approach, including keeping in close touch with the resident Indian                       
 communities to brief them regularly about the developments in India including the                       
 situation in the Punjab, with a view to isolate the host ile elements. The Missions                     
 are being provided with journals/magazines projecting developments in the Punjab in a                   
 balanced way. Selected Missions abroad are also being provided with information from                    
 the Punjab Government about the developments in that State.                                             
 Cultural Relations                                                                                      
                                                                                   Top                   
 CHAPTER XII                                                                                             
                                                                                                         
 CULTURAL RELATIONS SINCE 1950 the Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) has                      
 worked steadily to project the cultural image of India abroad and to bring to India                     
 the finest manifestations of culture from abroad. With a network of seven regional                      
 offices and five cultural centres abroad, and with the active assistan ce of Indian                     
 Missions abroad, the Council has succeeded in taking India's culture to the farthest                    
 corners of the world.                                                                                   
                                                                                                         
 The activities of the Council in 1988-89 followed the trends established i n earlier                    
 years. The Council continued its focus on countries and regions having traditiona l                     
 and historical ties with India and with developing countries in Asia, Africa an d                       
 Latin America. Like the Centre for Africa, which was set up in the Council in                           
 1986-87, two other centres viz., the Centre for Latin America and the Centre for                        
 South and South-East Asia have also started functioning under the aegies of the                         
 Council. More intensive cultural exchanges have taken place with these regions during                   
 the year under review than in any period in the past. The shift of the Council's                        
 focus from the advanced western countries to the developing countries is reflected in                   
 the following statement 1985-86 1986-87 1987-88 1988-89 Outgoing Visitors To the USA,                   
 East and West Europe 91 60 10 21 To Asia, Africa and Latin America 23 19 23 13                          
 Outgoing Cultural Troupes To the USA, East and West Europe 44 19 18 35 To Asia,                         
 Africa and Latin America 19 18 **55 33                                                                  
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                         
 ------------------                                                                                      
                                                                                                         
 *Excluding troupes which visited the USSR for Festival of India. **Includes troupes                     
 sent for the International Ocean Festival in Mauritius in Se ptember 1987.                              
 PG82                                                                                                    
 PG83                                                                                                    
 During 1988-89 the Council continued to involve itself with the work relat - ing to                     
 selection, travel arrangements and presentation of artistes from India a t the                          
 Festival of India in the USSR. The Council was also assigned the task of presenting                     
 the major cultural troupes of the Festival of the Soviet Union in In dia. The                           
 selection of the artistes for the Festivals abroad in the USSR and oth er countries                     
 was done in an objective and impartial manner with the assistance of Advisory Panels                    
 of specialists in the fields of dance, music, theatre and folk arts. A special                          
 feature of the selections has been the promotion of young talent. A number of                           
 outstanding young performing artistes were given an opportunity to participate in                       
 Festivals abroad. In fact, in the field of dance, the young perf or- mers exceeded                      
 the number of the established artistes.                                                                 
                                                                                                         
 Four new sections were opened within the Council, viz : - Audio-Visual Reference -                      
 Contemporary Arts - Traditional Arts and Crafts - In-House Publications. This                           
 reflected the growing importance of these areas in the Council's acti vities. Two new                   
 Cultural Centres were set up in Jakarta and Mauritius. The year-long Festival of                        
 India in the USSR and the Soviet Festival in Ind ia, in which the Council was                           
 entrusted with the Performing Arts, ended on Jul 08, 1988 and 19 November 1988 in                       
 Moscow and New Delhi respectively. While Shri R. Venkataraman, the President of                         
 India, went to Moscow to be present at the time of the closing ceremony of the                          
 Festival of India in the USSR, the Sovi et President Mikhail Gorbachev, witnessed the                   
 closing ceremony in New Delhi of the Soviet Festival in India.                                          
                                                                                                         
 The highlights of the Soviet Festival in India were the Kirov Ballet, the Ballet on                     
 Ice, the Soviet Circus and leading theatre, dance and puppet groups whose                               
 performances were organised in major cities in India. An amount of approximately Rs.                    
 2.3 crores, representing the sale proceeds of the programmes was collected for the                      
 Prime Minister's National Relief Fund.                                                                  
 PG84                                                                                                    
 The closing events of the Festival of India in the USSR included the parti - cipation                   
 of the leading Indian musicians and choreographers including Pandit Ravi Shankar, Dr                    
 L.N. Subramaniam and Shrimati Kumudini Lakhia. Mr Zubin Mehta conductor of New York                     
 Philharmonic Orchestra, conducted the USSR State Symphony Orchestra as a guest                          
 conductor during the closing phase of the Festival. The eminent artists who                             
 participated in the Festival in India in- cluded Ms Leela Samson (Bharatnatyam),                        
 Swapna Sundari (Kuchipudi), Kanaka Srinivasan (Bharatnatyam), Sonal Mansingh                            
 (Odissi), Shobha Naidu (Kuchipudi), Mani Krishnaswamy (Vocal) and T.N. Sheshagopalan                    
 (Vocal).                                                                                                
                                                                                                         
 an interesting feature of the closing of the Festival of India in the USSR was a                        
 series of joint productions presented by the Council, which brought Sovie t and                         
 Indian artists on a common platform. These included :                                                   
 (i) Orchestral composition by Pandit Ravi Shankar which was performed by Indian                         
 musicians playing with the Academic Symphony Orchestra, the Chamber Choir of the USSR                   
 Ministry of Culture and the Boyan Russian Folk Instruments Orchestra;                                   
 (ii) Jazz played by Dr L.N. Subramaniam and his group along with the Pikaski                            
 Orchestra;                                                                                              
 (iii) Dr L.N. Subramaniam playing his compositions with Fedoseev Symphony Orchestra;                    
 and (iv) Dance choreography by Shrimati Kumudini Lakhia performed by the Kadamb Group                   
 of Ahmedabad with the dancers and musicians of the Bakhor group of Uzbekistan. Apart                    
 from the Soviet Festival in India, the Council also arranged more than sixty cultural                   
 programmes in which Indian and Foreign artists were present ed. The series entitled                     
 "Guru Shishya Parampara," "Parivara Parampara" and "Choreographic Compositions" was                     
 well received and favourably commented by critics and artistes alike.                                   
                                                                                                         
 India sent a contingent of 10 cultural troupes consisting of 126 artistes to                            
 participate in the 150th Anniversary Celebrations of the arrival of Indians in                          
 Guyana. Some of the artistes also performed in Trinidad Tobago and                                      
 PG85                                                                                                    
 Suriname. The high-level Indian delegation for the celebrations, which openedin                         
 Georgetown, Guyana in May 1988 was led by the Vice-President of India and President                     
 of the ICCR, Dr Shanker Dayal Sharma. The 25th Anniversary of the `Organization of                      
 the African Unity' was marked by celebrations of African Unity Day on 25 May 1988                       
 with the Vice- President of India as the Chief Guest. This was followed by two weeks                    
 of per- formances in Delhi, Chandigarh and Bombay by cultural delegations from Uganda                   
 and Kenya. The Council also arranged for an exhibition on Nelson Mandela, the                           
 screening of African films and a reception for African students.                                        
                                                                                                         
 A public meeting and film show was organised on 16 June 1988 to mark SOWETO Day. On                     
 18 July 1988 a concert by eminent Indian musicians was arranged as a tribute to                         
 Nelson Mandela on his 70th Birthday. An Indo-African Seminar on the "Organization of                    
 African Unity at Twenty-Five" was organised in New Delhi on 6 and 7 September 1988                      
 with distinguished participants from African countries as well as India. The                            
 Vice-President of India, Dr Shanker Dayal Sharma inaugurated the Seminar while the                      
 Secretary-General of OAU, Mr Ide Oumarou delivered the keynote address.                                 
                                                                                                         
 Among the Indian visitors sponsored by the Council to Africa were Shrimati Shakuntala                   
 Narasimhan, Prof G.S.S. Srinivas Rao, Shrimati Tara Bhattacharya and Shri Ajit Ninan                    
 Mathew. Prof Ebun Clerk from Nigeria and Prof Uttam Bissoondoyal from Mauri- tius                       
 visited India as guests of the ICCR. The Council also received 10 parti- cipants at                     
 the OAU Seminar organised on 6 and 7 September 1988 from Ethiopia, Ghana, Zambia,                       
 Zimbabwe, Kenya, Egypt and Senegal. Chain tours of the following groups were                            
 organised covering Mauritius, Seychelles, Reunion Island, Madagascar, Comoros,                          
 Zambia, Botswana, Malawi, Mozambique, Lesotho, Swaziland, Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda,                      
 Ethiopia, Djibouti and Somalia :                                                                        
 (a) Qawali - Shrimati Prabha Bharti and group.                                                          
 (b) Bharatnatyam - Ms Uma Rao and group.                                                                
 (c) Sitar - Pt Uma Shankar Mishra.                                                                      
 (d) Andhra Natyam Perini - Shri Kala Krishna and group.                                                 
 (e) Folk Dancers from Orissa - Shri Bhagaban Sahu and group.                                            
 PG86                                                                                                    
 A dance group from Tanzania gave performances at Delhi, Kulu, Chandi- garh,                             
 Trivandrum and Bombay. The Council received 42 visitors in India from different                         
 countries of Asia . Eight Indian experts visited Malaysia, Sri Lanka, Japan and                         
 Australia. The following 16 cultural delegations visited countries as noted against                     
 each :                                                                                                  
 Sl. No.  Particulars of the Troupe                   countries visited                                  
 1.       22 Member Parvatiya Kala Kendra troupe      DPRK, China and Thailand                           
                                                      (3 to 23 April 1988)                               
 2.       Ms Sanjukta Panigrahi (Odissi)              Indonesia (June 1988)                              
 3.       15 Member Kadamb group of                                                                      
          Ms Kumudini Lakhia                          Mongolia (13 to 23 Jul1y                           
                                                      1988)(Kathak).                                     
 4.       7 Member Composite troupe of                Afghanistan                                        
 (i)      Shri Kashinath Bodas (Vocal)                (11 to 20 August 1988)                             
 (ii)     Shri Rajendra Kulkarni (Flute),                                                                
 5.       10 Member Composite troupe of               Maldives                                           
 (i)      Ms Kaushalaya (Kuchipudi)                   13 to 19 August 1988)                              
 (ii)     Ms Manjushri Chatterjee (Kathak).                                                              
 6.       8 Member Composite troupe of                Bhutan                                             
 (i)      Ms Arundhati Roy (Odissi)                   (12 to 20 August 1988)                             
 (ii)     Joydeep Ghosh (Sarod).                                                                         
 7.       8 Member troupe of Daksha Sheth (Kathak)    Australia                                          
          (11 to 23 November 1988)                                                                       
 8.       8 Member Dance troupe of Trio Sisters from  Iraq                                               
          Madras                                                                                         
          (2 September to 2 October 1988)                                                                
 9.       14 Member Composite troupe of               PDRY, Qatar, Kuwait, Baharain,                     
 (i)      Ms Kum Kum Dhar (Kathak)                    The UAE and Muscat                                 
 (ii)     Ms Ratna Roy (Odissi)                       (12 October to 8 November 1988)                    
 (iii)    Shri Dhyanesh Khan (Sarod).                                                                    
 10.      17 Member Composite troupe of               Indonesia, Singapore, Thailand,                    
 (i)      Guru Pankaj Charan Das (Odissi)             Laos and the Philippines                           
 (ii)     Ali Ahmed Hussain Khan (Shehnai).           (17 December 1988 to 7 January                     
                                                      1989)                                              
 The Council sent ten performing delegations to Guyana in May 1988 during the                            
 celebrations of the 150th Anniversary of the arrival of Indians. The Festival of                        
 India in the USSR and the Soviet Festival in India was yet another cause of large                       
 number of troupes and the experts exchanged between India and Europe.                                   
 PG87                                                                                                    
 Other important visits from/to countries in Europe, North and South America were as                     
 under :                                                                                                 
 (i) Incoming visitors :-(a) Mrs Markia Leisea, Deputy Minister of Culture of Cuba and                   
 two others who came to participate in the Cuban week in India (May 1988);                               
 (b) Mr Bernard Ziegler, Minister of Justice and Police of the Canton of Geneva,                         
 Switzerland, accompanied by his wife (1 to 9 December 1988).                                            
 (ii) Incoming performing delegations :-(a) Two performing delegations from Cuba for                     
 the Cuban week in India (May 1988);                                                                     
 (b) 17 Member Cumbra Flamens Dance Troupe from Spain (1 to 9 December 1988).                            
 (iii) Outgoing visitors:-Ms Elizabeth Brunner for Exhibition of her works                               
 and to receive "Order of the Banner" Award in Hungary (7 to 20 Sep-                                     
 tember 1988).                                                                                           
 (iv) Outgoing performing delegations :-(a) The following performing delegations of                      
 Classical/Folk Dances and instrumental music partici- pated in the `Days of Indian                      
 Culture in Bulgaria' in June 1988 :                                                                     
 (1) Ms Sonal Mansingh (Odissi)                                                                          
 (2) Ms Kanaka Srinivasan (Bharatanatyam)                                                                
 (3) Purulia Chhau group of Jagroo Mahato                                                                
 (4) Rajendra Prasanna (Flute);                                                                          
 (b) The following dance and music groups were sent to participate in the Cervantino                     
 Festival in Mexico in October 1988 :                                                                    
 (1) 15 Member Seraikella Chhan                                                                          
 (2) 4 Member Kaori Gopalnath (Sexophone). The Indian Cultural Centres in Fiji,                          
 Guyana, Suriname, Indonesia and Mauritius continued their activities by conducting                      
 classes in classical music, dance, Hindi, etc. and holding functions on various                         
 occasions. The Centres also organised lectures, exhibitions and essay competitions                      
 PG88                                                                                                    
 Two new Cultural Centres to be named after Shri Jawaharlal Nehru are due to be opened                   
 in Moscow and London. For promoting studies in Indology and Indian languages, the                       
 Council deputed 13 visiting Professors in various disciplines to Trinidad Tobago,                       
 Thailand, Indonesia, Romania, Poland, Bulgaria, GDR, Republic of Korea, China and                       
 Belgium. In Guyana, Suriname and Trinidad & Tobago, Professors of Hindi were deployed                   
 under the scheme of Propagation of Hindi abroad on behalf of the Ministry of Human                      
 Resource Development.                                                                                   
                                                                                                         
 The ICCR has been entrusted with the welfare activities of the foreign students                         
 studying in India under various scholarship schemes of the Government of India as                       
 also the self-financing students. The Council awarded 30 scholarships to foreign                        
 students under its Cultural Scholarship Scheme for 1988-89. It also disbursed                           
 scholorship on behalf of other agencies of the Government of India besides rendering                    
 assistance in the form of reception on arrival, location of accommodation and social                    
 get-together s. The Council, in cooperation with the Foreign Students Advisers                          
 located in Indian universities, has also taken steps to improve the facilities for                      
 foreign students on the recommendations of the Inter-Ministerial Standing Committee                     
 on Foreign Students. For making the foreign students aware of India's cultural                          
 heritage, eight Study Tours were arranged to places like Bombay, Goa, Chittor- garh,                    
 Udaipur, Jaipur, Bangalore, Mysore and Ooty. Four summer camps- three in Jammu and                      
 Kashmir and one in Ooty and Bangalore-were also arranged. A number of cultural                          
 programmes were organised for the foreign students on various occasions at the ICCR's                   
 Headquarters, the Regional Offices and the University Campuses. Foreign Students Day                    
 coinciding with the centenary of the birth of Maulana Azad was celebrated in a big                      
 way. A large number of foreign students participated in functions held in Delhi and                     
 different parts of India.                                                                               
 The ICCR Library with a stock of over 50,000 books, journals, etc. was visited by                       
 about 4500 persons both from India and abroad including scholars, writers and                           
 journalists.                                                                                            
 PG89                                                                                                    
 In pursuance of the guidelines issued by the Central Cultural Committee of the                          
 Government of India in 1971, the ICCR continued to supervise the activities of                          
 Foreign Cultural Organizations including the Max Mueller Bhavan, the Alli- ance                         
 Francaise, the House of Soviet Culture and the British Libraries.                                       
 The Council continued to publish the quarterly journal Indian Horizons and Africa                       
 Quarterly in English, Gagananchal in Hindi, Thaqafatul Hind in Arabic, Rencontre avec                   
 l 'Inde in French and Papeles de la India in Spanish. A brochure on the activities                      
 undertaken by the Council was brought out. The Annual Report of the Council for the                     
 year 1987-88 was also printed. The Council participated in the following                                
 International Book Fairs and Exhibitions during the year :                                              
 (i) London International Book Fair in March 1988;                                                       
 (ii) International Fair for Books and Press in Guyana in May 1988;                                      
 (iii) The Malaysia Book Fair in July/August 1988;                                                       
 (iv) International Book Fair in Singapore in September 1988;                                            
 (v) The Frankfurt Book Fair in October 1988; and                                                        
 (vi) Cairo International Book Fair in January/February 1989. Selected ICCR titles                       
 were sent for display in all the above mentioned fairs. Besides the Council also                        
 supplied ICCR titles to Exhibition of Books under the Festival of India in the USSR                     
 in July 1987 and May 1988. All cultural programmes sponsored by the Council were                        
 recorded on audio and video tapes using the format of 3/4 U-matic video recording.                      
 Lecture demonstrations by eminent Indian artistes have also been recorded for                           
 archival and publicity purposes. Besides special recording of eminent artistes were                     
 arranged . A series of one hour video films for introducing classical dance forms of                    
 India to foreign audiences have also been prepared. During 1988-89 the Council                          
 organised the following exhibitions :                                                                   
 (i) May/June 1988 : `Chitrakala'-Exhibition of paintings by six young contemporary                      
 painters shown in the Festival of India in Sweden; and                                                  
 (ii) November 1988 : Exhibition of paintings by young painters and photographers from                   
 Sri Lanka.                                                                                              
 PG90                                                                                                    
 The Council continued to supply books, audio-cassettes and art objects to Indian                        
 Missions abroad for presentation purposes. Video cassettes of Ramanand Sagar's                          
 Ramayana were sent to the Indian Cultural Centres in Suva and Port Louis. On behalf                     
 of the Ministry of External Affairs, books worth Rs. 50,000 were supplied to each of                    
 the Indian Missions in Baharain and Qatar for presenta - tion to the Indian school in                   
 Baharain and the MES Indian school in Qatar, respectively. Books were also sent to                      
 the Centre for Asian, African and Caribb ean Studies at the University of Carabobo at                   
 Valencia in Venezuela and various universities in Chile. Musical instruments worth                      
 Rs. 68,000 approximately have also been supplied to Missions abroad for presentation                    
 to various institut ions/ associations. Folios containing drawings of eminent Indian                    
 artistes have also been sent to Missions abroad for publicity and presentation. The                     
 Implementation Committee on the 40th Anniversary Celebrations and the Nehru Centenary                   
 Celebrations has put a sum of Rs. 25 lakhs at the disposal of the Ministry of                           
 External Affairs to be used for projects to commemo - rate the centenary of Shri                        
 Jawaharlal Nehru. Books on and by Shri Nehru have been supplied under this scheme to                    
 a number of Indian Missions abroad.                                                                     
                                                                                                         
 Besides, 280 Tanjore plates to be used as prizes for competitions organised by Indian                   
 Missions abroad have also been sent. Among other items sent by the Council to                           
 Missions abroad are : painting kits, drawing papers, etc. in pursuan ce of the                          
 latter's proposals for holding of painting competitions. The Council has instituted a                   
 prize of Rs. 10,000 annually for the best ess                                                           
 ay on subjects dear to Maulana Abul Kalam Azad. The essay competition has been                          
 instituted in memory of the late Maulana. The subject of the essay for 1989 is                          
 `Secularism and Nationalism'.                                                                           
                                                                                                         
 A postage stamp in commemoration of the birth centenary of the late maulana Abul                        
 Kalam. Azad was issued on his birthday falling on 11 November 1988. The design for                      
 the stamp was proposed by the ICCR. Some of the important activities of the Indo-US                     
 Sub-Commission on Educa- tion and Culture were as follows :                                             
 (i) Workshop on new technology and advertising for small and medium sized papers                        
 organised by the Press Information Bureau held in October 1988;                                         
 PG91                                                                                                    
 (ii) Workshop on newspaper lay-out and design organised by the Press Information                        
 Bureau held in October 1988; and                                                                        
 (iii) Visit of Mr Jacques d'Amboise, Choreographer in December 1988 for whom a                          
 workshop was organised by the ICCR in Delhi. His visits to Ahmedabad, Trichur and                       
 Madras were also arranged.                                                                              
                                                                                                         
 The Council organised functions to mark the UN Day on 24 October 1988 and a Day of                      
 Solidarity with the Palestine People on 19 November 1988 with Dr Shanker Dayal                          
 Sharma, the Vice-President of India and President of the ICCR and Shri K.K. Tewary,                     
 the Minister of State for External Affairs respectively as Chief Guests.                                
 Indians Overseas                                                                                        
                                                                                   Top                   
 Jan 01, 1988                                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 CHAPTER XIII                                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 INDIANS OVERSEASIT estimated that there are about 12 million persons of Indian origin                   
 resi - ding in different parts of the world which include those having Indian                           
 nationa- lity. The phenomenon of Indians travelling overseas is not a new one and                       
 dates back to time immemorial. Large number of persons of Indian origin were also                       
 settled abroad during the colonial period and have made contributions to t he                           
 economic development of the countries of their residence. In the last few decad es a                    
 number of Indian nationals have emigrated to the Gulf, Western Europe and the USA.                      
 They too have made a marked contribution in a variety of fields. The overseas Indians                   
 are increasingly being recognised as a valuable asset for Indi a as a bridge of                         
 understanding between India and the country of their domicile.                                          
                                                                                                         
 In May 1988, the 150th anniversary of Indian emigration to Guyana was celebrated in                     
 Georgetown which was attended by a high-level Indian delegation headed by the                           
 Vice-President of India, Dr Shanker Dayal Sharma. During this visit the                                 
 Vice-President also went to Suriname and Trinidad Tobago and these visits contributed                   
 to the strengthening of India's relations with all three cou ntries as well as the                      
 cultural and emotional links with the Indian communities there.                                         
                                                                                                         
 A Special Coordination Division was set up in the Ministry with a view to develop                       
 social, economic and cultural contacts between India and the overseas Indians. Indian                   
 Missions have been asked to maintain close contacts with overseas Indians and render                    
 them all possible assistance. This unit also dissem i- nates information about                          
 matters of interest to overseas Indians like investment procedures in India through                     
 the Missions abroad. It also represents the Ministr y in inter-Ministerial                              
 deliberations involving NRI affairs.                                                                    
                                                                                                         
 It is the consistent policy of the Government that persons of Indian origi n who have                   
 taken foreign nationality should identify themselves with and integrat e in the                         
 country of their domicile. The Government naturally, remains alive to, their interest                   
 and general welfare and encourages cultural contacts with them.                                         
 As regards Indian nationals the Government continues to exercise due care for their                     
 safety and welfare and takes all necessary steps in this regard.                                        
 PG92                                                                                                    
 Protocol                                                                                                
                                                                                   Top                   
 CHAPTER XIV                                                                                             
                                                                                                         
 PROTOCOL DURING the year 1988-89 the Heads of Mission of the following 24 countries                     
 left India on completion of their assignment : Finland, the Philippines, Ghana,                         
 Vietnam, Portugal, Malaysia, Uganda, Mexico, Iran, Kampuchea, Jordan, Pakistan,                         
 German Democratic Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Laos, Hungary,                         
 Belgium, Colombia, Brunei (non-resident), United States of America, Trinidad Tobago,                    
 Benin (non-resident), Lesotho (non-resident) and Singapore. During the year 1988-89,                    
 Heads of Missions of the following 28 countries and Head of Delegation of the                           
 Commission of the European Communities for South Asia presented their credentials to                    
 the President of India Thailand, Nepal, Austria, Mexico, Lesotho (non-resident),                        
 Rwanda (non- resident), Portugal, Denmark, Laos, Maldives, Malaysia, the Philippines,                   
 Uganda, Benin (non-resident), Hungary, Vietnam, Lebanon, Czechoslovakia, Kampuchea,                     
 German Democratic Republic, Belgium, Colombia, Pakistan, Union of Soviet Socialist                      
 Republics, Jordan, Trinidad Tobago, United States of America, Albania (non-resident),                   
 Burkina Faso (non-resident).                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 Senegal re-opened its diplomatic Mission in New Delhi. The Ambassador, H.E. Mr Ahmed                    
 al-Mansour presented his credentials to the President on Dec 05, 1988. Diplomatic                       
 relations Were established with Morocco on 21 October 1988 and its Mission started                      
 functioning from 21 November 1988.                                                                      
                                                                                                         
 A list of Heads of State/Government and Foreign Ministers who visited India during                      
 1988 is at Appendix XVII.                                                                               
 PG93                                                                                                    
 Passport And Consular Services                                                                          
                                                                                   Top                   
 CHAPTER XV                                                                                              
                                                                                                         
 PASSPORT AND CONSULAR SERVICES PRESENTLY there are 21 Passport Offices, spread over                     
 the country and two Liaison Offices (Shimla and Trivandrum). It has been decided to                     
 open some more Passport Offices/Liaison Offices.                                                        
                                                                                                         
 A statement showing the number of applications for fresh passport/misc. services                        
 received and the number of passports issued/misc. services rendered fo r the period 1                   
 January to Dec 31, 1988, is given at Appendix VI. The total revenues earned by the                      
 passport offices from January to December 1988 was Rs. 13.18 crores. The total                          
 expenditure incurred upto December 1988 stood at Rs. 4.72 crores. A detailed                            
 statement in this regard is given at Appendix VII. A system of regular inspections                      
 and monitoring of passport offices has bee n devised. So far, 19 teams of Officers                      
 have inspected various passport offices. Added to this, some of the passport offices                    
 were visited by the Minister of Sta te for External Affairs and Officers of the CPV                     
 Division. Passport Adalats were successfully held in passport offices at Jalandhar,                     
 Chandigarh and Jaipur by the Chief Passport Officer and some of the Senior officials                    
 of the Passport Organization. This was very much appreciated by the press and the                       
 public. Training facilities at Institute of Staff Training Management (ISTM) were                       
 fully utilised for imparting training to the officials in `Cash and Accounts' a nd                      
 `Vigilance matters'. A beginning was made to get officers trained in `Public                            
 Relations' and `Behavioural Skills' at FSTI. After the police and CID reports were                      
 made compulsory before the actual issue of passports, the workload in passport                          
 offices increased considerably although the sanctioned strength of personnel has                        
 remained the same as before. Steps are being taken to get the Staff Inspection Unit                     
 (SIU) norms revised in consultation with the Ministry of Finance.                                       
 PG94                                                                                                    
 PG95                                                                                                    
 Six passport offices, namely, Delhi, Bombay, Madras, Cochin, Goa and Lucknow have                       
 been computerised. Computer sites at passport offices at Banga-lore, Hyderabad,                         
 Bhopal and Chandigarh are ready to receive computers whereas site preparation at                        
 passport offices at Jaipur, Bhubaneshwar and Ahmedabad is nearing completion.                           
 Computer site preparation at the passport office at Calcutta is also being taken up.                    
 New office accommodation for passport office at Patna is being obtained which will                      
 have provision for a computer room. Computer site at Srinagar passport office would                     
 be prepared by the State Government of Jammu and Kashmir. A computer unit has also                      
 been installed at the CPV Division. A high powered committee under the Chairmanship                     
 of Secretary (E E R) had been set up to review all aspects of the functioning of the                    
 passport offices. This Committee has already reviewed problems connected with issue                     
 of passports in order to improve efficiency without compromising the security aspect.                   
 The Committee has recommended introduction of more secured passport (MSP) booklets                      
 with effect from 1 July 1989. As part of the on-going drive to improve efficiency,                      
 steps have been taken in consultation with the Ministry of Home Affairs to expedite                     
 police verification of passport applicants. Delayed and incomplete reports are being                    
 regularly moni- tored and reviews are taken up at a higher level. Chief Ministers of                    
 all the S tate Governments, Chief Secretaries and State Home Secretaries were                           
 approached to help expedite police reports of passport applicants from their                            
 respective St ates.                                                                                     
                                                                                                         
 During the year 1988, there were 1920 cases of registered complaints on delay in                        
 issue of fresh passports or renewal thereof. They were computerised a nd followed up                    
 successfully. As a result, 1325 complaints were settled by issuing passports and                        
 rendering the desired services. Forty-six cases of appeals again st the order of                        
 impounding or refusal of passport facilities to Indian nationals by                                     
 the passport offices were received. In 33 cases, the Chief Passport Officer he ard                      
 the appeals and passed orders. Other cases of appeals are in the process of                             
 consideration. About 102 cases of forgery of entries in passports and visas were                        
 reported to the Ministry. Investigations are being made in all these cases of                           
 forgeries. Three hundred and seventy seven applications were received for issue of                      
 certificate of Identity of Stateless persons, most of them being Tibetan refugees.                      
                                                                                                         
 In most of the cases, certificates of Identity were issued to the applicants.                           
 PG96                                                                                                    
 twenty-eight requests were received from Indian passport holders for grant                              
 of endorsement for South Africa. Almost all the cases were disposed of on merits.                       
                                                                                                         
 During the year, 149 fresh applications from Travel Agents were received for                            
 recognition to deal with the passport offices in passport matters under the new                         
 criteria introduced with effect from September 1986. One hundred and eighty-eight                       
 Travel Agencies were approved and recognised while 112 applica- tions were rejected                     
 for non-fulfilment of prescribed criteria. (These figures a lso include the                             
 applications received before 1988). As on 31 December 1988, 583 Travel Agencies were                    
 recognised to deal in passport matters in the country.                                                  
                                                                                                         
 During the year, plots of land and passport offices at Ahmedabad and Panaji were                        
 acquired for constructing office-cum-residential building for passp ort offices.                        
 There are proposals to construct office-cum-residential buildings for passport                          
 offices at Kozhikode, Cochin, Bhubaneshwar and Jaipur.                                                  
                                                                                                         
 Consular Matters During 1988, 458 cases of deportation of Indian nationals by foreign                   
 govern-ments were brought to the notice of the Ministry. Most of them originated from                   
 the Gulf countries. Indian Missions and posts abroad, repatriated 88 persons, who                       
 were in distress in foreign countries. Financial assistance was extended to deserving                   
 cases. Cases of 337 Indian nationals arrested in various countries were reported to                     
 the Government. Every consular assistance was rendered to them and wherever possible                    
 their release and return to India was facilitated by the Missions concerned.                            
                                                                                                         
 Three hundred and ninety-one cases of death of foreign nationals in India were also                     
 handled. Three hundred and eleven cases of death of Indian nationals                                    
 abroad came to the notice of the Ministry and actions were initiated to settle their                    
 claims of dues and death compensation through respective Indian Missions.                               
                                                                                                         
 Consular assistance was also rendered in all cases of labour disputes brought to the                    
 notice of the Indian Missions abroad. One lakh six thousand nine hundred and                            
 seventy-eight documents-received from the public for submission to foreign                              
 authorities were attested/authenticated by the Consular Section of the CPV Division.                    
 The procedure for authentication                                                                        
 PG97                                                                                                    
 of documents has been streamlined so as to enable the public to get back the docu-                      
 ments duly attested on the same day. There is no service charge at present for                          
 consular attestation by the Ministry. During 1988, Visa fees were revised in respect                    
 of 37 countries. On a reci - procal basis, visa fee has been abolished for the                          
 nationals of Zimbabwe. The provisions relating to the grant of long-term multiple                       
 entry visas were further liberalised. Certain categories of businessmen and                             
 technicians belonging to UK, FRG and Japan are now extended such visa facilities on a                   
 reciprocal basis.                                                                                       
 The requirement of visa application forms and photographs has been waived for Indian                    
 and US Diplomatic/Official passport holders when they apply for visas in New Delhi                      
 and Washington respectively. The Southern African State of Botswana has introduced a                    
 visa regime for Indian nationals with effect from March-1988.                                           
                                                                                                         
 In 1988, a total of 1699 Diplomatic passports and 7095 Official passports were issued                   
 by the CPV Division. One thousand five hundred and ninety consular services on                          
 diplomatic passports and 6633 services on official passports were rendered. About                       
 16,200 visa notes requesting foreign diplomatic Missions in India to issue                              
 Diplomatic/Official visas were also issued. Computerisation of Diplomatic and                           
 Official passports issued by the Ministry has begun from this year.                                     
 Administration And Organizationa                                                                        
                                                                                   Top                   
 CHAPTER XVI ADMINISTRATION AND ORGANIZATION SHRI P.V. Narasimha Rao assumed charge as                   
 Minister for External Affairs on Jun 27, 1988, Shri K.K. Tewary took over as Minister                   
 of State in the Ministry on 25 June 1988. Shri K. Natwar Singh continued as Minister                    
 of State in the Ministry. Shri K.P.S. Menon demitted charge of Foreign Secretary on                     
 15 February 1989. Shri S.K. Singh, formerly Ambassador in Pakistan, assumed charge as                   
 Foreign Secretary on the same day. Shri A.N.D. Haksar took over as Dean, FSTI while                     
 S/Shri P.L. Sinai, M. Dubey and A.G. Asrani took over charge as Special Secretaries.                    
 Shri Asrani has since been transferred as Ambassador of India to Japan. S/Shri Sinai                    
 and Dubey were appointed Secretaries in the Ministry w.e.f. 12 December 1988.                           
                                                                                                         
 Shri A.K. Banerjee has remained as Additional Secretary and Financial Adviser. Shri                     
 Prakash Shah was promoted to the rank of Additional Secretary on 24 January 1989.                       
                                                                                                         
 The Embassy at Conakry was closed down on 4 December 1988. The Ministry now has 139                     
 Resident Missions/Posts abroad manned by officials from India.                                          
                                                                                                         
 The total sanctioned strength of IFS and IFS(B) both at Headquarters and Indian                         
 Missions abroad is 3656. This includes 28 posts of the combined research cadre and 30                   
 posts of the interpreters' cadre. The cadre-wise strength is given in Appendices VIII                   
 and IX.                                                                                                 
 PG98                                                                                                    
 PG99                                                                                                    
 In addition, there are 1914 locally recruited staff in Indian Missions/Posts abroad.                    
                                                                                                         
 The list showing the number of officers of this Ministry who have qualified in                          
 various foreign languages is given in Appendix X. During the year under report the                      
 Computer Cell of the Ministry developed more application software for various                           
 divisions of the Ministry. "Country Data Bank" for use by seven territorial                             
 divisions-Afghanistan Pakistan Division , Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and Maldives                            
 Division, Europe West, Europe East, Africa, Division, Northern Division and East Asia                   
 Division have been installed.                                                                           
                                                                                                         
 The Computer Cell has also developed Personal Information System for IFS `A' and IFS                    
 `B' personnel, Indian Overseas Data Bank, UN Resolution Informa- tion System for XP                     
 Division and Monitoring System on Duty Exemption Certi- ficates. The Cell is also in                    
 the process of developing Leave Account System, Pay Slips, Service Books, System for                    
 UN, System for SAARC, Project Monitoring System for South Africa Unit, Technology                       
 Transfer Monitoring System for AMS Division, System for Foreign Postings covered by                     
 Foreign Service Board, Senior Establishment Board and Junior Establishment Board.                       
                                                                                                         
 Eight Application Packages-Passport Information System, Visa Control System, Accounts                   
 Packages, Rental Information System, Application package for Political work in                          
 Missions abroad, Immovable Property information system, Application package for stock                   
 register & Library Management System-have been identified for development and                           
 installation in Indian Missions abroad. Over 150 personnel of the Ministry have been                    
 imparted training in MS-DOS, Xenix, Word Processing and Data Bank Management. The                       
 Computer Cell also organises on an on-going basis, training programmes for personnel                    
 of various divisions, who are being handed over Application Software.                                   
                                                                                                         
 A Steering Committee chaired by Shri Sam Pitroda, Adviser to the Prime Minister on                      
 Technology Missions, has been constituted to lay down Policy guidelines and to                          
 periodically direct and monitor progress of computerisation                                             
 of the Ministry of External Affairs and its Missions abroad. To review the work done                    
 in the area of computerisation, a Review Committee headed by the Minister for                           
 External Affairs has been set up. This Committee is likely to meet every quarter.                       
 PG100                                                                                                   
 In line with the Government's direction on use of Official language, bilin gual                         
 package Sulekh has been loaded in the Computers of the Ministry. Two com- puters have                   
 also been installed in the Hindi and Parliament Sections of the Ministry. During the                    
 year under review, the Computer Cell has installed a total of 44 Personal Computers                     
 (PCs-17, PC-XTs-6, PC-ATs-15, Super ATs-2 and HCL work horse-4) in various divisions                    
 of the Ministry of External Affairs. Tender s have been invited for purchase of                         
 Computers for use in the Ministry and for Missions abroad.                                              
                                                                                                         
 On the basis of achievements in the last few years on being able to almost fully                        
 utilise funds earmarked for capital investment and acquisition of propert y abroad,                     
 budget for this activity of this Ministry was increased to Rs. 32 crore s during the                    
 current year from Rs. 22 crores last year. Progress achieved so far include the                         
 following: Embassy Residences in Rome and Lilongwe were purchased; a                                    
 Chancery-cum-residential complex in Mahe and a new Chancery in Athens were purchased.                   
 The Ministry also decided to acquire land in Bonn and Baghdad for the construction of                   
 Chancery and residences, and is finalising purchase of plots for staff residences at                    
 Dar-es-Salaam and Nicos ia. The project for the construction of Chancery in Islamabad                   
 has been completed and the Embassy has begun functioning from the new premises. The                     
 project at Kuwait to house the Chancery, Embassy Residence and some accommodation for                   
 officers as well as the project at Lagos for the construction of Chancery and t he                      
 entire residential requirements were initiated in May 1988. Both will be com- pleted                    
 by early 1990. Preparations for the projects for Chancery and residence at Dubai,                       
 Chancery of the PMI and a housing complex for officials at New York and Chancery and                    
 housing at Kuala Lumpur are under way and construction is expected to begin early in                    
 next financial year. Approval for the projects f or the construction of Chancery and                    
 Embassy Residence at Doha has been given and similar projects at Abu Dhabi and                          
 Brasilia are being finalised.                                                                           
                                                                                                         
 Indian Missions at Hanoi, Phnom Penh, Vientiane, Doha, Muscat, Baharain and Colombo                     
 were inspected during the current financial year. Review of the regulation governing                    
 entitlement of Government of India's officials posted abro ad was undertaken to                         
 simplify the procedures.                                                                                
 PG101                                                                                                   
 Nearly 1500 employees, who are recruited locally are also on the rolls of Indian                        
 Missions and Posts abroad. During the last two years the Ministry evolv ed systems                      
 which will protect their emoluments and improve their conditions of service in                          
 several countries where the local currency is vulnerable to major fl uctua- tions.                      
 Administrative measures for the standardisation of the conditions of se r- vice are                     
 being finalised. Computerisation of information in various sections of the                              
 Establishment Division was undertaken so that access to rules and regulations as well                   
 as thei r interpretation, data on all aspects of the conditions of service of locally                   
 rec ruited staff in Missions, property questions as well as matters relating to                         
 supplies t o Missions abroad can be speeded up through the use of computers. The                        
 soft- ware is already under preparation and the work will be completed before the end                   
 of the year. The Conference Cell continued to play a useful role in providing                           
 logistica l support and managerial assistance for all the international conferences                     
 convene d by the Ministry of External Affairs. It also arranged various functions                       
 concer ning the visits to India of foreign Heads of State/Government. The Cell shared                   
 its expertise with other Departments of the Government in the successful organizati                     
 on of their conferences. The available equipments was loaned, free of cost, to va                       
 rious Government organizations from time to time. All these measures resulted in                        
 considerable savings in expenditure to the Government, both in Indian Rupees and                        
 foreign exchange. An illustrative list of conferences/functions organised during the                    
 year is given in Appendix XV                                                                            
 Foreign Service Training Institute                                                                      
                                                                                   Top                   
 CHAPTER XVII                                                                                            
 FOREIGN SERVICE TRAINING INSTITUTE                                                                      
                                                                                                         
 DURING the period under review, the training activities of the Foreign Ser vice                         
 Training Institute (FSTI) increased manifold in range, scale and scope. The FSTI was                    
 placed under the full time charge of a Dean in the rank of Secreta ry to Government                     
 of India. (Shri A.N.D. Haksar, a Grade I IFS Officer, took charge as Dean in March                      
 1988). Two IFS Officers of Grade IV joined the FSTI Faculty against two newly created                   
 posts. The FSTI staff position also improved following the joining of one Accounts                      
 Officer (SAS), two Accounts- knowing Assistants and three LDCs against newly created                    
 posts. Joint Secretary (FSTI) was delegated the financial powers of a Head of                           
 Department in order to facilitate the functioning of the FSTI as a training                             
 institution.                                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 The first-ever meeting of the FSTI Advisory Committee under the Chairmanship of the                     
 Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri K. Natwar Singh, took place on Aug 16,                     
 1988. Others who participated in this meeting were Foreign Secretary, Special Envoy                     
 to Prime Minister, Dean of FSTI, Special Secretary (Administration) and Additional                      
 Secretary (Financial Adviser). The Committee reviewed the functioning of the FSTI,                      
 and approved various measures to enhance the efficacy of the FSTI as a training                         
 institution.                                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 Several new courses (Orientation Programme for Spouses, Course on Crisis Management,                    
 Refresher Course for Commercial Representatives in Missions abroad, Special Programme                   
 for RITES officials, Orientation Course on Computers for Database Management,                           
 Orientation Programme for State Government Protocol Officials, Course for Group D                       
 Officials, Course on Telephone Techniques, etc.) were introduced this year. Details                     
 of these course s are included in Appendix XVI.                                                         
 PG102                                                                                                   
 PG103                                                                                                   
 Under instructions from the Minister for External Affairs the duration of the course                    
 for IFS Probationers (1987 batch) was extended by three months and new Modules on                       
 Intelligence, Crisis Management, Conference handling, etc. were introduced apart from                   
 lengthening the module on Indian Culture and Cultural Diplomacy. Details of the                         
 courses of the IFS Probationers (both 1987 and 1988 batches) are given in Appendix                      
 XVI.                                                                                                    
                                                                                                         
 During 1988-89, the FSTI conducted eight Basic Professional, Courses for about 400                      
 Section Officers, Assistants, Upper Division Clerks and Lower Division Clerks who                       
 were/are proceeding on transfer to Indian Missions abroad. The BPC covered modules on                   
 Computers, Administration, Accounts, Consular and General Areas                                         
 (Diplomacy/Information/Commerce). The Minister for External Affairs presided over the                   
 Certificates-Presentation-Ceremony to the successful participants of XIIIth BPC                         
 Course. In addition to BPC, special workshops/seminars on Administration, Finance and                   
 Accounts were also conducted (Appendix XVI). As a part of mid-career training                           
 programme, the FSTI organised a course for Commercial Representatives serving abroad                    
 in February 1989. In accordance with the decision of the FSTI Advisory Committee, a                     
 proposal for a high-level Refresher Course for Heads of Mission has been formulated                     
 and submitted for the Committee's consideration. The FSTI geared up its activities to                   
 meet requests for providing appropria te orientation to officials from other                            
 Government of India Departments/Ministries being posted abroad, and also for training                   
 of officials from other countries.                                                                      
                                                                                                         
 During 1988, several Military Attache-designates from Ministry of Defence and                           
 officials from Ministries of Tourism/Information/Commerce attended selected modules                     
 from the course for 1987 IFS Probationers. During 1989 (January-March), two                             
 Diplomatic Officers from Mauritius and officials from Ministry of Defence/Ministry of                   
 Tourism will attend training modules from the course meant for 1988 batch IFS                           
 Probationers. Consequent on the above mentioned courses, the total number of trainees                   
 who availed all FSTI courses in 1988-89 was 612 compared to 289 in 1987-88 and 122 in                   
 1986-87. The FSTI enlarged its cooperating contacts with other training institutes                      
 (LBSNAA, IIFT, ASCI, MDI, IIPA and NDC) in India and initiated contacts with similar                    
 organizations (ADDAIIR, EROPA) abroad. It also developed                                                
 PG104                                                                                                   
 relations with multilateral training institutions like UNITAR, UNDTCD and ITC                           
 (CATT/UNCTAD). As a result of this increasing cooperation with other organizations, a                   
 number of visits took place in 1988-89; details of such visits are given in Appendix                    
 XVI. FSTI is in the process of establishing a documentation centre. It has commenced                    
 a publication programme and already brought out one brochure and two booklets on work                   
 in Missions abroad. A written symposium on the Role of the Junior Diplomat in                           
 Missions abroad, and another on Commercial representation are under preparation.                        
 Use Of Hindi In Official Work                                                                           
                                                                                   Top                   
 Jan 01, 1988                                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 CHAPTER XVIII                                                                                           
                                                                                                         
 USE OF HINDI IN OFFICIAL WORK USE of Hindi in this Ministry has two                                     
 aspects-Implementation of the Offici al Language Policy of the Government and                           
 Propagation of Hindi in foreign countries. The Ministry has three Committees namely,                    
 Hindi Advisory Committee, Official Language Implementation Committee and a                              
 sub-committee of the Hindi Advisory Committee, working under chairmanship of the                        
 Minister for External Affairs, Secretary (10) and JS(AD) respectively. During the                       
 year under review meetings of these committees were held and efforts were made to                       
 implement their suggestions.                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 Several sections in the Ministry and Regional Passport Offices at Hyderabad, Madras                     
 and Calcutta were inspected and remedial instructions issued. Besides, an incentive                     
 scheme carrying cash prizes for officials and staff who d o their entire official                       
 work or a part thereof in Hindi, has been introduced. To encourage Regional Passport                    
 Offices to do their work in Hindi, a competitive scheme has been introduced with the                    
 winning office receiving a shield. A kit o f Hindi aid material was distributed in                      
 the sections and to the Regional Passport Offices. In addition a Hindi Week was                         
 organised in the Ministry in December 1988. The Ministry continued its efforts to                       
 propagate Hindi abroad. Sets of Hindi books on various facets of India, Hindi Text                      
 Books, Children's Literature , Devanagari Typing Machines, Hindi Linguaphone                            
 Cassettes and Records, Hindi alphabet charts, standard Hindi-English and                                
 English-Hindi Dictionaries were sent to the Indian Missions abroad for helping them                     
 to build standard Hindi Libraries or for donation/presentation to deserving                             
 Governmental or voluntary institutions/organizations engaged in propagation of Hindi                    
 abroad. The Hindi Teaching Scheme for children in Missions abroad continued                             
 satisfactorily and some new classes were added.                                                         
 PG105                                                                                                   
 PG106                                                                                                   
 In order to encourage foreign students to learn Hindi in their countries, our Mission                   
 in Jakarta instituted an award for the best Hindi student in the Gandhi Memorial                        
 International School, Jakarta and our Mission in Seoul organised a Hindi Speech                         
 contest in Pusan University of Foreign Studies, Pusan. As in previous years, this                       
 year also, the OSD (Hindi) was sent to the PMI, New York to assist the Indian                           
 delegation to the United Nations General Assembly wishing to speak in Hindi in UNGA.                    
 The Minister for External Affairs, Shri P.V. Narasimha Rao addressed the UN General                     
 Assembly in Hindi and one member of the Indian delegation spoke in Hindi in one of                      
 the Committees of the United Nations.                                                                   
 Appendix-I Division-wise List of Countries                                                              
                                                                                   Top                   
         Division-wise List of                                                                           
         Countries                                                                                       
         AFRICA DIVISION               AFRICA DIVISION-Contd.                                            
 1.      Angola 41.                    Zaire                                                             
 2.      Benin 42.                     Zambia                                                            
 3.      Botswana 43.                  Zimbabwe                                                          
 4.      Burkina Faso                                                                                    
 5.      Burundi                                                                                         
 6.      Cameroon                      AMS DIVISION                                                      
 7.      Cape Verde                                                                                      
 8.      Central African Republic      1.Canada                                                          
 9.      Chad                          2.United States of America                                        
 10.     Comoros                                                                                         
 11.     Congo                                                                                           
 12.     Cate d' Ivoire                AP DIVISION                                                       
 13.     Equatorial Guinea                                                                               
 14.     Ethiopia                      1.Afghanistan                                                     
 15.     Gabon                         2.Pakistan                                                        
 16.     Gambia                                                                                          
 17.     Ghana                                                                                           
 18.     Guinea                        BSM DIVISION                                                      
 19.     Guinea-Bissau                                                                                   
 20.     Kenya                         1.Bangladesh                                                      
 21.     Lesotho                       2.Burma                                                           
 22.     Liberia                       3. Indian Ocean                                                   
 23.     Madagascar                    4.Maldives                                                        
 24.     Malawi                        5.Sri Lanka                                                       
 25.     Mali                                                                                            
 26.     Mauritius                                                                                       
 27.     Mozambique                    EAST ASIA DIVISION                                                
 28.     Namibia                                                                                         
 29.     Niger                         1.China, People's Republic of                                     
 30.     Nigeria                       2.Hong Kong                                                       
 31.     Rwanda                        3.Japan                                                           
 32.     Sao Tome and Principe         4.Korea, Democratic People's Republic of                          
 33.     Senegal                       5.Korea, Republic of                                              
 34.     Seychelles                    6.Mongolia                                                        
 35.     Sierra Leone                                                                                    
 36.     South Africa                  EE DIVISION                                                       
 37.     Swaziland                                                                                       
 38.     Tanzania, United Republic of  1.Albania                                                         
 39.     Togo                          2.Bulgaria                                                        
 40.     Uganda                        3.Czechoslovakia                                                  
 size=2>                                                                                                 
                                        PG109>                                                           
                                        PG110>                                                           
      EE DIVISION-Contd.                LAC DIVISION                                                     
 4.   German Democratic Republic        1.Antigua & Barbuda                                              
 5.   Hungary                           2.Argentina                                                      
 6.   Poland                            3.Bahamas                                                        
 7.   Romania                           4.Barbados                                                       
 8.   Union of Soviet Socialist         5.Belize                                                         
      Republics                                                                                          
 9.   Yugoslavia                        6.Bolivia                                                        
      7.Brazil                                                                                           
      8.Chile                                                                                            
      EW DIVISION                       9.Colombia                                                       
   1. Austria                           10. Costa Rica                                                   
 2.   Belgium                           11.Cuba                                                          
 3.   Cyprus                            12.Commonwealth of Dominica                                      
 4.   Denmark                           13.Dominican Republic                                            
 5.   Finland                           14.Ecuador                                                       
 6.   France                            15.El Salvador                                                   
 7.   Germany, Federal Republic of      16.Grenada                                                       
 8.   Gibraltar                         17.Guatemala                                                     
 9.   Greece                            18.Guyana                                                        
 10.  Holy See, The                     19.Haiti                                                         
 11.  Iceland                           20.Honduras                                                      
 12.  Ireland                           21.Jamaica                                                       
 13.  Italy                             22.Mexico                                                        
 14.  Liechtenstein                     23.Nicaragua                                                     
 15.  Luxembourg                        24.Panama                                                        
 16.  Malta                             25.Paraguay                                                      
 17.  Monaco                            26.Peru                                                          
 18.  Netherlands                       27.St. Christopher and Nevis                                     
 19.  Norway                            28.St. Lucia                                                     
 20.  Portugal                          29.St. Vincent and the Grenadines                                
 21.  San Marino                        30.Suriname                                                      
 22.  Spain                             31.Trinidad & Tobago                                             
      nbsp;                                                                                              
 23.  Sweden                            32.Uruguay                                                       
 24.  Switzerland                       33.Venezuela                                                     
 25.  Turkey                                                                                             
 26.  United Kingdom of Great Britain                                                                    
      and Northern Ireland.             NORTHERN DIVISION                                                
                                                                                                         
      1. Bhutan                                                                                          
      2. Nepal                                                                                           
      GULF DIVISION                                                                                      
 1.   Bahrain                                                                                            
 2.   Democratic Yemen                  SOUTHERN DIVISION                                                
 3.   Iran, Islamic Republic of                                                                          
 4.   Iraq                              1.Australia                                                      
 5.   Kuwait                            2.Brunei                                                         
 6.   Oman                              3.Fiji                                                           
 7.   Qatar                             4.French Polynesia                                               
 8.   Saudi Arabia                      5.Indonesia                                                      
 9.   United Arab Emirates              6.Kampuchea People's Republic of                                 
 10.  Yemen                                                                                              
      7.Kiribati                                                                                         
      SOUTHERN DIVISION-Contd.          WANA DIVISION                                                    
      1.Algeria                                                                                          
 8.   Lao People's Democratic Republic  2.Djibouti                                                       
 9.   Malaysia                          3.Egypt                                                          
 10.  Marshall Islands Republic of      4.Israel                                                         
 11.  Nauru                             5.Jordan                                                         
 12.  New Caledonia                     6.League of Arab States                                          
 13.  New Zealand                       7.Lebanon                                                        
 14.  Papua New Guinea                  8.Libya                                                          
 15.  Philippines                       9.Mauritania                                                     
 16.  Singapore                         10.Morocco                                                       
 17.  Solomon Islands                   11.Palestine                                                     
 18.  Thailand                          12.SADR (Saharawi Arab DemocraticRepublic)                       
 19.  Tonga                             13.Somalia                                                       
 20.  Tuvalu                            14.Sudan                                                         
 21.  Vanuatu                           15.Syria                                                         
 22.  Vietnam Socialist Republic of     16.Tunisia.                                                      
                                         PG111>                                                          
 Appendix-II Treaties conventions/Agreements                                                             
                                                                                                         
 APPENDIX II                                                                                             
                                                                                                         
 Treaties conventions/Agreements concluded or renewed by India with other countr ies                     
 in 1988*                                                                                                
                                                                                                         
 ----------------------------------------------------------------                                        
 Sl   Title of                             Date of    Date of                Date of                     
 No.  Convention/Treaty                    signature  Ratification/Accession entryinto                   
      Agreement                                                                                          
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------                            
 (1)  (2)                                  (3)        (4)                    (5)                         
      MULTILATERAL                                                                                       
      Commonwealth Agricultural Bureau                                                                   
      International                                                                                      
 1.   Agreement on Commonwealth                                                                          
      Agricultural Bureau                                                                                
      International                        Apr 22,    22-7-1988              22-7-1988                   
                                           1988                                                          
      Customs Cooperation Council                                                                        
 2.   International Convention on Mutual                                                                 
      Adminis-                                                                                           
      trative Assistance for the                                                                         
      Prevention, Investigation                                                                          
      and Repression of Customs                                                                          
      offences(Nairobi, 9-6-1977)          20-6-1988  20-9-1988                                          
 3.   Customs Convention concerning                                                                      
      Facilities for the                                                                                 
      Importation of Goods for display or                                                                
      use at Exhi-                                                                                       
      bitions, Fairs, Meetings or similar  20-6-1988  20-9-1988                                          
      Events                                                                                             
      European Economic Community                                                                        
 4.   Financing Agreement between the                                                                    
      Republic of India                                                                                  
      and the European Economic Community                                                                
      Coopera-                                                                                           
      tive Rural storage, Bihar (Agreement 11-3-1988  11-3-1988                                          
      ALA/86-07)                                                                                         
 5.   Financing Agreement between the                                                                    
      Republic of India                                                                                  
      and the European Economic                                                                          
      community-Coconut                                                                                  
      Development, Kerala (Agreement       25-3-1988  25-3-1988                                          
      ALA/87-9)                                                                                          
 6.   Financing Agreement between the                                                                    
      Republic of India                                                                                  
      and the European Economic                                                                          
      Community-Sheep                                                                                    
      Development, Tamil Nadu (Agreement   11-4-1988  11-4-1988                                          
      ALA/87-04)                                                                                         
      European Space Agency                                                                              
 7.   Cooperative Agreement between the                                                                  
      President of                                                                                       
      India represented by the Indian                                                                    
      Space Research                                                                                     
      Organization and the European Space  14-4-1988  14-4-1988                                          
      Agency                                                                                             
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                         
      *This list is not exhaustive.                                                                      
                                                                       PG113                             
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                         
 (1)  (2)                                  (3)        (4)                    (5)                         
      Food and Agriculture Organization                                                                  
 8.   Memorandum of Responsibilities to be                                                               
      Assumed by                                                                                         
      the Government of the Republic of                                                                  
      India and by                                                                                       
      the Food and Agriculture                                                                           
      Organization of the United                                                                         
      Nations for the Twenty-fourth                                                                      
      Session of the Inter-                                                                              
      governmental Group on Jute, Kenaf                                                                  
      and Allied                                                                                         
      Fibres                               1-8-1988   1-8-1988                                           
      International Atomic Energy Agency                                                                 
 9.   Convention on Early Notification of                                                                
      a Nuclear                                                                                          
      Accident                             29-9-1986  28-1-1988              28-1-1988                   
 10.  Convention on Assistance in the case                                                               
      of a Nuclear                                                                                       
      Accident or Radiological Emergency   29-9-1986  28-1-1988              28-1-1988                   
      International Sugar Agreement                                                                      
 11.  International Sugar Agreement, 1987  24-3-1988  24-3-1988                                          
      South Asian Association on Regional                                                                
      Cooperation                                                                                        
 12.  SAARC Regional Convention on                                                                       
      Suppression of                                                                                     
      Terrorism (Kathmandu, 4-11-1987)     4-11-1987  22-8-1988              22-8-1988                   
      United Nations                                                                                     
 13.  Agreement between the Government of                                                                
      India and                                                                                          
      the United Nations regarding                                                                       
      Arrangements for the                                                                               
      Eleventh Session of the Commission                                                                 
      on Human                                                                                           
      Settlement of the United Nations     5-4-1988   5-4-1988                                           
 14.  Agreement between the Government of                                                                
      India and                                                                                          
      the United Nations Department of                                                                   
      Technical Co-                                                                                      
      operation for Development (UNDTCD)                                                                 
      regarding                                                                                          
      the National Highway Project :                                                                     
      Training of Profes-                                                                                
      sionals for Central and State                                                                      
      Highway Organizations                                                                              
      (No. IND/86/XOI)                     17-5-1988  17-5-1988                                          
      United Nations Development Programme                                                               
 15.  Agreement between India and the                                                                    
      United Nations                                                                                     
      Development Programme regarding                                                                    
      Project No.                                                                                        
      IND/87/Q12/A/01/37-Sewing machine                                                                  
      develop-                                                                                           
      ment Centre, Ludhiana, Phase II      11-5-1988  11-5-1988                                          
 16.  Agreement between India and the                                                                    
      United Nations                                                                                     
      Development Programme regarding                                                                    
      Project No.                                                                                        
      IND/88/007/A/01/99-Instrumentation                                                                 
      for Micro-                                                                                         
      electronics                          31-5-1988  31-5-1988                                          
                                                                                 PG114                   
 (1)  (2)                                          (3)         (4)         (5)                           
 17.  Agreement between India and the United                                                             
      Nations                                                                                            
      Development Programme regarding Project No.                                                        
      IND/87/011/C/01/99-International Management                                                        
      Education                                    14-6-1988   14-6-1988                                 
 18.  Agreement between India and the United                                                             
      Nations                                                                                            
      Development Programme regarding Project No.                                                        
      IND/88/003/A/01/99-Development of Electric                                                         
      Transportation Technology                    20-7-1988   20-7-1988                                 
 19.  Agreement between India and the United                                                             
      Nations                                                                                            
      Development Programme regarding Project No.                                                        
      IND/88/008/A/01/12-Assistance to Wildlife                                                          
      Insti-                                                                                             
      tute of India, Phase II                      21-7-1988   21-7-1988                                 
 20.  Agreement between India and the United                                                             
      Nations                                                                                            
      Development Programme regarding Project No.                                                        
      IND/88/012/A/01/88-Development of Improved                                                         
      Corrosion Evaluation and Project Techniques                                                        
      in                                                                                                 
      Project and Development India Ltd.           19-8-1988   19-8-1988                                 
 21.  Agreement between India and the United                                                             
      Nations                                                                                            
      Development Programme regarding Project No.                                                        
      IND/88/015-Jawaharlal Nehru Aluminium Re-                                                          
      search, Development and Design Centre        7-12-1988   7-12-1988                                 
 22.  Agreement between India and the United                                                             
      Nations                                                                                            
      Development Programme regarding Project No.                                                        
      IND/88/010/01/37-Support to the Ceramic                                                            
      Tech-                                                                                              
      nological Institute                          7-12-1988   7-12-1988                                 
      BILATERAL                                                                                          
      Afghanistan                                                                                        
 23.  Protocol on Cooperation in the Field of                                                            
      Television                                                                                         
      between Doordarshan India, Ministry of                                                             
      Informa-                                                                                           
      tion and Broadcasting, Government of the                                                           
      Republic                                                                                           
      of India and the State Committee for Radio,                                                        
      Tele-                                                                                              
      vision and Cinematography of the Republic of                                                       
      Afghanistan                                  22-6-1988   22-6-1988                                 
      Argentina                                                                                          
 24.  Agreement between the Government of the                                                            
      Republic                                                                                           
      of India and the Government of the Republic                                                        
      of                                                                                                 
      Argentina on Scientific and                                                                        
      Technical Cooperation                        24-1-1985   7-1-1988    7-1-1988                      
 25.  Agreement on Economic Cooperation between                                                          
      the                                                                                                
      Government of the Republic of India and the                                                        
      Government of the                                                                                  
      Republic of Argentina                        24-1-1985   6-5-198     6-5-1988                      
                                                                                                         
 (1)  (2)                                          (3)         (4)         (5)                           
      Belgium                                                                                            
 26.  Supplementary Protocol Modifying the                                                               
      Agreement                                                                                          
      between the Government of India and the                                                            
      Govern-                                                                                            
      ment of Belgium for the Avoidance of Double                                                        
      Taxa-                                                                                              
      tion and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion                                                          
      with                                                                                               
      respect to Taxes on Income and the Protocol                                                        
      signed                                                                                             
      at Brussels on 7 February 1974               20-10-1984  23-1-1988                                 
      Bulgaria                                                                                           
 27.  Protocol of the Ninth Session of the                                                               
      Indo-Bulgarian                                                                                     
      Joint Commission for Economic, Scientific                                                          
      and                                                                                                
      Technical Cooperation                        18-11-1988  18-11-1988                                
      Burkina Faso                                                                                       
 28.  Cultural Cooperation Agreement between the                                                         
      Government of the Republic of India and the                                                        
      Republic of Burkina Faso                     12-12-1983  28-11-1988  28-11-1988                    
      China, People's Republic of                                                                        
 29.  Cultural Agreement between the Government of                                                       
      the Republic of India and the Government of                                                        
      the                                                                                                
      People's Republic of China                   28-5-1988   21-11-1988                                
      Czechoslovakia                                                                                     
 30.  Agreement between the Government of the                                                            
      Republic                                                                                           
      of India and the Government of the                                                                 
      Czechoslovak                                                                                       
      Socialist Republic on Cooperation in the                                                           
      Field of                                                                                           
      Health and Medical Sciences                  5-1-1988    5-1-1988                                  
 31.  Protocol on Mutual Cooperation in the Field                                                        
      of                                                                                                 
      Sports between Department of Sport and Youth                                                       
      Affairs, Ministry of Human Resource                                                                
      Development,                                                                                       
      Government of India and the Czechoslovak                                                           
      Asso-                                                                                              
      ciation of Physical Culture and Sports for                                                         
      the years                                                                                          
      1989-1994                                    20-5-1988   20-5-1988                                 
      Germany, Federal Republic of                                                                       
 32.  Agreement between the Government of India                                                          
      and                                                                                                
      the Government of the Federal Republic of                                                          
      Germany                                                                                            
      concerning Financial Cooperation             21-3-1988   21-3-1988                                 
      Japan                                                                                              
 33.  Exchange of Notes between India and Japan                                                          
      regar-                                                                                             
      ding Grant Assistance of 600 Million Yen for                                                       
      incre-                                                                                             
      asing Food Production                        21-4-1988   21-4-1988                                 
                                                                                                         
 (1)  (2)                                           (3)         (4)         (5)                          
 34.  Exchange of Notes between India and Japan                                                          
      regard-                                                                                            
      ing Grant Assistance of 911 Million Yen for                                                        
      the                                                                                                
      Fisheries Resources Survey Project            21-4-1988   21-4-1988                                
 35.  Exchange of Notes between India and Japan                                                          
      regard-                                                                                            
      ing Grant Assistance of 371 Million Yen for                                                        
      imp-                                                                                               
      rovement of Training and Testing Equipment of                                                      
      the                                                                                                
      Farm Machinery Institutes                     21-4-1988   21-4-1988                                
 36.  Exchange of Notes between India and Japan                                                          
      regard-                                                                                            
      ing Grant Assistance of 508 Million Yen for                                                        
      imp-                                                                                               
      rovement of Medical Equipment of Regional                                                          
      Cancer                                                                                             
      Centres                                       21-4-1988   21-4-1988                                
 37.  Exchange of Notes between India and Japan                                                          
      regard-                                                                                            
      ing Debt Relief Grant Assistance of 1254                                                           
      Million                                                                                            
      Yen Nepal                                     18-2-1988   18-2-1988                                
 38.  Exchange of Letters Amending the Agreement                                                         
      bet-                                                                                               
      ween the Government of India and His                                                               
      Majesty's                                                                                          
      Government of Nepal for the establishment of                                                       
      an                                                                                                 
      Industrial Estate at Rajbiraj in                                                                   
      Nepal (18-1-1987)Peru                         16-9-1988   16-9-1988                                
 39.  Cultural Agreement between the Government of                                                       
      the Republic of India and the Government of                                                        
      the                                                                                                
      Republic of Peru                              25-1-1987   4-4-1988    4-4-1988                     
      Seychelles                                                                                         
 40.  Cultural Cooperation Agreement between the                                                         
      Government of the Republic of India and the                                                        
      Government of the Republic                                                                         
      of Seychelles                                 22-12-1987  21-6-1988   21-6-1988                    
      Union of Soviet Socialist Republics                                                                
 41.  Protocol of the Seventh Session of the                                                             
      Working                                                                                            
      Group on Cooperation in Coal Industry within                                                       
      the                                                                                                
      Framework of the Inter-governmental                                                                
      Indo-Soviet                                                                                        
      Commission on Economic, Scientific and                                                             
      Technical                                                                                          
      Cooperation                                   18-3-1988   18-3-1988                                
 42.  Agreement between the Government of the                                                            
      Republic                                                                                           
      of India and the Government of the Union of                                                        
      Soviet                                                                                             
      Socialist Republics on Long Term Cooperation                                                       
      in                                                                                                 
      the Exploration and Use of Outer Space for                                                         
      Peaceful                                                                                           
      purposes                                      20-10-1988  20-10-1988                               
 43.  Agreement between India and the Union of                                                           
      Soviet                                                                                             
      Socialist Republics regarding Launch Service                                                       
      for                                                                                                
      Indian Remote Sensing Satellite                                                                    
      IRS-IB                                        2-11-1988   2-11-1988                                
 (1)  (2)                                                 (3)         (4)         (5)                    
 44.  Agreement between the Government of the Republic                                                   
      of India and the Government of the Union of Soviet                                                 
      Socialist Republics on Economic and Technical                                                      
      Cooperation in the setting up of Vindhyachal                                                       
      Thermal                                                                                            
      Power Station Stage II in the                                                                      
      territory of India                                  20-11-1988  20-11-1988                         
      United Kingdom                                                                                     
 45.  Exchange of Notes between India and the United                                                     
      Kingdom regarding Hyderabad Habitat Improve-                                                       
      ment Project, Phase II A:                                                                          
      Local Costs Grant 1988                              19-1-1988   19-1-1988                          
 46.  Exchange of Notes between India and the United                                                     
      Kingdom regarding Vishakhapatnam Habitat Imp-                                                      
      rovement Project : Local Costs Grant 1988           18-3-1988   18-3-1988                          
      United States of America                                                                           
 47.  Extension of the Science and Technology Initiative                                                 
      between India and the                                                                              
      United States of America                            5-10-1988   5-10-1988                          
 Appendix-III Major international Conferences/Meetings/Seminars                                          
                                                                                                         
 APPENDIX III                                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 Major international Conferences/Meetings/Seminars etc. organised by Inter-                              
 governmental Organizations at which Government of India was represented in 1988-89                      
 Sl.No  Title of Conferences etc.                            Venue      Date                             
 (1)    (2)                                                  (3)        (4)                              
 1.     2nd Tripartite ILO regional round table                                                          
        on International Labour Migration Arabian                                                        
        and Asian Countries                                  Amman      4 to Apr 07,                     
                                                                        1988                             
 2.     ILO/ARPLA/CLI Inter-country seminar                                                              
        on Labour Inspection in Engineering Indus-                                                       
        try at Central Labour Institute                      Bombay     4 to 20 April                    
                                                                        1988                             
 3.     Session of WMO Commission for Agri-                                                              
        cultural Meteorology Working Group on                                                            
        Monitoring, Assessment Combat of Drought                                                         
        and Desertification                                  Florence   5 to 9 April                     
                                                                        1988                             
 4.     IAEA Technical Committee Workshop of                                                             
        Incident Reporting System-Information                                                            
        Users from Utilities                                 Vienna     6 to 8 April                     
                                                                        1988                             
 5.     IAEA International Conference on Radia-                                                          
        tion Protection in Nuclear Energy/7th                                                            
        international Congress of the IRP                    Sydney     9 to 22 April                    
                                                                        1988                             
 6.     13th Session of FAO Committee on World                                                           
        Food Security                                        Rome       13 to 19 April                   
                                                                        1988                             
 7.     12th Session of the Coal Mines Committee of ILO      Geneva     13 to 21 April                   
                                                                        1988                             
 8.     Seminar on Working Conditions of Office-                                                         
        workers in Selected countries .                      Bangkok    18 to 22 April                   
                                                                        1988                             
 9.     UNICEF Executive Board Session                       New York   18 to 29 April                   
                                                                        1988                             
 10.    Annual Session of the Executive Council                                                          
        of the Universal Postal Union                        Berne      18 April to 4                    
                                                                        May 1988                         
 11.    National Workshop on Female Headed                                                               
        Households and the Development of                                                                
        Guidelines for their participation in                                                            
        Development                                          New Delhi  22 to 26 April                   
                                                                        1988                             
 12.    Meeting of Commonwealth Health                                                                   
        Minisetrs pre-WHA Meeting                            Geneva     1 May 1988                       
                                                                         PG118                           
                                                                         PG119                           
 (1)  (2)                                             (3)              (4)                               
 13.  Forty-first Session of World Health                                                                
      Assembly                                        Geneva           2 to 13 May                       
                                                                       1988                              
 14.  4th Special Antarctic Treaty Consultative                                                          
      Meeting on Antarctic Minerals-Informal                                                             
      Consultations and                                                                                  
      final Session                                   Wellington       2 May to 2 June                   
                                                                       1988                              
 15.  First Regular Session of Economic and                                                              
      Social Council                                  New York         3 to 27 May                       
                                                                       1988                              
 16.  Meeting of the Committee on Conditions of                                                          
      Work in the Fishing Industry of ILO             Geneva           4 to 13 May                       
                                                                       1988                              
 17.  International Symposium on the Use of                                                              
      Computer Technology in Employment                                                                  
      services                                        Stockholm        10 to 18 May                      
                                                                       1988                              
 18.  WHO Executive Board Eighty-second                                                                  
      Session                                         Geneva           16 to 17 May                      
                                                                       1988                              
 19.  WMO Technical Conference on Instruments                                                            
      and Methods of Observation                      Leip zing (GDR)  16 to 20 May                      
                                                                       1988                              
 20.  IAEA Research Coordination Meeting on                                                              
      Optimising Reactor Pressure Vessel Sur-                                                            
      veillance Programmes and their Analysis         Vienna           17 and 18 May                     
                                                                       1988                              
 21.  Ninth Meeting of Commonwealth Youth                                                                
      Affairs Council                                 Samoa            19 to 23 May                      
                                                                       1988                              
 22. 240th Session of the Governing Body of                                                              
     ILO                                         Geneva              19 to 28 May 1988                   
 23. 46th Session of the Board of International                                                          
     Centre for Advanced Technical and                                                                   
     Vocational Training                         Turin               20 May 1988                         
 24. 14th Ministerial Session of the World Food                                                          
     Council                                     Nicosia             23 to 26 May 1988                   
 25. First Session of WMO Commission for                                                                 
     Instruments & Method of Observation                                                                 
     Advisory Working Group                      Potsdam (GDR)       24 to 27 May 1988                   
 26. Third Special Session of the UNGA devoted                                                           
     to Disarmament (SSOD-III)                   New York            31 May to 25 June                   
                                                                     1988                                
 27. 75th Session of the International Labour                                                            
     Conference                                  Geneva              1 to 22 June 1988                   
 28. 13th IABSB Congress                         Helsinki (Finland)  6 to 12 June 1988                   
 29. 40th Session of WMO Executive Council       Geneva              6 to 16 June 1988                   
 30. Thirty-fifth Session of UNDP Governing                                                              
     Council                                     Geneva              6 June to 1 July                    
                                                                     1988                                
                                                                                                         
 (1)  (2)                                           (3)           (4)                                    
 31.  60th Session of IMO Council                   London        20 to 24 June 1988                     
 32.  First Meeting of the Working Party to                                                              
      study International Bureau, Suggestion on                                                          
      the operation of the Universal Postal Union   Berne         26 to 28 June 1988                     
 33.  First Session of the Inter-governmental                                                            
      Oceanographic Commission (IOC) Regional                                                            
      Committee for the Central Indian Ocean        Islamabad     26 June to 9 July                      
                                                                  1988                                   
 34.  World Conference on the Changing                                                                   
      Atmosphere Implication to Global                                                                   
      Security                                      Toronto       27 to 30 June 1988                     
 35.  Second WMO Regional Workshop on                                                                    
      Asian Winter Monsoon                          Kuala Lumpur  27 June to 1 July                      
                                                                  1988                                   
 36.  Regional Workshop on Occupational                                                                  
      Safety and Health for Asia and the Pacific    Kuala Lumpur  4 to 8 July 1988                       
 37.  IAEA International Conference on Solvent                                                           
      Extraction                                    Moscow        18 to 24 July 1988                     
 38.  Seminar on Executive Development for                                                               
      Senior Labour Administrators organised                                                             
      by ARPLA/ILO and National Labour                                                                   
      Law Association of India                      New Delhi     27 to 30 July 1988                     
 39.  Second Meeting of the Commonwealth                                                                 
      Committee of Foreign Ministers on                                                                  
      Southern Africa                               Toronto       2 to 3 August 1988                     
 40.  NAM Group of Meetings in the Sphere on                                                             
      Standardization, Measurement and Quality                                                           
      Control                                       DPR Korea     2 to 8 August 1988                     
 41.  8th Conference of Commonwealth Postal                                                              
      Administrations                               Malawi        6 to 19 August 1988                    
 42.  IAEA/WHO Seminar on Training in                                                                    
      Nuclear Medicine in Developing Countries      Vienna        8 to 12 August 1988                    
 43.  IAEA/WHO International Symposium on                                                                
      Applications of Dynamic Functional                                                                 
      Studies in Nuclear Medicine in Developing                                                          
      countries                                     Vienna        15 to 19 August 1988                   
 44.  WMO/FAO/BCKV/IMD Workshop on                                                                       
      Agrometeorological Information for                                                                 
      planning and operation in Agriculture         Calcutta      22 to 26 August 1988                   
 45.  World Administrative Radio Conference                                                              
      on Space Services Planning (WARC-ORB-                                                              
      88-Session-II)                                Geneva        29 August to 5                         
                                                                  October 1988                           
                                                                    PG121>                               
 (1)  (2)                                    (3)                (4)                                      
 46.  World Administrative Radio Conference                                                              
      on the use of the geostationary                                                                    
      satellite                                                                                          
      orbit and on the planning of space                                                                 
      services                                                                                           
      utilizing it (WARC-ORB-88)             Geneva             29 August to 5                           
                                                                October 1988                             
 47.  NAM Ministerial Meeting                Nicosia            September 1988                           
 48.  Workshop on Women Workers in Asia                                                                  
      Region                                 New Delhi          2 to 3 September 1988                    
 49.  9th Session of WMO Regional Associa-                                                               
      tion-II (Asia)                         Beijing            5 to 16 September                        
                                                                1988                                     
 50.  ILO/ARPLA/Turin Centre "Asian Regional                                                             
      Seminar on the use of Economic Data in                                                             
      Labour Administration Function         Pattaya            5 to 16 September                        
                                                                1988                                     
 51.  Annual Session of Asian Pacific Union  Male               10 to 21 September                       
                                                                1988                                     
 52.  Asian Tripartite Seminar on the                                                                    
      Improve-                                                                                           
      ment of Working conditions and Produc-                                                             
      tivity in Small and Medium Enterprises Bangkok            12 to 16 September                       
                                                                1988                                     
 53.  IAEA Symposium on Uranium and                                                                      
      Electricity and World Materials        Saskatoon, Canada, 13 September to 12                       
      Congress 1988                          Chicago            October 1988                             
 54.  Inter-relationship of advanced and new                                                             
      technologies in the area of                                                                        
      biotechnology                                                                                      
      and law of intellectual property       Geneva             15 to 17 September                       
                                                                1988                                     
 55.  UN International Seminar on                                                                        
      Development                                                                                        
      and applications of Communication      Beijing            19 to 23 September                       
      systems                                                   1988                                     
 56.  Commonwealth Finance Ministers and                                                                 
      Senior Finance Officials Meeting       Cyprus             20 to 22 September                       
                                                                1988                                     
 57.  Session of WWMO Commission for Agri-                                                               
      cultural Meteorology-Working Group on                                                              
      practical use of Agrometeorological                                                                
      Data                                                                                               
      and Information in Agriculture         Geneva             26 to 30 September                       
                                                                1988                                     
 58.  International Seminar on Cable stayed                                                              
      Bridges                                Bangalore          3 to 5 October 1988                      
 59.  IAEA/UNDP/RCA Regional Workshop                                                                    
      on Image Processing Techniques for NDT Tokyo              3 to 7 October 1988                      
 60.  IAEA 1st Research Co-ordination                                                                    
      Meeting                                                                                            
      on the use of nuclear related                                                                      
      techniques in                                                                                      
      the study of environmental pollution                                                               
      associated with solid wastes           Ljubljana          3 to 7 October1988                       
      (Yugoslavia)                                                                                       
                                                                 PG122                                   
 (1)  (2)                                                 (3)        (4)                                 
 61.  Tenth Session of the Chemical Industries                                                           
      Committee of IUO                                    Geneva     5 to 13 October                     
                                                                     1988                                
 62.  RRSP-ESCAP-UNDP/RAS/86/141-Work-                                                                   
      ing Group Meeting on Education                                                                     
      and Training in Remote Sensing for the                                                             
      ESCAP Region                                        Wuhan      10 to 13 October                    
                                                                     1988                                
 63.  IAEA/FAO Research Coordination Meet-                                                               
      ing on the use of Nuclear and Isotopic                                                             
      techniques to improve crop production on                                                           
      salt affected soils                                 Vienna     10 to 14 October                    
                                                                     1988                                
 64.  Annual Session of the Consultative Council                                                         
      for Postal Studies (CCPS)                           Berne      16 to 29 October                    
                                                                     1988                                
 65.  FAO Workshop on Biotechnology Network                                                              
      for Animal Production and Health in Asia            Bangkok    17 to 21 October                    
                                                                     1988                                
 66.  Second Session of WMO Commission for                                                               
      instruments & Methods of Observation                                                               
      Working Group on Upper Air Measure-                                                                
      ments                                               China      24 to 28 October                    
                                                                     1988                                
 67.  ESCAP-Inter-governmental Meeting of                                                                
      Highway Experts                                     Bangalore  31 October to 4                     
                                                                     November 1988                       
 68.  International Conference on Maritime                                                               
      safety                                              London     31 October to 11                    
                                                                     November 1988                       
 69.  241st Session of the Governing Body of                                                             
      ILO                                                 Geneva     3 to 8 November                     
                                                                     1988                                
 70.  IAEA International Symposium on Re-                                                                
      gulatory practices and safety standards for                                                        
      nuclear power plants                                Munich     6 to 11 November                    
                                                                     1988                                
 71.  47th Session of the Board of International                                                         
      Centre for Advanced Technical and Voca-                                                            
      tional Training                                     Geneva     7 November 1988                     
 72.  IX Plenary Assembly of the Inter-orbital                                                           
      Telegraph and Telephone Consultative                                                               
      Committee (CCITT)                                   Melbourne  14 to 25 November                   
                                                                     1988                                
 73.  61st Session of IMO Council                         London     21 to 25 November                   
                                                                     1988                                
 74.  Meeting of ESCAP Committee on Popula-                                                              
      tion and Social Development                         Bangkok    21 to 25 November                   
                                                                     1988                                
 75.  Third Inter-regional High level Seminar                                                            
      on the Theory and Practice for Modern                                                              
      Labour Administration for Development               Nicosia                                        
      21 November to 2 December 1988                                                                     
                                                                                                         
 (1)  (2)                                     (3)                    (4)                                 
 76.  Regional Training Course on Labour                                                                 
      Inspection skills in industries using/                                                             
      manufacturing chemicals                 Philippines/Japan      21 November to 3                    
                                                                     December 1988                       
 77.  The Commonwealth Senior                                                                            
      Official Meeting                        Seychelles             22 to 25 November                   
                                                                     1988                                
 78.  Tripartite Workshop on Formulation of                                                              
      Policies and Programmes and Supervision                                                            
      of the Construction Industry            Kuala Lumpur           22 to 25 November                   
                                                                     1988                                
 79.  National Tripartite Seminar on Linking                                                             
      Wages and Productivity                  New Delhi              22 to 26 November                   
                                                                     1988                                
 80.  Fifth Asian Pacific Regional Seminar on                                                            
      National and International Labour                                                                  
      standards                               Yogyakarta(Indonesia)  22 November to 1                    
                                                                     December 1988                       
 81.  4th Session of the Joint Committee on                                                              
      the                                                                                                
      Public Service of ILO                   Geneva                 23 November to 1                    
                                                                     December 1988                       
 82.  International Conference on "Environ-                                                              
      mental Impact Analysis" for Developing                                                             
      countries                               New Delhi              28 November to 2                    
                                                                     December 1988                       
 83.  World Administrative Telegraph and                                                                 
      Tele-                                                                                              
      phone Conference (WATTC-88)             Melbourne              28 November to 9                    
                                                                     December 1988                       
 84.  43rd Session of UN General Assembly     New York                                                   
      September to December 1988                                                                         
 85.  Asian Sub-regional Tripartite Seminar                                                              
      on                                                                                                 
      the protection of Home workers          Manila                 5 to 9 December                     
                                                                     1988                                
 86.  Workshop on "Women in Export            Geneva                 5 to 9 December                     
      Development                                                    1988                                
 87.  12th Session of the Metal Trades        Geneva                 7 to 15 December                    
      Committee of ILO                                               1988                                
 88.  UN General Assembly debate on the                                                                  
      question of Palestine due to shifting                                                              
      of                                                                                                 
      venue from New York to Geneva           Geneva                 12 to 16 December                   
                                                                     1988                                
 89.  RAS/85/009 Asian Regional Programme on                                                             
      International Labour Migration Steering                                                            
      Committee meeting and Terminal Review                                                              
      of the project                          Bangkok                14 to 16 December                   
                                                                     1988                                
 90.  41st Session of the International       Geneva                 9 to 17 January                     
      Conference on Education                                        1989                                
                                                                                                         
 (1)  (2)                                        (3)              (4)                                    
 91.  IAEA/ICTP Workshop on Theoretical                                                                  
      Fluid Mechanics and Applications           Trieste (Italy)  9 to 27 January 1989                   
 92.  3rd Meeting of the Working Party to study                                                          
      suggestions on the working of the UPU      Berne            10 to 13 January                       
                                                                  1989                                   
 93.  Ministerial Committee on Reforms of NAM    Cyprus           12 to 16 January                       
                                                                  1989                                   
 94.  IAEA Workshop on proper use of Irradica-                                                           
      tion to reduce post-harvest food losses                                                            
      for countries in Asia and the Pacific      BARC             6 to 24 February                       
                                                                  1989                                   
 95.  IAEA RCA Workshop on Neutron Activa-                                                               
      tion Analysis for Mineral Resources                                                                
      Prospecting and Materials Characterisation BARC             6 to 24 February                       
                                                                  1989                                   
 Appendix-IV Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars                                           
                                                                                                         
 APPENDIX IV                                                                                             
                                                                                                         
 Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars etc. organised by Non-go vernmental                   
 Organisations in which Indian experts participated in their personal capacity with                      
 Government assistance in 1988-89                                                                        
 Sl.No.  Title of Conferences etc.             Venue               Date                                  
 (1)     (2)                                   (3)                 (4)                                   
 1.      Meeting of ISO/TC 126 "Tobacco and                                                              
         tobacco products"                     Beijing             25 to Apr 30, 1988                    
 2.      Meeting of ISO Council Committee on                                                             
         Confirmity Assessment (CASCO) & ISO                                                             
         Committee on Consumer Policy                                                                    
         COPOLCO)                              Geneva              2 to 6 May 1988                       
 3.      International Conference on Nuclear                                                             
         Test                                                                                            
         Ban Verification                      Linkoplay (Sweden)  16 to 19 May 1988                     
 4.      2nd International Conference on                                                                 
         Low-level                                                                                       
         measurements of actinides and                                                                   
         Long-lived                                                                                      
         radionuclides in Biological and                                                                 
         Environ-                                                                                        
         mental Samples                        Akita (Japan)       16 to 20 May 1988                     
 5.      International Workshop on Statistical                                                           
         Data Processing and Data Base         Geneva              30 May to 3 June                      
                                                                   1988                                  
 6.      Meeting of ISO/TC28 "Petroleum                                                                  
         products                                                                                        
         and Lubricants"                       Tokyo               6 to 9 June 1988                      
 7.      37th Session of the United Nations                                                              
         Scientific Committee on the effect of                                                           
         Atomic Radiation                      Vienna              6 to 17 June 1988                     
 8.      3rd Meeting of National Coordinators                                                            
         for                                                                                             
         Radiation Processing and review                                                                 
         Tripartite                                                                                      
         meeting of National Counterparts.     Jakarta             8 to 17 June 1988                     
 9.      International Conference on High Tem-                                                           
         perature Superconductivity            Singapore           27 June to 3 July                     
                                                                   1988                                  
 10.     International Conference on                                                                     
         Atomic Physics                        Paris               29 June to 1 August                   
                                                                   1988                                  
 11.     14th International Symposium on the                                                             
         effects of Radiation on Materials     USA                 30 June to 27 July                    
                                                                   1988                                  
 12.     IAU General Assembly                  Baltimore           2 to 11 August 1988                   
 13.     World Congress on Medical Physics and                                                           
         Bioengineering                        Texas               5 to 27 August 1988                   
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                         
 (1)     (2)                                   (3)                 (4)                                   
 14.     International Position Workshop and                                                             
         8th                                                                                             
         International Conference on positron                                                            
         annihilatio                           FRG & Belgium       25 August to 3                        
                                                                   September 1988                        
 15.     5th International Symposium on Hyper-                                                           
         thermic oncology                      Kyoto (Japan)       29 August to 3                        
                                                                   September 1988                        
 16.     'EMCON-88', International Seminar on                                                            
         Energy Conservation                   Hyderabad           7 to 9 September                      
                                                                   1988                                  
 17.     Meeting of GATT Committee on                                                                    
         Technical                                                                                       
         Barriers to Trade                     Geneva              13 to 16 September                    
                                                                   1988                                  
 18.     Meetings of ISO Council, ISO DEVCO,                                                             
         ISO RLO & ISO General Assembly        Prague              13 to 22 September                    
                                                                   1988                                  
 19.     Environtech '88-3rd International                                                               
         Confe-                                                                                          
         rence on Industrial Pollution Control                                                           
         and                                                                                             
         Safety                                Bombay              21 to 26 September                    
                                                                   1988                                  
 20.     IAEA Sponsored Workshop of a Computer                                                           
         programme for real time dose                                                                    
         assessment                                                                                      
         model                                 California          3 to 7 October 1988                   
 21.     International Conference on the role                                                            
         of                                                                                              
         Women in Scientific and Technological                                                           
         Development of the Third World        Italy (Trieste)     3 to 14 October                       
                                                                   1988                                  
 22.     First Conference of the International                                                           
         Association for Official Statistics   Rome                4 to 7 October 1988                   
 23.     39th International Astronautical                                                                
         Federa-                                                                                         
         tion Congress                         Bangalore           8 to 15 October                       
                                                                   1988                                  
 24.     Meetings of ISO/TC 34 `Agricultural                                                             
         Food                                                                                            
         Products'                             China               24 to 26 October                      
                                                                   1988                                  
 25.     Meeting of ISO/TC 102 `Iron Ores'     Brazil              24 to 28 October                      
                                                                   1988                                  
 26.     Meeting of IES/TC 12 "Radiocommuni-                                                             
         cations"                              Rome                7 to 11 November                      
                                                                   1988                                  
 27.     Third International Rangeland         New Delhi           7 to 11 November                      
         Congress                                                  1988                                  
 28.     Conference Towards a Nuclear Weapon                                                             
         Free and Non-Violent World            New Delhi           14 to 16 November                     
                                                                   1988                                  
 29.     COMMEX 2000 "Communication Excellence                                                           
         for High Quality of Life"             New Delhi           24 and 25 November                    
                                                                   1988                                  
 30.     Energy Conservation in Industry       New Delhi           24 and 25 November                    
                                                                   1988                                  
                                                                    PG127>                               
 (1)  (2)                                     (3)                    (4)                                 
 31.  8th Antarctic Expedition                Antarctica                                                 
      24 November 1988 to 30 April 1989                                                                  
 32.  ITMA's 3rd International Conference on                                                             
      Transformers                            New Delhi              25 and 26                           
                                                                     November 1988                       
 33.  Working Group Meeting of Statistical                                                               
      Experts                                 Bangkok 28 November to                                     
                                              1 December 1988                                            
 34.  ESCAP/SIAP Seminar on Improving                                                                    
      Timeleness and Quality of Statistics    Bangkok                12 to 16 December                   
                                                                     1988                                
 35.  Second World Buffalo Congress           New Delhi              12 to 17 December                   
                                                                     1988                                
 36.  International Conference on Residual                                                               
      Life                                                                                               
      of Power Plant Equipment-Prediction &                                                              
      Extension                               Hyderabad              23 to 25 January                    
                                                                     1989                                
 Appendix-V Miscellaneous Major International Conferences                                                
                                                                                                         
 APPENDIX V                                                                                              
                                                                                                         
 Miscellaneous Major International Conferences etc. in 1988-89 at which Gove rnment of                   
 India was represented or in which Indian experts participated with Government of                        
 India's assistance In their personal capacity                                                           
 Sl.No.  Title of Conferences etc.                Venue            Date                                  
 (1)     (2)                                      (3)              (4)                                   
 1.      21st Session of United Nations Com-                                                             
         mission on international Trade Law                                                              
         (UNICITRAL)                              New York         11 and Apr 12, 1988                   
 2.      Expert Group meeting on Harmonization                                                           
         of Economic classifications              New York         25 to 29 April 1988                   
 3.      Asia/Pacific Regional Workshop for Corn-                                                        
         monwealth jurisdiction on Mutual Assis-                                                         
         tance in Criminal matters                Sydney           16 t 20 May 1988                      
 4.      Workshop on Biological DNA Modification  Gloucester, USA  May 1988                              
 5.      Ministerial meeting of the NAM Coordi-                                                          
         nating Bureau                            Harare           26 to 30 May 1988                     
 6.      International Meeting on Nuclear Weapons Berlin           20 to 22 June 1988                    
         Free Zone                                                                                       
 7.      Expert Group Meeting on improving                                                               
         Government Information System & Com-                                                            
         puterisation                             Bangkok          21 to 24 June 1988                    
 8.      12th Session of Prepcom, International                                                          
         Centre for Genetic Engineering &         Vienna           5 to 8 July 1988                      
         Biotechnology                                                                                   
 9.      Meeting of the Commission of                                                                    
         International                                                                                   
         Union of Applied Chemistry and 8th                                                              
         international Biotechnology Symposium    Paris            13 to 23 July 1988                    
 10.     International Conference on Global                                                              
         Impacts                                                                                         
         of Applied Microbiology Biotechnology                                                           
         and International Conference on Applied                                                         
         Biology and Biotechnology                Hong Kong        1 to 5 August 1988                    
 11.     63rd Conference of International Law     Warsaw           21 to 27 August                       
         Association                                               1988                                  
                                                                                 PG128                   
                                                                                 PG129                   
 (1)     (2)                                      (3)              (4)                                   
 12.     Meeting of the General Assembly of the                                                          
         international Peace Bureau               Sydney           9 to 12 September                     
                                                                   1988                                  
 13.     International Fiscal Association's 42nd                                                         
         international Congress                   Amsterdam        11 to 16 September                    
                                                                   1988                                  
 14.     IAEA-XXXII General Conference and                                                               
         meetings of the Board of Governors,                                                             
         Special Advisory Committee, and discus-                                                         
         sions with UK AEA                        Vienna London    11 September to 1                     
                                                                   October 1988                          
 15.     5th Symposium on International terrorism Paris            13 to 15 September                    
                                                                   1988                                  
 16.     International Workshop on Advanced                                                              
         Technologies for increased agricultural                                                         
         production-actual situation, future                                                             
         pros-                                                                                           
         pects and concrete possibilities of                                                             
         applica-                                                                                        
         tion in developing countries             Geneva, Italy    25 to 27 September                    
                                                                   1988                                  
 17.     International Meeting on Oral Cancer     London           10 and 11 November                    
                                                                   1988                                  
 18.     General Assembly Session of ICPO,        Bangkok          17 to 23 November                     
         Interpol                                                  1988                                  
 19.     International Conference on Roads                                                               
         Road's problems by University of Roorkee New Delhi        12 to 15 December                     
                                                                   1988                                  
 20.     Transgenic Technology in Biology         USA              12 to 15 December                     
         Medicine and Agriculture                                  1988                                  
 21.     Conference of the States Party to the                                                           
         1925                                                                                            
         Geneva Protocol and all other interested                                                        
         States on Chemical Weapons use           Paris            7 to 11 January                       
                                                                   1989                                  
 Appendix-VI Statement showing the number of Passports/Miscellaneous services                            
                                                                                                         
 Jan 01, 1988                                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 APPENDIX VI                                                                                             
                                                                                                         
 Statement showing the number of Passports/Miscellaneous services applicati ons                          
 received and number of Passports issued/Miscellaneous services rendered during the                      
 period January t o December 1988                                                                        
 Sl.No. Station         No. of Passport      No.of      No.of          No. of                            
                        applications         Passports  applications   misc.                             
                        received             issued for services       services                          
                                             misc.      received       rendered                          
 (1)    (2)             (3)                  (4)        (5)            (6)                               
 1.     Ahmedabad       89,387               88,893     47,404         47,059                            
 2.     Bangalore       55,020               48,174     31,961         29,735                            
 3.     Bareilly        62,953               53,587     26,204         22,499                            
 4.     Bhopal          21,780               19,916     10,574         10,291                            
 5.     Bhubaneshwar    6235                 4908       2912           2764                              
 6.     Bombay          224,176              219,171    167,017        165,061                           
 7.     Calcutta        53,121               50,852     31,753         31,297                            
 8.     Chandigarh      77,961               67,226     45,563         43,026                            
 9.     Cochin          133,995              114,572    97,463         94,054                            
 10.    Delhi           100,553              92,546     62,263         51,863                            
 11.    Goa             12,256               12,127     10,528         10,233                            
 12.    Guwahati        4753                 3888       1402           1320                              
 13.    Hyderabad       119,941              88,307     51,585         49,993                            
 14.    Jaipur          49,247               39,842     29,555         28,225                            
 15.    Jalandhar       74,771               70,481     56,586         52,793                            
 16.    Kozhikode       108,560              80,036     59,844         58,053                            
 17.    Lucknow         53,899               43,765     13,911         13,709                            
 18.    Madras          92,657               84,125     55,069         54,923                            
 19.    Patna           12,768               11,504     8067           8046                              
 20.    Srinagar        6289                 6231       2311           2784                              
 21.    Tiruchirapalli  93,432               88,127     59,454 57,223                                    
        Total           14,53,754            12,88,278  871,426        826,951                           
                                                                                 PG130                   
 Appendix-VII Statement showing Revenue and Expenditure                                                  
                                                                                                         
 Jan 01, 1988                                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 APPENDIX VII                                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 Statement showing Revenue and Expenditure in respect of Passport offices in India                       
 during the period January to December 1988                                                              
 Sl.No.  Station         Revenue (in Rupees)  Expenditure (in Rupees)                                    
 (1)     (2)             (3)                  (4)                                                        
 1.      Ahmedabad       90,75,948            30,72,488                                                  
 2.      Bangalore       53,46,469            22,04,104                                                  
 3.      Bareilly        53,90,630            20,31,931                                                  
 4.      Bhopal          13,02,752            845,188                                                    
 5.      Bhubaneshwar    527,503              385,200                                                    
 6.      Bombay          2,16,88,629          72,59,447                                                  
 7.      Calcutta        51,05,076            19,89,728                                                  
 8.      Chandigarh      51,26,295            20,40,628                                                  
 9.      Cochin          1,12,95,661          31,29,346                                                  
 10.     Delhi           89,62,998            52,20,771                                                  
 11.     Goa             10,38,179            16,98,423                                                  
                                              (from Feb 17, 1988)                                        
                                              (from January 1988)                                        
 12.     Guwahati        223,842              198,887                                                    
 13.     Hyderabad       1,06,54,994          28,70,296                                                  
 14.     Jaipur          47,58,111            17,92,375                                                  
 15.     Jalandhar       74,41,491            24,08,162                                                  
 16.     Kozhikode       96,40,783            22,29,666                                                  
 17.     Lucknow         49,74,051            19,60,187                                                  
 18.     Madras          85,52,741            29,06,814                                                  
 19.     Patna           13,86,209            756,827                                                    
 20.     Srinagar        632,134              311,539                                                    
 21.     Tiruchirapalli  87,48,876            19,54,992                                                  
         Total           13,18,73,372         4,72,61,049                                                
                                                                                                         
 Appendix-VIII Cadre strength at Headquarters                                                            
                                                                                                         
 Jan 01, 1988                                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 APPENDIX VIII                                                                                           
                                                                                                         
 Cadre strength at Headquarters and 139 Missions/Posts abroad during 1988-89                             
 Sl.No. Cadre/Post                             Posts at      Posts at        Total                       
                                               Head-quarters Missions abroad No.Posts                    
 (1)    (2)                                    (3)           (4)             (5)                         
 IFS                                                                                                     
 1.     Grade I                                3             18              21                          
 2.     Grade II                               3             25              28                          
 3.     Grade III                              20            96              116                         
 4.     Grade IV                               17            66              83                          
 5.     Sr. Scale                              52            200             252                         
 6.     Jr. Scale                              5             28              33                          
 7.     Training Reserve (Prob) Jr. Scale      27            27                                          
 8.     Training Reserve for all Grades        10            10                                          
 9.     Leave Reserve                          19            19                                          
 10.    Deputation Reserve                     20            20                                          
        IFS (B)                                                                                          
 1.     Grade I                                62            63              125                         
 2.     Grade II/III                           167           163             320                         
 3.     Grade IV                               359           516             875                         
 4.     Grade V/VI                             451           197             648                         
 5.     Grade II of Cypher Sub-Cadre           81            119             200                         
 6.     Selection Grade of Steno Cadre         17            35              52                          
 7.     Grade I of Steno, Cadre                32            164             196                         
 8.     Grade II of Steno Cadre                204           238             442                         
 9.     Grade III of Steno Cadre               42            79              121                         
        Combined Research Cadre                22            6               28                          
        Interpreters' Cadre                    15            15              30                          
        Total                                  1634          2022            3656                        
                                                                                                         
 Appendix-IX Cadre strength of IFS                                                                       
                                                                                                         
 Jan 01, 1988                                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 APPENDIX IX                                                                                             
                                                                                                         
 Cadre strength of IFS during 1988-89                                                                    
 Sl.No.  Grades                                                           Total Posts                    
 1.      Grade I                                                          21                             
 2.      Grade II                                                         28                             
 3.      Grade III                                                        116                            
 4.      Grade IV                                                         83                             
 5.      Sr. Scale                                                        252                            
 6.      Jr. Scale                                                        33                             
 7.      Training Reserve (Prob) Jr. Sc.                                  27                             
 8.      Training Reserve for all grades                                  10                             
 9.      Leave Reserve                                                    19                             
 10.     Deputation Reserve                                               20                             
         Total                                                            609                            
                                                                                                         
 Appendix-X Foreign Language Chart                                                                       
                                                                                                         
 Jan 01, 1988                                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 APPENDIX X                                                                                              
                                                                                                         
 Foreign Language Chart                                                                                  
 Sl.No.  Compulsory Foreign Languages officers                                No. of                     
 1.      Arabic                                                               88                         
 2.      Bahasa Indonesia                                                     7                          
 3.      Burmese                                                              2                          
 4.      Chinese                                                              46                         
 5.      Dutch                                                                1                          
 6.      French                                                               81                         
 7.      German                                                               42                         
 8.      Gorkhali                                                             4                          
 9.      Hungarian                                                            1                          
 10.     Italian                                                              4                          
 11.     Japanese                                                             27                         
 12.     Kiswahili                                                            11                         
 13.     Malay                                                                2                          
 14.     Persian                                                              17                         
 15.     Polish                                                               1                          
 16.     Portuguese                                                           12                         
 17.     Russian                                                              68                         
 18.     Serbo-Croatian                                                       4                          
 19.     Sinhalese                                                            3                          
 20.     Spanish                                                              54                         
 21.     Swedish                                                              1                          
 22.     Thai                                                                 2                          
 23.     Tibetan                                                              3                          
 24.     Turkish                                                              1                          
 25.     Vietnamese                                                           3                          
         Total                                                                485                        
                                                                               PG134>                    
 Appendix-XI Revenue expenditure of the Ministry of External Affairs                                     
                                                                                                         
 Jan 01, 1988                                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 APPENDIX XI                                                                                             
                                                                                                         
 Revenue expenditure of the Ministry of External Affairs during the Fin ancial year                      
 1988-89                                                                                                 
   Revised Estimates 1988-89                                           (Rs. in lakhs)                    
   Headquarters                                                        3957.00                           
   Missions/Posts abroad 10,550.00                                                                       
   Supply Wing Washington/London                                       200.00                            
   Other items                                                                                           
   Contribution to UN 355.00                                                                             
   Commonwealth Secretariat 29.00                                                                        
   Commonwealth Foundation 19.00                                                                         
   SAARC Secretariat & Other International Institutions                136.00                            
   Central Passport Organization                                       950.00                            
   SCAAP Programmes                                                    121.00                            
   Special Diplomatic Expenditure                                      8422.00                           
   Grant-in-Aid to ICCR & Other Organizations                          841.00                            
   Other Miscellaneous Items                                           986.00                            
   Aid to other countries                                                                                
   Aid to Bangladesh                                                   81.00                             
   Aid to Bhutan                                                       7938.00                           
   Aid to Nepal                                                        1732.00                           
   Aid to other developing                                             2959.00                           
   countries (including Rs. 18.63                                                                        
   crores to SriLanka and Rs. 3.96 crores to Maldives)                                                   
   ITEC Programmes                                                     1888.00                           
   Aid under AFRICA Fund                                               1666.00                           
   Total Revenue Expenditure 1988-89                                   42,830.00                         
                                                                                                         
 Appendix-XII Expenditure on Indian Missions/Posts Abroad                                                
                                                                                                         
 an 01, 1988                                                                                             
                                                                                                         
 APPENDIX XII                                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 Expenditure on Indian Missions/Posts Abroad and Headquarters of the Mini stry of                        
 External Affairs in 1988-89 The estimated expenditure on the Headquarters                               
 organization of the Ministry during the current financial year 1988-89 is expected to                   
 be Rs. 3957.00 lakhs out of which Rs. 350 .00 lakhs will be on External Publicity,                      
 Rs. 304.00 lakhs on Travel Expenses, Rs. 919.00 lakhs on Sa laries and Wages of                         
 Establishment, Rs. 8.00 lakhs on Subsidy to Departmental Canteens, Rs. 730.0 0 lakhs                    
 on Rents and Maintenance and Rs. 1646.00 lakhs on other miscellaneous items. The                        
 total estimated expenditure on Indian Missions abroad excluding Supply Wing                             
 Washington and London is expected to be Rs. 10,550.00 lakhs. This amount comprises                      
 Rs. 41 00.00 lakhs on Salaries, Wages and allowances including Foreign Allowance. Rs.                   
 1270.00 lakhs o n Transfers, Home Leave Passages and Local Tours, Rs. 2658.00 lakhs                     
 on Rents, Rates and Taxe s as well as on maintenance and repairs of accommodation                       
 owned/rented for Missions abroad and Rs. 2522.00 lakhs on other miscellaneous items.                    
 Average expenditure per Mission abroad is Rs. 76.45 lakhs. The expenditure mentioned                    
 above on Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad including expen- diture on Publicity                    
 works out to approximately 33.87 percent of the total estim ated Revenue Expen-                         
 diture of this Ministry. The remaining 66.13 percent of the Revenue Estimates of the                    
 Ministry are being spent on various Aid Programmes to neighbouring and other                            
 developing coun tries, Aid under the AFRICA Fund, Contribution to United Nations and                    
 other International bodies, Passport Orga- nization, Hospitality and Miscellaneous                      
 items.                                                                                                  
 PG136                                                                                                   
 Appendix-XIII Statement showing the total number of employees                                           
                                                                                                         
 APPENDIX XIII                                                                                           
                                                                                                         
 Statement showing the total number of employees (both permanent and tempor ary) in                      
 the Ministry of External Affairs under various groups and representation of Scheduled                   
 Ca stes and Scheduled Tribes therein (Position as on Dec 31, 1988)                                      
 Group              Total No.    Scheduled    Scheduled     Employees   total                            
                                 Castes       Tribes % of               Employees                        
                                                                        Employees                        
 Group `A'          726          94           12.94%        39          5.37%                            
 Group `B'          1818         181          9.95%         30          1.65%                            
 Group `C'          833          94           11.28%        40          4.80%                            
 Excluding `D'      558          106          18.99%        11          1.97%                            
 (excluding                                                                                              
 Sweepers)                                                                                               
 Group `D'          8                                                                                    
                                                                               PG137                     
 Appendix-XIV Statement showing the number of appointments                                               
                                                                                                         
 Jan 01, 1988                                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 APPENDIX XIV                                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 Statement showing the number of appointments (both by direct recruitment and                            
 promotion) made in various Groups in the Ministry of External Affairs and reserved                      
 vacancies filled by Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes during the year 1988                              
 Group       Total Number  Number of       Number of reserved     No. of vacancies                       
             of reserved   vacancies       candidates             de-reserved                            
             candidates    reserved        appointed Scheduled    due to non-avail                       
             Scheduled     for Scheduled   Castes/Scheduled       ability                                
             Castes        Castes          Tribes                 of reserved                            
             /Scheduled    /Scheduled                             candidates                             
             Tribes        Tribes                                 Scheduled Castes                       
                                                                  /Scheduled Tribes                      
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------                     
 Group `A'   39            7       3       7           3                                                 
 Group `B'   115           27      20      15          1          11        15                           
 Group `C'   18            4       4       3           2          1         2                            
 Group `D'   (excluding                                                                                  
 Sweepers)   22                                                                                          
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------                      
 Appendix-XV International Conferences/Meetings                                                          
                                                                                                         
 APPENDIX XV                                                                                             
                                                                                                         
 International Conferences/Meetings and functions arranged during the year 19 88-89                      
 with the assistance of the Conference Cell, Ministry of External Affairs                                
                                                                                                         
 1. SAARC Meeting of Non-Governmental Organizations on Drug Abuse-April 1988.                            
                                                                                                         
 2. Meeting of the Central Haj Advisory Board-May 1988.                                                  
                                                                                                         
 3. Press Conference of the President of Afghanistan-May 1988.                                           
                                                                                                         
 4. Meeting of the Senior Officials of NAM countries on Kampuchea-July 1988.                             
                                                                                                         
 5. SAARC Meeting on Chairs, Fellowships and Scholarships-September 1988.                                
                                                                                                         
 6. Third Meeting of SAARC Audio Visual Exchange (SAVE) Committee-October 1988                           
 .                                                                                                       
                                                                                                         
 7. Meeting of the Central Haj Advisory Board-October 1988.                                              
                                                                                                         
 8. Consultative Conference of Experts on New and High Technologies of NAM and                           
 Developing Countries-October 1988.                                                                      
                                                                                                         
 9. Conference `Towards a Nuclear Weapon Free and Non-Violent World'-November 1988.                      
                                                                                                         
 10. The Indira Gandhi Award Ceremony-November 1988.                                                     
                                                                                                         
 11. The SAARC Quiz Meeting-November 1988.                                                               
                                                                                                         
 12. Press Conference of the Prime Minister of Malta-Jan 10, 1989                                        
                                                                                                         
 13. Press Conference of the General Secretary of Communist Party of Vietnam and the                     
 Foreign Minister of Vietnam-27 January 1989.                                                            
                                                                                                         
 14. Fourth Meeting of the SAARC Audio Visual Exchange (SAVE) Committee-7 and 8                          
 February 1989.                                                                                          
                                                                                                         
 15. Fourth Meeting of Senior Officials of AFRICA Fund Committee-14 to 17 Febr uary                      
 1989.                                                                                                   
 PG139                                                                                                   
 Appendix-XVI Training Programmes organised by the Foreign Service                                       
                                                                                                         
 APPENDIX-XVI                                                                                            
                                                                                                         
 Training Programmes organised by the Foreign Service Training Institute (FSTI)                          
 during 1988 and some Programmes envisaged for 1989                                                      
 Sl.No.  Course                               Date              No. of Participants                      
         SPECIAL COURSES                                                                                 
 1.      1st Course on Crisis                                                                            
         Management for senior officials      12 to 211988      325                                      
 2.      1st Orientation Programme for                                                                   
         RITES officials                      4 and 5 April     15                                       
                                              1988                                                       
 3.      1st Orientation Programme for        1 to 3 August     30                                       
         Spouses                              1988                                                       
 4.      Two Special Courses on Computers for                                                            
         Database                                                                                        
         Management                           27 June to 1 July 24                                       
                                              and                                                        
         17 to 23 August 1988                                                                            
 5.      Orientation Programme for State                                                                 
         Government Protocol                                                                             
         officials                            9 to 14 January   35                                       
                                              1989                                                       
 6.      Refresher Course for Commercial                                                                 
         Representatives                                                                                 
         abroad                               6 to 25 February  20                                       
                                              1989                                                       
 7.      2nd Orientation Programme for        28 to 30 March    30                                       
         Spouses                              1989                                                       
 raining Programme for IFS Probationers (1987 Batch) during 1988 (No. of                                 
 Participants : 15) MODULES                                                                              
                                                                                                         
 1. Dimensions of Indian Foreign Policy                                                                  
                                                                                                         
 2. Indian Foreign Policy-Landmarks                                                                      
                                                                                                         
 3. National Security                                                                                    
                                                                                                         
 4. Overseas Indian Communities                                                                          
                                                                                                         
 5. International Law                                                                                    
                                                                                                         
 6. Diplomatic Practice and Protocol                                                                     
                                                                                                         
 7. Administration, Establishment, Accounts and Vigilance                                                
                                                                                                         
 8. (a) Typing                                                                                           
                                                                                                         
 9. (b) Indian Culture & Cultural Diplomacy                                                              
                                                                                                         
 10. Communications Security (Bureau of Security)                                                        
 PG140                                                                                                   
 PG141                                                                                                   
 11. External Publicity                                                                                  
                                                                                                         
 12. Driving                                                                                             
                                                                                                         
 13. Economic Relations in Foreign Policy (Indian Institute of Foreign Trade)                            
                                                                                                         
 14. Commercial work in Indian Missions                                                                  
 (Indian Institute of Foreign Trade)                                                                     
                                                                                                         
 15. Intelligence Work                                                                                   
                                                                                                         
 16. Crisis Management Negotiating Skills                                                                
                                                                                                         
 17. Hindi                                                                                               
                                                                                                         
 18. Consular Work                                                                                       
                                                                                                         
 19. Computer Appreciation including Word Processing                                                     
                                                                                                         
 20. Social Behaviour, Etiquette and Representational Skills                                             
                                                                                                         
 21. Multilateral Diplomacy and International Organizations                                              
                                                                                                         
 22. Attachment with offices of Ministers and Secretaries                                                
                                                                                                         
 23. Conference Attachment with UN Division/Conference Cell                                              
                                                                                                         
 24. Bharat Darshan                                                                                      
 (Tour of places of cultural and historical importance)                                                  
                                                                                                         
 25. Attachment with Administration                                                                      
                                                                                                         
 26. Indian Culture & Cultural Diplomacy-Part II                                                         
 (with ICCR)                                                                                             
                                                                                                         
 27. Food Back and Evaluation Workshop                                                                   
                                                                                                         
 28. Desk Attachment Till Transfer for Language Training. Training, Programme for                        
 IFS Probationers (1988 Batch) in 1988-89                                                                
  (No. of Participants : 20)                                                                             
  ORIENTATION PROGRAMME                                                                                  
  Module I                                      Introduction                                             
  Module II                                     Diplomacy and Indian Foreign Policy                      
  Module III                                    Diplomatic Practice and Protocol                         
  Module IV                                     International Law                                        
  Module V                                      Indian Culture & Cultural Diplomacy                      
  Module VI                                     Representational Skills.                                 
  PG142>                                                                                                 
  Courses for Junior Officials during 1988                                                               
  Name of Course                                Total No. of participants                                
  10th Basic Professional                       Course                                                   
  Second Course on Public                       14                                                       
  Relations Techniques for RPOs                 5                                                        
  Third Course on Public Relations                                                                       
  Techniques for RPOs                           5                                                        
  11th-17th Basic Professional Course           166                                                      
  First C & R Course                            9                                                        
  Second Cash & Accounts Course                 8                                                        
  Third Cash & Accounts Course                  ..                                                       
  Administration & Finance Workshops            70                                                       
  First T.P. for Group `D' officials            31                                                       
  Second T.P. for Group `D' officials           28                                                       
  Administration Workshops                      74                                                       
  Visits                                                                                                 
 Sl.No.  Name                           Name of       Date of     Conference/Seminar                     
                                        Designation   Visit                                              
 1.      J. D. Chinada                  Ambassador,   21 and 22   FSTI                                   
                                                      October                                            
                                                      1988                                               
         Nigerian Delegation                                                                             
 2.      J. Fakayode                    Ambassador,   21 and 22                                          
                                                      October                                            
                                                      1988                                               
         FSTI Nigerian Delegation                                                                        
 3.      M. B. Ekpang                   Ambassador,   21 and 22                                          
                                                      October                                            
                                                      1988                                               
         FSTI Nigerian Delegation                                                                        
 4.      Claude Cellich                 Head of Trg.  31 October                                         
                                        Divn.         to 1                                               
                                                      November                                           
                                                      1988                                               
         FSTI GATT/UNCTAD,ITC,Geneva                                                                     
 5.      Maldvyn Thomas                 Sr. Adviser   1 and 2                                            
                                                      December                                           
                                                      1988                                               
         FSTI ITC, Geneva                                                                                
 6.      Ajit Banerjee                  Special                                                          
                                        Technical                                                        
                                        Adviser 15 to                                                    
                                        23 December                                                      
                                        1988                                                             
         FSTI UNDTCD                                                                                     
 PG143>                                                                                                  
         FSTI Faculty                                                                                    
 1.      A. N. D. Haksar                Dean FSTI     20 and 21                                          
                                                      June 1988                                          
         ASCI & IPA Hyderabad.                                                                           
 2.      A. N. D. Haksar                Dean FSTI     19 to 24                                           
                                                      September                                          
                                                      1988                                               
         ADDAIIR, Geneva                                                                                 
 3.      A. N. D. Haksar                Dean FSTI     10 and 11                                          
                                                      May & 24                                           
                                                      and 25                                             
                                                      November                                           
                                                      1988                                               
         LBSNAA,Mussoorie.                                                                               
 4.      K. Gajendra Singh              JS (FSTI)     4 to 9                                             
                                                      April 1988                                         
         Seminar on Trg. of 3rd world                                                                    
         Diplomats, Nairobi.                                                                             
 5.      P. S. Ray                      Director      17 to 28                                           
                                        (FSTI-I)      October                                            
                                                      1988                                               
         2nd Executive Development                                                                       
         Programme for EROPA Countries                                                                   
         in Seoul.                                                                                       
 6.      P. S. Ray                      Director      8 to 10                                            
                                        (FSTI-II)     October                                            
                                                      1988                                               
         LBSNAA, Mussoorie.                                                                              
 7.      Deepak Vohra                   Director      9 to 14 May                                        
                                        (FSTI-III)    1988                                               
         ATI, Nainital.                                                                                  
 Appendix-XVII VVIP visits to India                                                                      
                                                                                                         
 APPENDIX XVII                                                                                           
                                                                                                         
 VVIP visits to India during 1988                                                                        
 Sl.  Heads of State/Government                          Date                                            
 No.                                                                                                     
 (1)  (2)                                                (3)                                             
 1.   H.E. Dr Carlos Rafeel Rodriguez, Vice-President of                                                 
      the Councils of                                                                                    
      State and of Minister of the Republic of Cuba      3 to @@19880308 Mi,                             
      ster of the Republic of Cuba 3 to @                                                                
 2.   H. E. Mr Lee Kuan Yew, Prime Minister of Singapore 15 to 17 March 1988                             
 3.   H.E. Mr Peter S. Mmusi, Chairman of the SADCC                                                      
      Council of                                                                                         
      Minister and Vice-President of Botswana            10 to 15 April 1988                             
 4.   His Royal Highness Prince El Hassan Bin                                                            
      Talal, Crown Prince of Jordan                      23 to 27 April 1988                             
 5.   H.E. Dr Najibullah, President of Afghanistan       4 to 6 May 1988                                 
 6.   H.E. Major General Joaquim Alberto Chissano,                                                       
      President of Mozambique                            14 to 16 May 1988                               
 7.   H.E. Mr A. A. Makanou, Vice-President of the                                                       
      Supreme Soviet of the USSR                         13 to 15 August 1988                            
 8.   H.E. Mr H. M. Ershad, President of Bangladesh      29 September 1988                               
 9.   His Majesty King Birendra Bir Bikram                                                               
      Shah Dev, King of Nepal                            29 and 30 September 1988                        
 10.  H.E. Mr Daniel Arap Moi, President of Kenya        3 and 4 October 1988                            
 11.  H.E. Mr Yasser Arafat, Chairman of the                                                             
      Palestine Liberation Orga-nization                 5 October 1988                                  
 12.  H.E. Mr Daniel Arap Moi, President of Kenya        7 and 8 October 1988                            
 13.  H.E. Mr Eduardo dos Santos, President of Angola    24 to 26 October 1988                           
 14.  H.E. Mr R. F. M. Lubbers,                                                                          
      Prime Minister of the Netherlands 28 and 29                                                        
      October 1988                                                                                       
 15.  H.E. Sir Veerasamy Ringadoo,                                                                       
      Governor General of Mauritius                      12 to 25 November 1988                          
 16.  H.E. Mr Hun Sen, Member of the Polit Bureau,                                                       
      Chairman of the                                                                                    
      Council of Minister, Kampuchea                     16 and 17 November 1988                         
 17.  H.E. Mr Mikhail S. Gorbachev, Chairman of the                                                      
      Presidium of the                                                                                   
      Supreme Soviet of the USSR, General Secretary                                                      
      of the Central Committee of the CPSU               18 to 20 November 1988                          
 18.  H.E. Mr Sam Nujoma, President of the Swapo         23 to 27 November 1988                          
 19.  H.E. Mr Maumoon Abdul Gayoom,                                                                      
      President of the Maldives                          7 and 8 December 1988                           
                                                                                                         
                                                          PG145>                                         
 (1)  (2)                                                (3)                                             
      Visits of Foreign Ministers                                                                        
 1.   H.E. Mr Abdul Wakil,                                                                               
      Foreign Minister of Afghanistan                    2 and 3 February 1988                           
 2.   H.E. Mr Marian Orzechowaki,                                                                        
      Foreign Minister of Foreign Affairs of Poland      22 to 29 February 1988                          
 3.   H.E. Dr Peter Varkonyi, Minister of                                                                
      Foreign Affairs of the                                                                             
      Hungarian People's Republic to                     27 February 1988 to 2                           
                                                         March 1988                                      
 4.   H. E. Mr Miguel D'Escoto Brockmann,                                                                
      Foreign Minister of Nicaragua                      20 to 24 August 1988                            
 5.   H.E. Mr Rashleigh Jackson,                                                                         
      Foreign Minister of Guyana                         23 to 27 August 1988                            
 6.   H.E. Mr Ali Alatas, Foreign Minister of Indonesia  24 to 26 August 1988                            
 7.   H.E. Mr Abdul Wakil,                                                                               
      Foreign Minister of Afghanistan                    1 to 4 September 1988                           
 8.   H.E. Mr Abdulaziz Al-Daly,                                                                         
      Foreign Minister of PDR Yemen                      6 to 11 December 1988                           
                                                                                                         
External website that    External website    External website    External website    External website    
opens in a new window    that opens in a new that opens in a new that opens in a new that opens in a new 
                         window              window              window              window              

    Address : Patiala House, Annexe - BNew Delhi                              
   -110001                                           Page last updated on: 09 
    Telephone: 23389073, 23382694, 23073685;                  December, 2013  
   Fax: 23386340, 23387700;Feedback :            Site designed and maintained 
   dirlibmea.gov.in                                  by: National Informatics 
    Officer In-charge:-                                         Centre (NIC), 
    (c)Content Owned by MEA Library Ministry of   DeitY, MoCIT, Government of 
   External Affairs, Government of India                               India. 
   Terms & Conditions | Privacy Policy |         Visitors:                    
   Copyright Policy | Hyperlinking Policy |      
   Accessibility Statement | Help                

   java script is required for this page
   MEAs App twitter Facebook Google plus YouTube flickr
   loading
