   java script is required for this page java script is required for this
   page java script is required for this page java script is required for
   this page java script is required for this page java script is required
   for this page

   Sun, February 08, 2015 at 03:31:06 IST Indian Flag
   Ministry of                      Print Content Small Font Medium Font      
    External       MEA Library      Large Font                                
    Affairs,   Ministry of External   * Sitemap                               
   Government  Affairs, Government    * Contact Us                            
    of India         of India         * Feedback                              
                                      * _____________________           [  ]  

     * Home
     * Director's Office
          * Director Lib & Info
          * Library Officers & Staff
     * Journals
          * Current Journals
          * Online Journals
          * CD-ROMs Databases
     * Online Services
          * Business Monitor Online
          * EIU
          * JSTOR
          * Janes Online Services
          * Kessing World News Archive
          * Marketline MDIC
          * Online Service Links
     * Newspapers
          * E-Newspapers
          * Subscribed Print Newspapers
     * Library Bulletins
          * Foreign Affairs Documentation Bulletin
          * Recent Additions
          * Chronicle of Events
     * Alert
          * Book Alert
          * Article Alerts
     * Important Abbrevations

 Annual Reports Prior to 1999                                                                 
   * Home >   Annual Reports Prior to 1999 >   Annual Report 1989-90          * Home          
 Annual Report 1989-90                                                        * Director's    
                                                                                Office        
 CONTENTS                                                                     * Journals      
 Introduction                                                                 * Online        
 S.No.  CHAPTERS                                                Pages No.       Services      
 I.     India's Neighbours                                      1-11          * Newspapers    
 II.    South-East Asia and the Pacific                         12-16         * Alert         
 III.   East Asia                                               17-20         * Important     
 IV.    West Asia and North Africa                              21-25           Abbrevations  
 V.     Africa (South of the Sahara)                            26-33         * Back          
 VI.    Europe                                                  34-39                         
 VII.   The Americas                                            40-46                         
 VIII.  United Nations and International Conferences            47-67                         
 IX.    Foreign Economic Relations                              68-70                         
 X.     Policy Planning and Research                            71-72                         
 XI.    External Publicity                                      73-76                         
 XII.   Indians Overseas                                        77-78                         
 XIII.  Protocol                                                79                            
 XIV.   Passport and Consular Services                          80-81                         
 XV.    Administration and Organisation                         82-83                         
 XVI.   Foreign Service Training Institute                      84-86                         
 XVII.  Use of Hindi in Official Work                           87-88                         
 XVIII. Cultural Relations                                      89-95                         
 APPENDICES A-1--A-28                                                                         
 1989                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Introduction                                                                                 
                                                                        Top                   
                                INTRODUCTION                                                  
                                                                                              
 THE welcome trends which marked an improvement in international relations                    
 last year, saw their further strengthening during the year under report.                     
 The efforts made by the Soviet Union and the United States to remove the                     
 sources of tension resulted in a more open dialogue, leading to the                          
 announcement of significant unilateral and bilateral disarmament measures                    
 by the two powers. A s in the past, India welcomed these steps which held                    
 out the hope for a safer world order. India continued to strengthen her                      
 relations with both the United States and the USSR on the basis of                           
 bilateral complementarity.                                                                   
                                                                                              
 In relation to its neighbours in particular, the emphasis of India's                         
 foreign policy was on friendship, cooperation and the understanding of                       
 each other's interests. In this context, it sought to revitalise regional                    
 cooperation withi n the framework of SAARC. The 7th Session of the Council                   
 of Ministers meeting in November 1989, decided on the issue of a visa-free                   
 Special SAARC Travel Document, for travel in the region for Members of                       
 Parliament and Supreme Court Judges. Progress was also made on cooperation                   
 in the fields of primary educati on and in the joint production of TV and                    
 Radio programmes. However, no final decision has been taken regarding the                    
 holding of the 5th SAARC Summit.                                                             
                                                                                              
 India has consistently sought to develop friendly and. good-neighbourly                      
 relations with Pakistan on the basis of the Simla Agreement. During the                      
 year under report, the third meeting of the Indo-Pakistan Joint Commission                   
 chaired b y the Minister for External Affairs of India and the Foreign                       
 Minister of Pakistan was held after a gap of four years. A meeting at the                    
 Foreign Secretary-level was a lso held.                                                      
                                                                                              
 India's consistent position that Jammu and Kashmir is an integral part of                    
 Ind ia and that no outside interference would be tolerated was suitably                      
 conveyed to Mr Abdus Sattar, the Special Envoy of the Pakistani Prime                        
 Minister and to the Foreign Minister Sahabzada Yaqub Khan when they                          
 visited India from 7 to 11 January and 21 to Jan 23, 1990, respectively.                     
                                                                                              
 (i) In keeping with the Government of India's main foreign policy                            
 objectives of peace and cooperation, India sought solution's to the                          
 existing difficulties in its relations with Sri Lanka. Mutual                                
 understanding has been reached regarding the deinduction of the IPKF from                    
 Sri Lanka. It is hoped that a satisfactory solu tion ensuring the safety                     
 and security of the Tamils in Sri Lanka will be worked out and that                          
 Indo-Sri Lanka relations would be restored to their traditional level of                     
 cordiality.                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 The year under report saw a further consolidation of Indo-bangladesh                         
 relations, particularly in the economic field. The extension of the term                     
 of th e Indo- Bangladesh Joint Economic Commission for another five years,                   
 the renewal of the Indo-Bangladesh Trade Agreement for another three-year                    
 term, and the renewal of the Inland Water Transit and Trade, were some of                    
 the highlights of this cooperation.                                                          
                                                                                              
 An important event in Indo-Bangladesh relations was the visit of the                         
 Minister for External Affairs, Shri I K Gujral, to Bangladesh in February                    
 1990. A numbe r of bilateral issues such as the sharing of the Ganga                         
 Waters, Tin Bigha and the return of the Chakma refugees from India were                      
 discussed.                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 India deeply values its traditional and multifaceted relationship with                       
 Nepal. However, some strains surfaced in Indo-Nepal relations after the                      
 lapse of the I ndo- Nepal Treaties of Trade and Transit in March 1989.                       
 Several proposals have been made to overcome these temporary difficulties.                   
 In spite of the fact that there is no Indo-Nepal Transit Treaty in force                     
 at present, India ensured imports of goods b y Nepal through the                             
 checkposts of Raxaul and Jogbani, as also separate transit routes from                       
 Bhutan and Bangladesh to Nepal, besides continued Nepal-Nepal transit                        
 through Indian territory. India also continued to implement the econom ic                    
 development projects in Nepal under its Aid to Nepal programme.                              
                                                                                              
 In pursuance of the determination of the Government of India to improve                      
 relations with neighbours, the Minister for External Affairs invited the                     
 Nepale se Foreign Minister to visit India. The latter visited New Delhi                      
 early in January 1990.                                                                       
 The talks created a greater understanding of each other's interest and                       
 concerns . This was followed by the visit of a Nepalese official level                       
 delegation comprisi ng the Nepalese Foreign Secretary and the Defence and                    
 the Commerce Secretaries, in February 1990.                                                  
                                                                                              
 The extremely cordial relations between India and Bhutan in the economic                     
 and political fields were further strengthened through important visits                      
 exchang ed                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 by the dignitaries of the two countries. The two visits paid by His                          
 Majesty th e King of Bhutan to India and the visits paid by the Chief of                     
 the Indian Army and the Foreign Secretary to Bhutan, helped in the process                   
 of consolidation of relation s. Considerable progress was achieved on                        
 important hydroelectric projects like the Chukha Hydel Project built                         
 entirely with Indian assistance.                                                             
                                                                                              
 (ii) As in the past, India continued to provide experts and specialists to                   
 Bhutan in fields such as forestry, industry and telecommunications.                          
 Bhutanese students a re also offered opportunities for higher education                      
 and training in diverse fields like civil aviation, police, defence,                         
 customs, medicine and engineering.                                                           
                                                                                              
 India's warm relations with the Maldives were further strengthened and                       
 diversified. Soon after assuming office, the External Affairs Minister,                      
 Shri I K Gujral visited the Maldives. He attended the first meeting of the                   
 Indo-Maldive s Joint Commission. A decision to waive visa requirements for                   
 nationals of the t wo countries to visit each other, was announced. The                      
 last of the Indian troops returned to India on 3 November 1989, after a                      
 warm send off by the Government and the people of Maldives.                                  
                                                                                              
 India continued to take an active interest in the developments in                            
 Afghanistan and kept in touch with those concerned with the situation in                     
 that country. The Geneva Accords of April 1988 designed to bring peace and                   
 stability in Afghanist an and welcomed by India, were not implemented by                     
 all parties involved despite the complete withdrawal of Soviet troops by                     
 15 February 1989. The resistance group s formed an Afghan Interim                            
 Government in February following a shoora that had been convened in                          
 Rawalpindi. However, the international community continued it s efforts to                   
 solve the Afghanistan problem.                                                               
                                                                                              
 The people of India and Myanmar (Burma), have traditional and friendly                       
 ties. It is, therefore, natural for India to be interested in developments                   
 in that co untry. It is hoped that the multiparty elections promised for                     
 May 1990 will be held in a free and fair manner and relations between the                    
 two countries restored to their traditional warmth.                                          
                                                                                              
 India maintained the momentum in fostering cooperative interaction with                      
 China during the year. It was recognised that normalisation of India-China                   
 relations was in the interests of both countries and that efforts should                     
 be mad e to improve and expand this relationship. In December 1989, the                      
 Government stresse d that the outstanding boundary question should be                        
 resolved in a fair and reasona ble manner in consonance with India's                         
 national interests. In a message of felicita tion addressed to the Prime                     
 Minister, Shri V P Singh, the Chinese Premier, Mr Li Peng, expressed the                     
 hope that the good-neighbourly relations between India and China would                       
 improve and develop further on the basis of the Five Principles of                           
 Peaceful Co-existence. In his response, the Prime Minister said that India                   
 was confident that the traditional friendship and mutual respect between                     
 the two peoples and the common commitment of both countries to the Five                      
 Principles of Peaceful Co-existence would help the further development of                    
 bilateral relations and the resolution of outstanding issues. He stated                      
 that the process of understanding and cooperation initiated in recent                        
 times between India and China would be continued by the Government.                          
                                                                                              
 (iii) India's support to the cause of the Palestinians remained firm.                        
 During the v                                                                                 
 isit of Chairman Yasser Arafat to India in March 1989, the PLO Embassy in                    
 New Delhi was renamed as "The Embassy of the State of Palestine." India                      
 continued t o maintain its earlier position, that only an international                      
 peace conference unde r UN auspices with participation of all the                            
 concerned parties to the Arab-Israeli di spute could effectively come to                     
 grips with the problem.                                                                      
                                                                                              
 Indo-Arab relations continued on an even keel during the period under                        
 report. A series of visits were exchanged between Indian and Arab leaders.                   
 Among the important visitors from the Arab world were, the Foreign                           
 Ministers of Egypt and Syria and the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs                   
 of Tunisia. A Sp ecial Envoy of the President of the Sahrawi Arab                            
 Democratic Republic also visited India. From India, some of the important                    
 visits were those of a Parliamentary delegation led by the former Speaker                    
 of the Lok Sabha, Dr Balram Jakhar and later, the Deputy Chairman of the                     
 Rajya Sabha, Dr Najma Heptullah, to Syria. There were also visits from                       
 India at the official level.                                                                 
                                                                                              
 There were also an exchange of visits between the countries of the Gulf                      
 region and India, at the Ministerial and official levels. The Iranian                        
 Foreign Minister, Dr Ali Akbar Velayati, had visited India in August 1989                    
 for discussio ns on a wide range of political issues. However, the dates                     
 for the Fifth Session of the Indo-Iranian Joint Commission meeting                           
 scheduled to be held in Tehran in January 1990, have since been deferred.                    
                                                                                              
 The Iraqi Minister of Transport and Communications visited India early in                    
 February, at the invitation of the Railway Minister, Shri George                             
 Fernandes. Th e Iraqi Minister also held discussions with the Ministers                      
 for Commerce Petroleu m and Natural Gas, Civil Aviation, and Transport and                   
 Communications. He also called on the Prime Minister and the Minister for                    
 External Affairs. With the countries of South-East Asia, India continued                     
 to maintain close relations. India's traditional friendly relations with                     
 these countries were fu rther diversified through frequent contacts and                      
 India's active and constructive role in promoting a peaceful negotiated                      
 settlement in Cambodia. Shri K Natwar Singh, t he then Minister of State                     
 in the Ministry of External Affairs met leaders of the ASEAN, the                            
 Indo-China countries, the USSR and France for consultations. India                           
 participated in the International Conference on Cambodia. held in Paris in                   
 Augu st 1989. Although the Conference was unable to achieve a                                
 comprehensive settlement , important areas of agreement were identified                      
 and India's contribution was appreciated. A delegation led by Shri B R                       
 Bhagat, MP, witnessed the final withdrawal of Vietnamese troops from                         
 Cambodia at the end of September 1989. Since then, India has participated                    
 in further consultations in the search for a solution to the Cambodian                       
 problem.                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 (iv) An Indian Consulate General was opened in Ho Chi Minh City in January                   
 1990, reflecting the growing relations between India and Vietnam. The                        
 first ever visit to India of a Thai Prime Minister, Gen. Chatichai                           
 Choonhavan, in March 1989, was a major development in India's relations                      
 with Thailand. An agreement to set up a Joint Commission was signed. The                     
 ONGC and the Petroleum Authority of Thailand signed a Memorandum of                          
 Understanding for Cooperation in activities related to exploration and                       
 production of petroleum.                                                                     
                                                                                              
 In December 1989, a faction in the Philippine military tried to overthrow                    
 Mrs Aquino's Government. In keeping with India's firm commitment to                          
 democratic principles, the Government of India expressed its support to                      
 the Government of Philippines for the steps taken to restore normalcy and                    
 the rule of law.                                                                             
                                                                                              
 Bilateral relations between India and Australia were characterised by                        
 exchange of many visits at Ministerial level. The Australian Minister for                    
 Fore ign Affairs and Trade, Mr Gareth Evans visited in June 1989. During                     
 his visit, let ters were exchanged to establish an Indo-Australian Joint                     
 Ministerial Commission The Minister for commerce led the Indian delegation                   
 to the first meeting of the J oint Ministerial Commission held in                            
 Australia in July 1989. Modalities for expansio n of bilateral trade and                     
 economic cooperation were identified.                                                        
                                                                                              
 (v) India continued the ban on trade with Fiji and opposed in                                
 international fora. racially discriminatory measures adopted in that                         
 country. India also issued a statement criticising the Report of the                         
 Constitution Inquiry and Advisory Committee for failing to address the                       
 central issue of removing the retrograde a nd racially discriminatory                        
 features of the Draft Constitution.                                                          
                                                                                              
 Indo-Japanese relations, particularly in the economic field, were further                    
 strengthened during the year. Japan's Official Development Assistance                        
 (ODA) touched the figure of about Yen 96.7 billion; an increase of about                     
 36.6% over t he previous year's ODA to India. An Indo Japanese agreement                     
 on the Avoidance of Double Taxation was signed during the year under                         
 report. A Parliamentary delegation led by the Speaker of the Lok Sabha                       
 visited Japan during the year.                                                               
                                                                                              
 India's relations with the Republic of Korea (ROK) and the Democratic                        
 People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) continued to be cordial. While India                       
 signed a Cultural Exchange Programme for 1990-92 with ROK, cultural and                      
 academic exchanges between India and the DPRK were maintained. With                          
 Mongolia, India's relations continued to be cordial. The President of                        
 Mongolia, Mr Jambyn Batmunkh, had paid a visit to India in March 1989.                       
 During his visit, a Protocol on Science and Technology was signed and an                     
 announcement made on the establishment of a Chair for Mongolian Studies at                   
 the Jawaharlal Nehru University. The Mongolian People's Republic issued a                    
 special commemorative stamp during the Nehru Centenary Celebrations.                         
                                                                                              
 India continued to actively support the struggle of the people of Africa                     
 agai nst apartheid in various international Lira. While India warmly                         
 welcomed the relea se of the ANC leader Mr Nelson Mandela from                               
 incarceration, it maintained that pressure must be directed towards the                      
 complete dismantlement of apartheid. Indi a has also extended full support                   
 to the ANC's call for the establishment of a non racial democratic South                     
 Africa based on majority rule.                                                               
                                                                                              
 (vi) A Special Envoy of the Prime Minister of India, called on Nelson                        
 Mandela to convey good wishes and to invite him to visit india, which he                     
 has accepted. A Nelson Mandela Reception Committee has been formed with                      
 the Prime Minister as the Chairman, and the Minister for External Affairs                    
 as the Vice Chairman.                                                                        
 India welcomed the significant changes that took place leading towards the                   
 eventual decolonisation of and full independence to Namibia. India                           
 contributed military, police and civilian personnel to the UN Transition                     
 Assistance Group deployed for supervising elections to a Constituent                         
 Assembly in Namibia. Sam Nujoma, the leader of SWAPO, was declared                           
 President-elect by the Assembly. He will assume office as President on 21                    
 March 1990 when Namibia becomes independent. Namibian leaders have warmly                    
 acknowledged India's bilateral assistance.                                                   
                                                                                              
 As in the past, India continued to maintain strong economic links with the                   
 African countries whose economies were not faring well. Substantial                          
 technical assistance in fields like agriculture, transport, industry and                     
 education was re ndered in the spirit of South-South Cooperation. There                      
 was also a deepening of materi al and moral support to the Frontline                         
 States waging struggle against apartheid and for democracy in Namibia and                    
 South Africa.                                                                                
                                                                                              
 An important event during the year was the visit of the President, Shri R                    
 Venkataraman to Zimbabwe and Zambia, in June 1989, where he had                              
 discussions with Presidents Robert Mugabe and Kenneth Kaunda,                                
 respectively. He also held talks with the President of the African                           
 National Congress, Mr Oliver Tambo. A notable event was the visit of a                       
 delegation consisting of representatives o f the Transvaal Indian                            
 Congress, Natal Indian Congress and the Mass Democratic Movement to India                    
 as guests of the Government of India in May 1989. The delegation had talks                   
 with the Prime Minister, the External Affairs Minister and Members of                        
 Parliament.                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 The close and friendly relations between India and Tanzania were further                     
 strengthened with the visit of the President, Shri R Venkataraman, in June                   
 and the transit visit of President Mwinyi and the Tanzanian Foreign                          
 Minister to New Del hi in December 1989. During the latter's visit,                          
 discussions were held with the Pr ime Minister, Shri V P Singh. The                          
 Foreign Minister exchanged views with the Minist er for External Affairs,                    
 Shri I K Gujral.                                                                             
                                                                                              
 (vii) An important visit to India was that of the Prime Minister of                          
 Mauritius, Sir Anerood Jugnauth, who was also the Chief Guest at the                         
 Republic Day Parade. He called on the President, the Vice President. and                     
 the Prime Minister. During hi s visit, agreements were signed in the                         
 fields of science and technology and cultu re.                                               
                                                                                              
 Another important visit was of the President, Shri R Venkataraman, to                        
 Seychelles in September, the first ever by an Indian President to that                       
 country. During the visit, the establishment of a Joint Commission was                       
 announced, beside s the extension of a Rs 2 crore credit. A Cultural                         
 Exchange Programme was also signed.                                                          
                                                                                              
 Some of the other important visitors from Africa to India were the                           
 Minister o f External Affairs of Nigeria, in August; the President of                        
 Burkina Faso, in trans it in September; the Ghanaian Minister of Local                       
 Government and Rural Development, in November; the Agriculture Minister of                   
 Angola, and the Defence Minister of Mozambique, in May.                                      
                                                                                              
 As Chairman of the AFRICA Fund, India continued to play a crucial role in                    
 mobilising support for the Fund. In this capacity, India kept in touch                       
 with th e anti- apartheid movements in the UK, the European continent and                    
 Japan. The Sixth meeting of the Africa Fund Committee at the level of                        
 Senior officials is schedu led to be held in March 1990, at Lusaka.                          
                                                                                              
 Close interaction and growing cooperation between India and the Soviet                       
 Union on a wide range of issues set the pace for Indo-Soviet relations.                      
 The fo rmer Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi visited Moscow at President                    
 Gorbachev's invitation in July 1989 and exchanged views on all major                         
 aspects of the current international situation and also bilateral                            
 relations. After assumption of offi ce by the new Government of India, the                   
 Soviet First Deputy Foreign Minister, Mr Yuli Vorontsov visited India as                     
 Special Envoy of President Gorbachev. Both countrie s reiterated their                       
 commitment to continue and strengthen the traditional friendsh ip and                        
 cooperation. It was agreed that regular political interaction between the                    
 leaders of the two countries would be maintained.                                            
                                                                                              
 (viii) The 12th Session of the Indo-Soviet Joint Commission on Economic,                     
 Scientific and Technical Cooperation held in New Delhi from 7 to 9 March                     
 1989, reviewed the implementation of ongoing projects and bilateral                          
 economic cooperation and identified new areas and forms of future                            
 cooperation. The Joint Commission decided to set up new Working Groups                       
 under its aegis in the field of Civil Avia tion and for promotion of New                     
 Forms of Economic Cooperation, as well as a Sub- Group on Transportation                     
 under the existing Working Group on Trade. In September 1989, two Credit                     
 Agreements worth 900 million Roubles for three thermal power                                 
 projects-Kayamkulam, Mangalore and Maithon and associated transmission                       
 fines for Vindhayachal Thermal Power Project-were signed. The Soviet                         
 credit includes 170 million Roubles as assistance for local costs in Ind                     
 ia for the thermal power projects.                                                           
                                                                                              
 India's traditionally close and friendly relations with the countries of                     
 East ern Europe were further strengthened. During the year, radical                          
 changes took place ail over Eastern Europe. The Government of India warmly                   
 welcomed these trends in the direction of democratisation, political                         
 pluralism and the evolution of more representative systems and                               
 institutions reflecting popular aspirations. India organised exclusive                       
 Indian exhibitions of electronics and apparel in Sofia Exploratory talks                     
 were held in New Delhi with Bulgaria in December 1989 for cooperation in                     
 the field of Civil Aviation. Indo-Czechoslovak cultural coopera tion                         
 received a stimulus with the holding of "Days of Indian Culture" in                          
 Czechoslova kia in April 1989 and a reciprocal "Days of Czechoslovak                         
 Culture" in India in November 1989, for which the former Czechoslovak                        
 Deputy Prime Minister, Dr Matej Lucan, visited India. A new dimension was                    
 added to Indo-GDR economic relations with the signing of the Agreement on                    
 Avoidance of Double Taxation in New Delhi on 27 July 1989. Following the                     
 revolution in Romania in December 1989, the Government extended to the new                   
 Romanian Government, its support and cooperation, as also some urgently                      
 needed medical and humanitarian relief assistance. The former Prime                          
 Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, visited Yugos lavia to participate in the 9th                   
 NAM Summit From the Yugoslav side, Foreign Minister Mr Budimir Loncar and                    
 the Yugoslav Minister for Foreign Trade, Mr Franc Horvat, visited India. A                   
 bilateral Air Agreement was also signed.                                                     
                                                                                              
 India's interaction with the European Community as an entity and, with the                   
 individual member countries in the political, economic,                                      
 scientific-technologica l and cultural fields, was intensified during the                    
 period under report. It may be men tioned that the European Community is                     
 India's largest trading partner. In view of the impending creation of a                      
 single Community market in 1992 India's political and economic dialogue                      
 with the Community and with the individual members assumed special                           
 importance.                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 (ix) The President, Shri R Venkataraman, paid a visit to the Federal                         
 Republic of Germany in September. He not only had important discussions                      
 with the FRG President, Mr Weizsacker, but also met the leaders of all                       
 major political parti es. The former Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi,                      
 had visited Paris in July, to participate in the Bicentenary celebrations                    
 of the French Revolution. During h is visit, he exchanged views with                         
 several foreign leaders who were also participan ts in the celebrations.                     
                                                                                              
 The President of Cyprus, Mr Vassiliou, visited India in April 1989. During                   
 h is visit, an agreement on trade, economic, scientific and technological                    
 cooperatio n was concluded.                                                                  
                                                                                              
 The French Prime Minister, Mr Michel Rocard and Mme Rocard, visited India                    
 in January 1990. His delegation comprised some important French Minister s                   
 and senior officials. The French Prime Minister and the Prime Minister of                    
 Indi a, exchanged views on various matters of mutual interest. There were                    
 important Ministerial level visits, besides Joint Commission meetings with                   
 the EEC, FRG and Turkey. The former Speaker of the Lok Sabha had led a                       
 delegation of Indian Parliamentarians to the FRG. During the year under                      
 report, there was further consolidation of the positive trends in Indo-US                    
 relations that have become evident in recent years. There wa s greater                       
 interaction between the two countries in the political, economic,                            
 commercial, cultural, scientific and defence-related fields.                                 
                                                                                              
 From the USA, there were visits by Congressman Stephen Solarz, Chairman of                   
 the Sub-Committee on Asian and Pacific Affairs of the House of                               
 Representatives Foreign Relations Committee, and several prominent                           
 Congressmen.                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 (x) From India, the then Defence Minister, Shri K C Pant, visited USA in                     
 June 1989. It is recalled that the two previous US Defence Secretaries had                   
 visited India in 1987 and 1988, respectively.                                                
                                                                                              
 The Foreign Secretary, Shri S K Singh visited the USA in November, for the                   
 annual consultations and held wide-ranging discussions with the US Under                     
 Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Mr Robert Kimmitt. Mr Kimmitt                      
 paid a visit to India in January 1990. The Foreign Secretary paid yet                        
 another visit t o USA in January-February 1990 when he met his counterpart                   
 as well as several leaders and briefed them on the Kashmir situation.                        
                                                                                              
 There was greater progress in the field of transfer of technology. An                        
 agreement on Avoidance of Double Taxation was signed in September. India                     
 continued to maintain warm and friendly relations with the countries of                      
 Latin America. At the French Bicentenary celebrations in Paris in July,                      
 and at the NAM Summit in Belgrade in September, the former Prime Minister,                   
 Shri Rajiv Gandhi had met the Presidents of Brazil, Venezuela, Mexico,                       
 Nicaragau, Peru and others. The then External Affairs Minister, Shri P V                     
 Narasimha Rao had visited Caracas in June 1989, for the G-77 Special                         
 Ministerial Meeting, and was receive d by the President of Venezuela. He                     
 had also visited Cuba thereafter. There wer e other Ministerial and                          
 official level exchange of visits.                                                           
                                                                                              
 Jawaharlal Nehru's Birth Centenary was celebrated in many Latin American                     
 countries. Prof. Perez Esquivel, the Nobel Peace Laureate from Argentina,                    
 participated in the seminar on Humanism, International Politics and                          
 Nehru's Thought, held in New Delhi in October.                                               
                                                                                              
 The Non-Aligned Movement worked towards reduction and relaxation of                          
 tensions globally, and the promotion of dialogue and cooperation in the                      
 international community, during the year. Addressing the 9th NAM Summit in                   
 Belgrade, the former Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi proposed three                        
 important initiatives, namely, the establishment of a Planet Protection                      
 Fund, interaction among experts to pool resources of the developing                          
 countries for South-South Representatives Foreign Relations Committee and                    
 several prominent Congressmen.                                                               
                                                                                              
 (xi) From India, the then Defence Minister, Shri K C pant, visited USA in                    
 June 1989. It is recalled that the two previous US Defence Secretaries has                   
 visited india in 1987 mid 1988, respectively.                                                
                                                                                              
 The Foreign Secretary, Shri S K Singh visited the USA in November, for the                   
 annual consultations and held wide-ranging discussions with the US Under                     
 Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Mr Robert Kimmitt. Mr Kimmitt                      
 paid a visit to India in January 1990. The Foreign Secretary paid yet                        
 another visit t o USA in January-February 1990 when he met his counterpart                   
 as well as several leaders and briefed them on the Kashmir situation.                        
                                                                                              
 There was greater progress in the field of transfer of technology. An                        
 agreement on Avoidance of Double Taxation was signed in September.                           
                                                                                              
 India continued to maintain warm and friendly relations with the countries                   
 of Latin America. At the French Bicentenary celebrations in Paris in July,                   
 and at the NAM Summit in Belgrade in September, the former Prime Minister,                   
 Shri Rajiv Gandhi had met the Presidents of Brazil, Venezuela, Mexico,                       
 Nicaragau, Peru and others. The then External Affairs Minister, Shri P V                     
 Narasimha Rao had visited Caracas in June 1989, for the G-77 Special                         
 Ministerial Meeting, and was receive d by the President of Venezuela. He                     
 had also visited Cuba thereafter. There were other Ministerial and                           
 official level exchange of visits.                                                           
                                                                                              
 Jawaharlal Nehru's Birth Centenary was celebrated in many Latin American                     
 countries. Prof. Perez Esquivel, the Nobel Peace Laureate from Argentina,                    
 participated in the seminar on Humanism, International Politics and                          
 Nehru's Thought, held in New Delhi in October.                                               
                                                                                              
 The Non-Aligned Movement worked towards reduction and relaxation of                          
 tensions globally, and the promotion of dialogue and cooperation in the                      
 international community, during the year. Addressing the 9th NAM Summit in                   
 Belgrade, the former Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi proposed three                        
 important initiatives, namely, the establishment of a Planet Protection                      
 Fund, interaction among experts to pool resources of the developing                          
 countries for South-South Cooperation and establishing a summit level                        
 Group of 15 developing countries fo r South-South Consultations and                          
 Cooperation. One of the most significant outcomes of the Belgrade Summit                     
 was the establishment of a summit level Group on South- South                                
 Consultations and Cooperation comprising 15 developing countries. of the                     
 AFRICA Fund.                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 (xi) The Summit issued a Declaration summarising the perspective role of                     
 the Movement in the context of the global political and economic                             
 situation. It stre ssed the importance of six priority areas for NAM, viz,                   
 disarmament and internationa l security, environment, development, human                     
 rights, decolonisation, and strengthening of multilateralism and the role                    
 of the UN.                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 As in the past, India played a constructive and catalytic tole in the                        
 conce rned international fora, in the progress towards disarmament,                          
 particularly nuclear disarmament and the elimination of chemical weapons.                    
 In the First Committee of the 44th Session of the UN General Assembly,                       
 India introduced three important resolutions: Conventions on the                             
 prohibition of the use of Nuclear weapons; Nuclear arms freeze; ad                           
 Scientific and technological developments and their impact on                                
 international security. All the three resolutions were adopted with                          
 overwhelming support.                                                                        
                                                                                              
 Through the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation Programme (ITEC),                      
 administered by the Ministry of External Affairs, India continued to                         
 provide technical and economic assistance to the developing countries. In                    
 addit ion to ITEC, the Ministry has strengthened India's economic                            
 cooperation with regio nal bodies such as the Economic Commission for                        
 Africa and the Southern African Development Cooperation Council.                             
                                                                                              
 India and the Non-Aligned Movement as a whole, have been seeking                             
 relaxation of international and regional tensions side by side with the                      
 advocac y of international economic cooperation. The Movement has                            
 consistently stood for decolonisation and the ending of apartheid. The                       
 marked improvement in international relations, in particular, in East-West                   
 relations, the independenc e of Namibia and the progress of the                              
 anti-apartheid movement in south Africa, were among the developments                         
 vindicating the consistent stands taken by India and the NAM.                                
                                                                                              
 (xii) ANNUAL REPORT, MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL (PORTION OMITTED IN PRINT MAY                      
 PLEASE BE SEEN BELOW)                                                                        
                                                                                              
 As the Government of India Press, Minto Road, had inadvertently not                          
 printed a few paragraphs of the Introduction, the following additions may                    
 please be read as continuation of the last words ". . . South-South. . . .                   
 ." on page (xi ) of the Introduction. This omission on the part of the                       
 Press, is very much regretted.                                                               
                                                                                              
 Cooperation and establishing a Summit level Group of 15 developing                           
 countries for South-South Consultations and Cooperation. One of the most                     
 significant outcomes of the Belgrade Summit was the establishment of a                       
 Summit level Group on South-South Consultations and Cooperation comprising                   
 15 developing countries, including India. The Summit also decided that                       
 India should continue as Chairman of the Africa Fund.                                        
                                                                                              
 The Summit issued a Declaration summarising the perspective role of the                      
 Movement in the context of the global political and economic situation. It                   
 stressed the importance of six priority areas for NAM, viz., disarmament                     
 and international security, environment, development, human rights,                          
 decolonisation, and strengthening of multilateralism and the role of the                     
 UN.                                                                                          
                                                                                              
 As in the past, India played a constructive and catalytic role in the                        
 concerned international fora, in the progress towards disarmament,                           
 particularly nuclear disarmament and the elimination of chemical weapons.                    
 In the First Committee of the 44th Session of the UN General Assembly,                       
 India introduced three important resolutions: Convention on the                              
 prohibition of the use of Nuclear Weapons; Nuclear arms freeze and                           
 Scientific and technological developments and their impact on inter-                         
 national security. All the three resolutions were adopted with                               
 overwhelming support.                                                                        
                                                                                              
 Through the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation Programme (ITEC),                      
 administered by the Ministry of External Affairs, India continued to                         
 provide technical and economic assistance to the developing countries. In                    
 addition to ITEC, the Ministry has strengthened India's economic                             
 cooperation with regional bodies such as the Economic Commission for                         
 Africa and the Southern African Development Cooperation Council.                             
                                                                                              
 India and the Non-Aligned Movement as a whole, have been seeking                             
 relaxation of international and regional tensions side by side with the                      
 advocacy of international economic cooperation. The Movement has                             
 consistently stood for decolonisation and the ending of apartheid. The                       
 marked improvement in international relations, in particular in East-West                    
 relations, the independence of Namibia and the progress of the                               
 anti-apartheid movement in South Africa, were among the developments                         
 vindicating the consistent stands taken by India and the NAM.                                
                                                                                              
 CHAPTER XII INDIANS OVERSEAS IT is the consistent policy of the Government                   
 of India that persons of Indian origin who have taken foreign nationality                    
 should identify themselves with and integrate in the country of their                        
 domicile. The Government, naturally remains alive to the interests and                       
 general welfare of overseas Indians and encourages cultura l contacts with                   
 them. Accordingly, the Government continues to take all necessar y steps                     
 for their safety and welfare.                                                                
                                                                                              
 It is estimated that there are about 12 million persons of Indian origin                     
 re siding in different parts of the world, including those having Indian                     
 nationality. An Overseas Indian Cell was set up in the Ministry with a                       
 view to develop social, economic and cultural contacts between India and                     
 the overseas Indians.(Indian Missions have been asked to maintain close                      
 contacts with overseas Indians and render them all possible assistance.                      
 This unit also disseminates information a bout matters of interest to                        
 overseas Indians, like investment procedures in India, through the                           
 Missions abroad. It also represents the Ministry of inter-minister ial                       
 deliberations involving NRI affairs. In addition, the Cell is trying to                      
 develo p a "database" on the overseas Indians.                                               
                                                                                              
 As the nodal point concerning overseas Indians, this unit coordinated                        
 arrangements for the first Global Convention of Overseas Indians held in                     
 New York from 27 August to Mar 09, 1989. The Indian delegation to the                        
 Convention was led by the former Minister of State for Railways, Shri                        
 Madhavrao Scindia. The former Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi was the                      
 Chief Patron of the Convention. The Convention was an important event in                     
 that it sought to bring together people of Indian origin from all over the                   
 globe to discuss common problems and issues. The publication "Facilities                     
 for Non-Resident Indians" bro ught out by the Overseas Indian Cell was                       
 greatly appreciated by the persons attend ing the Convention.                                
                                                                                              
 The Seventh International Conference - Seminar of Tamil Studies - was held                   
 in Port Louis, Mauritius from 4 to 8 December 1989. The Overseas Indian                      
 Cell coordinated Indian participation in this Conference. The Indian                         
 Council f or Cultural Relations sponsored 3 performing troupes to the                        
 Conference. The Counc il also gifted books and musical instruments to the                    
 Mauritian National Organising Committee of the Tamil Conference. The Tamil                   
 Nadu Government sent performing artistes and delegates to the Conference.                    
 The efforts of ICCR and t he Tamil Nadu Government were coordinated by the                   
 Overseas Indian Cell.                                                                        
                                                                                              
 1989                                                                                         
 India's Neighbours                                                                           
                                                                        Top                   
                                                                                              
 CHAPTER I INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS                                                                 
                                                                                              
 THE Government of India's objectives in Sri Lanka are the restoration of                     
 Indo - Sri Lanka relations to their traditional levels of cordiality;                        
 striving for the safety and security of Tamils in Sri Lanka; promoting                       
 lasting peace amongst all sections of the population in that country; and                    
 the expeditious deinduction of the IPKF from Sri Lanka.                                      
                                                                                              
 By the beginning of 1989, the Indo-Sri Lanka Agreement appeared well on                      
 the way to being implemented. A Provincial Council had been set up in the                    
 North- Eastern Province, an elected Tamil Government was in position in                      
 Trincomalee, and the security situation in the North-Eastern Province was                    
 satisfactory. It was, therefore, felt that a phased withdrawal of the IPKF                   
 could start. Unfortunatel y, this process was disrupted and delayed due to                   
 certain unilateral actions by the Sri Lankan Government. However, the                        
 misunderstandings were removed and the process resumed once again after                      
 the signing of a joint communique on Sep 18, 1989.                                           
                                                                                              
 The importance attached by the Government to Indo-Sri Lanka relations was                    
 reflected by the fact that the Sri Lankan Foreign Minister was the first                     
 foreig n dignitary to visit India after the installation of the new                          
 Government, from 6 t o 8 December 1989. The Sri Lankan Foreign Minister                      
 came to India for a second visi t from 4 to 6 January 1990.                                  
                                                                                              
 The Government announced in Parliament on 28 December, that keeping                          
 logistical and other factors in mind, it should be possible to complete                      
 deinduc tion of the IPKF from Sri Lanka by the end of March 1990.                            
                                                                                              
 During the year under review, relations with Bangladesh were strengthened,                   
 particularly in the economic field. The Jute Minister of Bangladesh                          
 visited In dia in September 1989 to discuss a joint strategy to protect                      
 long term interests of the two countries in this sector. The                                 
 Indo-Bangladesh Joint Economic Commission, whose term ended in October                       
 1987, was revived and extended to a further period of fiv e Years with                       
 effect from 6 October 1987 through an exchange of letters between th e                       
 Foreign Ministers of the two countries in October 1989. The                                  
 Indo-Bangladesh Trade Agreement was renewed for another three years                          
 effective form 3 October 1989, in Dhaka during the Trade Review Talks held                   
 in September 1989. The Protocol on Inland Water Transit and Trade was                        
 renewed for another two years with effect from 4 October 1989.                               
                                                                                              
 The Minister for External Affairs visited Bangladesh form 16 to 18                           
 February 1990 at the invitation of the Bangladesh Foreign Minister. He                       
 Called on Presid ent Ershad. A number of bilateral issues Such as the                        
 sharing of the Ganga Waters, Tin Bigha, Chakma refugees, influx of illegal                   
 immigrants from Bangladesh were discussed.                                                   
                                                                                              
 Such exchanges have created a favourable climate for further strengthening                   
 and diversifying of India's relations with Bangladesh in the political and                   
 econ omic fields. The warm and cordial relations between India and the                       
 Maldives were further strengthened and diversified during the year under                     
 report. The last of the Ind ian troops returned to India on 3 November                       
 1989, after a ceremonial send off by the Government and people of the                        
 Maldives.                                                                                    
                                                                                              
 Exchanges at the political level continued. The Maldivian Foreign                            
 Minister, Fathulla Jameel visited Delhi in August 1989 and this was                          
 followed by President Gayoom's two-day official visit to New Delhi on 18                     
 and 19 September 1989. In keeping with the warmth of Indo-Maldives                           
 relations, the External Affair Minister, Shri I K Gujral chose Maldives as                   
 the first country to be visited by him after assuming office. He was in                      
 the Maldives from 12 to 16 January 1990, for the first meeting of the                        
 Indo-Maldives Joint Commission. During this visit, the foundation stone of                   
 the Rs 18 crores Indira Gandhi Memorial Hospital being buil t with Indian                    
 assistance, was laid by President Gayoom. A decision to waive visa                           
 requirements for nationals of either country wishing to visit the other                      
 country , was also announced.                                                                
                                                                                              
 India and Myanmar share not only a long border but also religious and                        
 cultural affinities. The people of the two countries have traditional and                    
 frie ndly ties and it is, therefore, natural for India to be interested in                   
 developments in Mya nmar. While maintaining the policy of strict                             
 non-interference in the internal affai rs of Myanmar, India continued its                    
 principled support to the democratic aspirations o f the people of                           
 Myanmar. It is hoped that the multi-party elections promised for May 1990                    
 will be held in it tree and fair manner and relations between the two                        
 countries will be restored to their traditional warmth.                                      
                                                                                              
 The relations between India and Bhutan have traditionally remained close                     
 and friendly. These ties were further strengthened during the year under                     
 review. His Majesty the King of Bhutan visited India in July 1989 and held                   
 discussions with the President, Shri R Venkataraman, the then Prime                          
 Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, and other senior Ministers of the Government                    
 of India. The discussions were marked by a close identity of views and                       
 held in an atmosphere of warmth and cordiality . His Majesty's visit was                     
 preceded by the visit to Bhutan of the Chief of the Arm y Staff in May                       
 1989 and the Foreign Secretary in June 1989.                                                 
                                                                                              
 The flourishing economic cooperation between the two countries was main                      
 tained. The remaining work on the prestigious 330 MW Chukha Hydel Project,                   
 built entirely with Indian assistance, has also begun satisfactorily. The                    
 trans mission line projects connected with Chukha Project have now been                      
 completed.                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 The Thimphu-Paro sub transmission and distribution system project (Rs 11.5                   
 crores) was also completed successfully The upgradation of the airport                       
 faciliti es of Bhutan's Paro airport is being done by India and is                           
 expected to be completed soon. Preliminary studies were done for second                      
 airport in South Bhutan to be b uilt by India on a turnkey basis under                       
 project aid. A 50 kW broadcasting station ha s been set up in Thimphu by                     
 India on a turnkey basis and is to be commissioned soon.                                     
                                                                                              
 On 1 August 1989, the ISD link between India and Bhutan was inaugurated by                   
 the King of Bhutan and the then Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi. An                        
 agreement was also signed in the same-month for a rural development                          
 project in the Gaylegphug area of South Bhutan.                                              
                                                                                              
 The Gyetsa Mini Hydel Project (1.5 MW; Rs 4.42 crores) which was                             
 commissioned in July 1988 was inaugurated on 14 December 1989. Further                       
 work on the Taktichu Super Group Drop Microwave Transmission Project (Rs                     
 3.7 crores) is progressing satisfactorily. Moreover, over and above                          
 Bhutan's Sixth Plan, Rs 70 crores has been approved for the Kurichu Hydel                    
 Project.                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 India continues to cooperate with Bhutan in various other fields also. It                    
 provides experts and specialists to Bhutan in the fields of forestry,                        
 industry, telecommunications, hydel survey, education etc. India also                        
 gifted to Bhutan 8 2 top quality cross bred cows and heifers.                                
                                                                                              
 In the sphere of education, India continues to offer Bhutanese students                      
 opportunities for secondary as well as higher education and training in                      
 various fields such as civil aviation, police, defence, customs, medicine                    
 and engineeri ng. About 40 Bhutanese students are availing of the                            
 Government of India scholarship s. Further, a large number of scholarships                   
 are given to the Bhutanese under the Colombo Plan for studies in India.                      
                                                                                              
 India continues to supply to Bhutan, at their request, essential                             
 commodities such as wheat, rice, sugar, coal, steel and edible oils at                       
 controlled prices un der a special quota system.                                             
                                                                                              
 The first ever Bhutan Week in India organised in New Delhi in March 1989                     
 proved very popular. Relations between India and Nepal have traditionally                    
 been close and cordial The Government of India attaches high priority to                     
 improving Indo-Nepal relation s, as part of their efforts to improve                         
 relations with India's neighbours. Over th e years, India has been                           
 extending considerable economic and technical assistance to Nepal and till                   
 recently was one of its largest donors. However, strains surfac ed in                        
 Indo-Nepal relations, especially after the lapse of the Indo-Nepal                           
 Treaties of Trade and of Transit in March 1989. This was consequent on the                   
 non-fulfilment by Nep al of the commitments made when a new trade treaty                     
 was negotiated and initialled i n October 1988.                                              
                                                                                              
 The expiry of both these treaties and the agreements for the supply of POL                   
 products and coal in March 1989 was followed by a number of diplomatic                       
 demarches and communications between India and Nepal regarding the agenda                    
 and related details for bilateral talks. On 19 April 1989, India asked                       
 Nepal to sug gest a comprehensive agenda and the venue, date and level for                   
 bilateral talks. The invitation was reiterated on 8 and 18 May 1989. Nepal                   
 responded on 25 May 1989 suggesting a restricted agenda. On 16 June, India                   
 proposed a comprehensive agenda for Nepal's consideration. The Nepalese                      
 suggested certain amnendments o n 26 June which were considered and                          
 responded to by India on 16 August 1989. On 25 August 1989, the then                         
 Minister for External Affairs, Shri P V Narasimha Rao visited Kathmandu to                   
 discuss outstanding issues with the Foreign Minister and the King of Nepal                   
 and prepare the ground for a meeting between the then Prime Minister and                     
 the King of Nepal during the NAM Summit at Belgrade in early September                       
 1989. This was followed. by a meeting between former Prime Minister, Shri                    
 Rajiv Gandhi and King Birendra of Nepal during which matters concerning                      
 Indo-Nepal relations were discussed.                                                         
                                                                                              
 Despite the expiry of the Indo-Nepal Transit Treaty efforts were made to                     
 ensure smooth and unhindered transit of goods imported by Nepal from third                   
 countries through the authorised checkposts of Raxaul and Jogbani, which                     
 had earlier carried 80%-90% of Nepal's transit trade. Separate transit                       
 routes from Bhutan and Bangladesh to Nepal were also made available. India                   
 also continued to allow Nepal-Nepal transit through Indian territory.                        
                                                                                              
 In spite of the lapse of the special quota arrangements with the expiry of                   
 th e Treaty on Trade, India offered to make available to Nepal the full                      
 quantities requested by Nepal of seven essential commodities of mass                         
 consumption at levy prices. Nepal has availed only of the offer of 15,000                    
 tonnes of sugar. During the year under review, India continued to                            
 implement the economic development projects and obligatory works in Nepal                    
 under its Aid to Nepal programme. For this purpose, export of essential                      
 construction materials and PO L products was allowed even through                            
 denotified checkposts.                                                                       
                                                                                              
 India in line with the commitment to take effective steps to improve                         
 relation s with neighbours, will strive for friendly and comprehensive                       
 discussions to achi eve the early resolution of all outstanding issues                       
 between Nepal and India. Accord - ingly, the Minister for External Affairs                   
 invited the Nepalese Foreign Minister for talks in December 1989. The                        
 latter responded to the invitation and the talks w ere held in New Delhi                     
 from 3 to 5 January 1990. This resulted in greater understan ding of each                    
 other's interests and concerns.                                                              
                                                                                              
 This process has been carried further with the visit of the Nepalese                         
 official level delegation, led by the Nepalese Foreign Secretary and                         
 including the Nepal ese Defence Secretary, Commerce Secretary and other                      
 senior officials to New Delhi for detailed talks with their Indian                           
 counterparts from 19 to 22 February 1990. All aspects of Indo-Nepal                          
 relations were discussed exhaustively. The progress achi eved would be                       
 further built upon (hiring the next round of official talks, at which work                   
 will begin on the documents that would comprise a broad framework of the                     
 close and age-old Indo-Nepal relationship on an enduring basis.                              
                                                                                              
 The Government of Nepal has extended an invitation to the Prime Minister                     
 and the External Affairs Minister to visit Nepal. An invitation has been                     
 exten ded to the King of Nepal to visit India. India continued its efforts                   
 to develop friendly and good neighbourly relation s with Pakistan in                         
 accordance with the letter and spirit of the Simla Agreement.                                
                                                                                              
 During the visit of the then Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi in December                   
 1988, it had been decided to maintain a close dialogue at all levels on                      
 the ent ire range of bilateral issues with the objective of accelerating                     
 the normalisation process. Accordingly, the following meetings took place                    
 during 1989: Water Resources Secretaries (28 to 31 March 1989), Directors                    
 General Civil Aviation ( 10 to 13 May 1989), Railway Authorities (11 to 15                   
 May 1989), Home Secretaries (21 to 23 May 1989), Surveyors General (29 May                   
 2 June 1989), Defence Secretaries (15 and 16 June 1989), Foreign                             
 Secretaries (17 and 18 June 1989), and the Joint Commission (18 and 19                       
 July 1989). These meetings have generally had a positive outcome and                         
 helped to consolidate the normalisation process.                                             
                                                                                              
 The then Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, paid an official bilateral                       
 visit to Pakistan on 16 and 17 July 1989. It was the first bilateral visit                   
 by an Indian Prime Minister since 1960, when Prime Minister Nehru had                        
 visited to sign the Indus Water Treaty. The Prime Minister held talks with                   
 President Ghulam Ishaq Khan and the Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto. The                       
 talks which covered bilateral, regi onal and multilateral issues were                        
 cordial and held in an atmosphere of mutual trust and rapport. Prime                         
 Minister Benazir Bhutto reiterated her commitment to reorientin g                            
 bilateral relations with India.                                                              
                                                                                              
 Mr Aitzaz Ahsan, Interior Minister of Pakistan, visited India from 8 to 11                   
 April 1989 as Special Envoy of Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto to solicit                      
 support for the candidature of Justice (Retd.) Dorab Patel of Pakistan for                   
 the Internationa l Court of Justice. During his stay he had discussions                      
 with the Indian leaders o n bilateral and other issues of mutual interest.                   
 During the third round of Home Secretary level talks between India and                       
 Pakistan held in Islamabad from 20 to 24 May 1989. both sides agreed on a                    
 number of measures to contain terrorism, drug trafficking, Smuggling and                     
 illici t border crossings along the India-Pakistan border. The Defence                       
 Secretaries of t he two countries during their meeting in June 1989                          
 discussed specific proposals ai ming at an early solution of the Siachen                     
 issue in accordance with the Simla Agreemen t.                                               
                                                                                              
 At their meeting in June 1989, the Foreign Secretaries of India and                          
 Pakistan discussed bilateral relations between the two countries and also                    
 laid the groun d- work for the third meeting of the Joint Commission. The                    
 Joint Commission meeting, which was chaired by the External Affairs                          
 Minister and Foreign Ministe r of Pakistan, was held after a gap of four                     
 years. The constituent Sub-Commissio ns of the Joint Commission met on 17                    
 July 1989. The meetings of the Sub- Commissions and the Joint Commission                     
 evolved several concrete measures to increase cooperation between the two                    
 countries in the fields of agriculture, industries, health, planning and                     
 to further promote people-to-people exchanges between the two countries                      
 particularly in the fields of education, culture and media. Agreement was                    
 also reached on relaxation of visa regime including exemption from                           
 personal police reporting for those visiting for less than 14 da ys,                         
 increase in the number of cities allowed for visit during one trip from 4                    
 to 8, measures to promote group tours and increase in the number of                          
 shrines and pilgrims allowed for reciprocal visits.                                          
                                                                                              
 The Foreign Minister, Sahabzada Yaqub Khan, visited India on 24 and 25                       
 July 1989 for discussions on SAARC matters. The External Affairs Minister                    
 paid a visit to Pakistan from 7 to 9 November 1989 to attend the SAARC                       
 Ministerial meeting. During the visit the Foreign Secretary held talks                       
 with his counterpart on bilateral relations.                                                 
                                                                                              
 India has consistently sought to develop friendly and good neighbourly                       
 relations with Pakistan in accordance with the Simla Agreement. However,                     
 there have been disturbing developments in the form of increased support                     
 by pakistan to terrorism directed against India in Jammu and Kashmir.                        
 Besides, deliberate attempts are being made to generate religious                            
 hysteria. Pakistan has also been attempting to distance itself from the                      
 commitments it undertook Under the Simla Agreement such as to resolve all                    
 issues peacefully and bilaterally. not to inte rfere In internal affairs,                    
 and not to indulge in hostile propaganda. India has clear ly reiterated                      
 its consistent position that Jammu and Kashmir is an integral part o f                       
 India, and that any interference in India's internal affairs will not be                     
 tolera ted. The unity and integrity of India will be preserved at any                        
 cost. India continues to hope that the Government of Pakistan will                           
 cooperate with India in its endeavour to promote peace and stability in                      
 the region. This had been conveyed suitably to Mr Abdus Sattar, a Special                    
 Envoy of the Pakistan Prime Minister, who visited India from 7 to 11                         
 January and Sahabzada Yaqub Khan, the Foreign Minister of Pakistan, who                      
 was in India from 21 to 23 January 1990.                                                     
                                                                                              
 India continued to take an active interest in the developments in                            
 Afghanistan and kept in touch with those concerned with the situation.                       
 India had welcomed the signing of the Geneva Accords in April 1988 in the                    
 hope that it would lead to restoration of peace and stability in the                         
 region. T he Accords have not, however, been implemented by all the                          
 parties involved despite the complete withdrawal of Soviet troops, by 15                     
 February 1989.                                                                               
                                                                                              
 The resistance groups formed an Afghan Interim Government, in February,                      
 following a Shoora that had been convened in Rawalpindi. However,                            
 dissensions arose in the Iran-based rebels remaining outside the                             
 framework. There was also severe infighting among the Peshawar based                         
 rebels.                                                                                      
                                                                                              
 The international community continued its efforts for a resolution of the                    
 iss ue. A debate was held in the UN Security Council in April 1989. The                      
 Final Communique of the CHOGM (October 1989), the Resolution adopted at                      
 NAM Summit as well as the 44th Session of the UN General Assembly in                         
 October 1989, made references to the situation in Afghanistan. These                         
 references emphasised t he need for a comprehensive political settlement,                    
 the right of the Afghan people t o determine their own future and the need                   
 to preserve the sovereignty, territoria l integrity, political                               
 independence and nonaligned status of Afghanistan. The NA M also called                      
 upon the Chairman of the Movement to undertake an initiative for finding a                   
 solution to the Afghan conflict.                                                             
                                                                                              
 India is for the strict implementation of the Geneva Accords. India would                    
 li ke to see a political settlement in Afghanistan arrived at by the                         
 Afghans themselv es without external interference or intervention and                        
 which takes into account the existing realities and the legitimate                           
 interests of all concerned. India is als o for the cessation of bloodshed                    
 in that country and the preservation of Afghanistan's st atus as a                           
 sovereign, nonaligned and independent country.                                               
                                                                                              
 Bilateral relations developed satisfactorily. India sent relief supplies                     
 to Afghanistan worth Rs 1.3 crores. India is also committed to providing                     
 assistan ce of Rs 10 crores for refugee rehabilitation through the UN and                    
 bilaterally. The process of regional cooperation under the auspices of the                   
 South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) received a                          
 serious setback during the year, although interaction at the technical                       
 level continued.                                                                             
                                                                                              
 The setback occurred with the postponement of the 7th Session of the                         
 Council of Ministers, scheduled to have been held in Islamabad in                            
 June-July 1989 owing to Sri Lanka's decision not to participate in the                       
 meeting. Since the Council of Ministers would not have been able to take                     
 any decisions in the absence of any single member country, the meeting was                   
 postponed to a date to be decided after mutual consultations between all                     
 the member States. The Session was eventually held in Islamabad on 8 and 9                   
 November 1989. It was preceded by the 12th Sessio n of the Standing                          
 Committee of Foreign Secretaries and the 7th Session of the Programming                      
 Committee of senior officials.                                                               
                                                                                              
 The uncertainty facing SAARC continued with the dates and venue of the 5th                   
 SAARC Summit, which should have met in 1989, remaining undecided. The                        
 Summit was to have been hosted by Sri Lanka but did not take place.                          
 Consultations have been going on among the member States on the subject.                     
 The Pakistan Foreign Minister, Sahabzada Yaqub Khan visited New Delhi in                     
 January 1990 for this purpose on behalf of the current SAARC Chairperson,                    
 the Pakistan Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto. He informed the Government of                    
 the discussions h e had held with the Maldives and Sri Lankan leaders in                     
 December 1989. It was agreed that Pakistan would keep the Government of                      
 India informed of further consultations to be held on the subject with                       
 other SAARC member countries. The Government of India has viewed this slow                   
 pace of SAARC meetings with great disappointment, and has reiterated                         
 categorically that SAARC must not be affecte d by bilateral and                              
 contentious issues.                                                                          
                                                                                              
 The postponement of the Council of Ministers meeting also resulted in the                    
 delay in decision-making on various ongoing projects and administrative                      
 matters relating to the Secretariat, which were subsequently settled                         
 through correspondence.                                                                      
                                                                                              
 In spite of this slow pace of SAARC meetings, work continued at the                          
 technical level through the organisation of short term activities like                       
 workshop s and seminars and other projects. The Ministry functioned as the                   
 national focal poi nt to coordinate India's involvement and worked in                        
 close association with all other Ministries, Departments and agencies                        
 involved with various specific aspects.                                                      
                                                                                              
 The year witnessed some progress in the implementation of schemes and                        
 projects already agreed upon: The Council of Ministers decided that the                      
 scheme for the issue of a Special SAARC Travel Document, for visa-free                       
 travel in the region-for Members of Parliament and Supreme Court Judges to                   
 start with-would come into effect from 1 May 1990 after some preparatory                     
 work in this connection;                                                                     
                                                                                              
 The Technical Committee on Education, set up by a decision of the 4th                        
 SAARC Summit in Islamabad in December 1988, held its first meeting and                       
 commenced work on drawing up plans for regional cooperation in the areas                     
 of primary education; literacy, post-literacy and continuing education;                      
 science and technical education; educational research; education for                         
 under-served areas/groups and modernisation of curriculum;                                   
                                                                                              
 The SAARC Audio Visual Exchange (SAVE) completed two years of smooth                         
 functioning. Guidelines for the co-production of programmes for both radio                   
 and television have been adopted. Also, special magazine type programmes                     
 on development issues have been scheduled twice a year on both media-                        
 these would be in addition to the regular monthly programmes on radio and                    
 television contributed by each member country and broadcast throughout the                   
 region on the same day each month.                                                           
                                                                                              
 The year 1989 was observed as the SAARC Year for Combating Drug Abuse and                    
 Drug Trafficking, and a regional Plan of Action was drawn up by the                          
 Technical Committee concerned. This included steps to increase public                        
 awarenes s about the adverse effects of drug abuse through a campaign in                     
 the print and electronic media and the distribution of educational                           
 material. Eighth December 1989 was observed in all member countries as the                   
 SAARC Day Against Drug Abuse. The President Shri R Venkataraman issued a                     
 special message on the occasion. The Government of India doordinated a                       
 comparative study of existing laws with a view to harmonising drug-related                   
 legislation in member countries an d hosted a meeting of legal experts in                    
 New Delhi in December 1989 in this connection.                                               
                                                                                              
 The member countries also focused their attention on measures to                             
 streamline SAARC activities, of which 62 were held during 1989-90, in the                    
 12 sectors of cooperation (Agriculture, Education, Health and population                     
 activities. Meteorology, Postal Services, Prevention of Drug Trafficking                     
 and Drug Abuse, Rural Development, Science and Technology, Sports, Arts                      
 and Culture, Telecommunications, Transport and Women in Development).                        
 Steps for smoother intersectoral coordination among the respective                           
 Technical Committees were decided on. It was also agreed that before                         
 considering any new proposals for t he establishment of regional                             
 institutions, it would be necessary to assess the functioning of the                         
 institutions already approved.                                                               
                                                                                              
 In keeping with the move to increase the involvement of non-governmental                     
 organisations in SAARC activities, it was decided that at least one of the                   
 act ivities planned each year by each of the Technical Committees should                     
 involve the participation of NGOs/professional bodies. Member countries                      
 have agreed that there is a need for a qualitative change i n the nature                     
 of SAARC activities, so as to make them effective instruments for th e                       
 transfer of technology. India also continued to stress the urgency for                       
 SAARC t o include core economic areas such as trade, industry, money and                     
 finance within t he purview of regional cooperation; this would impart to                    
 SAARC a new dynamism which would enable the Association to play an active                    
 role in the economic development and growth of the region. Economic                          
 cooperation together with increased people-to-people contact and the freer                   
 flow of information would give SAARC the impetus required for progress in                    
 developmental areas, within the overall framework built up for                               
 cooperation.                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 Shri K K Bhargava, the nominee of the Government of India, assumed (tic                      
 office of Secretary General at the SAARC Secretariat in October 1989, on                     
 the expiry of the term of Mr Abut Ahsan of Bangladesh.                                       
 1989                                                                                         
 South-East Asia and the Pacific                                                              
                                                                        Top                   
 Jan 01, 1989                                                                                 
 CHAPTER II                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 SOUTH-EAST ASIA AND THE PACIFIC INDIA'S traditionally close relations with                   
 the South-East Asian and Pacific region were further diversified through                     
 frequent official interaction and India 's supportive role in promoting a                    
 peaceful negotiated settlement in Cambodia. As the Prime Minister's                          
 Special Envoy, Shri K Natwar Singh, then Minister of State in the Ministry                   
 of External Affairs met leaders of ASEAN and the Indo-China countries as                     
 also USSR and France for consultations. At the International Conference on                   
 Cambodia in Paris in August 1989, India co-chaired the First Committee                       
 which dealt with the establishment of an International Control Mechanism.                    
 Although t he Conference was unable to achieve a comprehensive settlement,                   
 important areas of agreement were identified and India's contribution was                    
 appreciated. A delegati on led by Shri B R Bhagat, MP, witnessed the final                   
 withdrawal of Vietnamese troops from Cambodia at the end of September                        
 1989. Since then, India has held further consultations in the search for a                   
 solution to the Cambodian problem. A senior official of the Ministry of                      
 External Affairs visited Phnom Penh, Hanoi and Bangkok to discuss the                        
 recent peace initiatives. In this context the Governmen t has also been in                   
 close touch with Australia regarding the proposal for a UN Tole in                           
 Cambodia.                                                                                    
                                                                                              
 Close and friendly relations with Cambodia continued. An official                            
 delegation visited Cambodia in June 1989 to study prospects for increasing                   
 bilateral assis tance to Cambodia for reconstruction of its war-ravaged                      
 economy. Restoration work of the Angkor Wat by the Archaeological Survey                     
 of India has made progress.                                                                  
                                                                                              
 Important visits to India from Vietnam were those of the Vice-Chairman of                    
 the Council of Ministers, Gen. Yo Nguyen Giap in April 1989 and of Foreign                   
 Minister Co Thach. Bilateral trade and economic cooperation grew as ONGC                     
 Videsh Limited began seismic survey in offshore areas under contract with                    
 Petro Vietnam. An agreement in the field of atomic energy is being drawn                     
 up by the Indian Atomic Energy Commission. A Protocol for cooperation                        
 between the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research and the Vietnam                    
 Institute of Scie nce was signed. A trade delegation visited India at the                    
 invitation of CIMMCO International to explore prospects for cooperation in                   
 the tea and textile indus tries. An agreement to set up a Vietnam-India                      
 Joint Chamber of Commerce was finalised during the visit of a delegation                     
 of the Indian Merchants' Chamber. Provision of technical assistance under                    
 the ITEC Programme is continuing. The Rice Research Institute and the                        
 Buffalo Breeding and Forage Research Centre are due to be handed over to                     
 Vietnam in early 1990. When Vietnam was struck by three typhoons in                          
 October 1989, medicines worth Rs 5 lakhs were sent by air as emergency                       
 relief.                                                                                      
                                                                                              
 Cooperation between Doordarshan and the All India Radio on the one hand,                     
 and their Vietnamese counterparts on the other, became closer as a result                    
 of th e visit of a Doordarshan delegation in April 1989, and the visit of                    
 a delegation from the Voice of Vietnam to India in December.                                 
                                                                                              
 An Indian Consulate General was opened in Ho Chi Minh City in January                        
 1990.                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 Friendly relations and economic cooperation between India and Laos were                      
 maintained. Training in diverse areas such as forestry, agriculture, fine                    
 arts , media etc, was provided under the ITEC Programme, alongwith the                       
 deputation of Indian experts. A Lao cultural troupe was sponsored by the                     
 ICCR in November 1989. The warm relations between India and Thailand                         
 received a fillip with the firs t ever visit of a Thai Prime Minister,                       
 Gen. Chatichai Choonhavan, in March 1989. An agreement to set up a Joint                     
 Commission was signed. ONGC and the Petroleun Authority of Thailand signed                   
 a Memorandum of Understanding for cooperation in activities related to                       
 exploration and production of petroleum.                                                     
                                                                                              
 The External Affairs Minister visited Thailand in May 1989 for the first                     
 meeting of the Indo-Thailand Joint Commission. It was agreed to expand                       
 bilatera l trade to US $ 1 billion within three years. It was also                           
 resolved to establish a Joint Business Council. The Minister of State for                    
 Science and Technology visited Thailand in July 1989. With the Thai Deputy                   
 Prime Minister, he inaugurated the Electronic Design Laboratory at                           
 Chulalonkorn University which had been set up with assistance from the                       
 Government of India. The Deputy Foreign Minister of Thailand visited India                   
 in connection with the Republic Day celebrations in 1990 The Foreign                         
 Secretary visited Malaysia in September-October 1989 as a Special Envoy of                   
 the Prime Minister for exchange of views on issues of mutual interest and                    
 called on the Malaysian Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister. A return                    
 visit by the Malaysian Secretary General for Foreign Affairs took place in                   
 January 1990. The Commerce Minister visited Malaysia in September 1989,                      
 and held discussions on the entire range of trade related issues with a                      
 view to pro mote bilateral trade and economic cooperation.                                   
                                                                                              
 The Minister of State for External Affairs visited Indonesia in April and                    
 in June 1989, for discussions on the Cambodian issue. Cultural ties                          
 between the people of India and Indonesia were further strengthened by the                   
 inauguration of the Jawaharlal Nehru Indian Cultural Centre in Jakarta.                      
 The Indonesia-India Friendship Association was inaugurated in November                       
 1989, in the presence of the Indonesian Foreign Minister and other                           
 prominent Indonesian leaders.                                                                
                                                                                              
 A number of Indians were arrested in Singapore, following the recent                         
 enactment of a new immigration law providing for the sentence of caning in                   
 addition to varying periods of imprisonment for foreigners who overstayed                    
 their visas by more than 90 days and /or for illegally entering the                          
 country. They we re subsequently granted clemency by the President of                        
 Singapore. The Singapore authorities also agreed to the repatriation                         
 without any panel action of about 1 900 overstayers who voluntarily                          
 registered themselves with the Indian High Commission in May and                             
 July-August 1989. Although the problem of immigration offenders from India                   
 was amicably settled through cooperation between the two Governments and                     
 wide publicity was given both in India and Singapore to prevent violation                    
 of Singapore's harsh immigration regulations, in the past few months some                    
 more arrests and convictions for overstaying have occurred. Some of the                      
 offenders were carted. The Ministry of External Affairs strongly protested                   
 thi s punishment with the Singapore Government while simultaneously                          
 continuing its efforts in India to prevent recurrences.                                      
                                                                                              
 In December 1989, a faction in the Philippine military made an abortive                      
 attempt to overthrow the elected Government led by President Aquino. In                      
 keepin g with India's firm commitment to democratic principles, the                          
 Government of India expressed its support to the Government of the                           
 Philippines for the steps taken to restore normalcy and the rule of law.                     
                                                                                              
 Bilateral relations between India and Australia were characterised by                        
 exchang e of many visits at Minister level. The Australian Prime Minister,                   
 Mr Hawke, had visited in February 1989, and exchanged views on various                       
 issues of bilateral in terest including disarmament, chemical weapons and                    
 the political situation and strateg ic environment in the Asia Pacific                       
 region. During his visit, four Memoranda of Understanding had also been                      
 signed in the fields of meteorology, tele- communications, railways and                      
 concessional finance. The Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs and                        
 Trade, Mr Gareth Evans, visited in June 1989. During the visit, letters                      
 were exchanged to establish an Indo-Australian Joint Ministerial                             
 Commission. The Minister for Commerce led the Indian delegation to the                       
 first meeting of the Joint Ministerial Council held in Australia in July                     
 1989. Modal ities for expansion of bilateral trade and economic                              
 cooperation were identified. The Minister of State for Railways and Shri                     
 Abid Hussain, Member, Planning Commission, also visited Australia. The                       
 Australian Minister for Employment, Education and Training and the                           
 Minister for Industry, Technology and Commerce visited India in September                    
 and October 1989, respectively. The Piparwar openca st coal mining project                   
 in Bihar and the feasibility study for the establishment of the Karwar                       
 naval base in Karnataka were awarded to an Australian-led consortia. The                     
 then Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri K Natwar Singh visited                     
 Australia and Newzealand to discuss issues to be taken up at the impending                   
 CHOGM meeting in Kualalumpur. In Australia he met the Prime Minister and                     
 in Newzealand, the Prime Minister and Minister for External Relations.                       
 These meetings also provided opportunities for discussing bilateral                          
 matters.                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 India and Newzealand maintained their traditionally friendly relations. In                   
 February 1990, the Attorney General of Newzealand and former Prime                           
 Minister, Mr David Lange visited Delhi and was a guest of the Ministry of                    
 External Affair s.                                                                           
                                                                                              
 The constitutional crisis in Fiji remained unresolved with the submission                    
 of its Report by the Constitution Inquiry and Advisory Committee appointed                   
 by the Interim Government. The CIAC Report reiterated the thrust of the                      
 Draft Constitution proposed in September 1988, which had been criticised                     
 by the ouste d National Federation Party-Fiji Labour Party Coalition, as                     
 an authoritarian, feu dal and racially discriminatory document. The                          
 Government of India issued a Stateme nt criticising the CIAC Report which                    
 had failed to address the central issue of weeding out the retrograde and                    
 racially discriminatory features of the Draft Constitution. India                            
 continued its ban on trade with Fiji. In international fora, India has                       
 continued to criticise the apartheid-like character of the present                           
 dispensation in Fiji.                                                                        
 1989                                                                                         
 East Asia                                                                                    
                                                                        Top                   
 CHAPTER III EAST ASIA                                                                        
                                                                                              
 DURING the year under review, the steady momentum in the fostering of                        
 cooperative interaction between India and China was maintained. It was                       
 recognised that normalisation of India-China relations is in the interests                   
 of b oth countries and that efforts should be made to improve and expand                     
 this relationsh ip. It was stressed by the Government in December 1989,                      
 that the outstanding boundary question should be resolved in a fair and                      
 reasonable manner in consonance with India's national interests.                             
                                                                                              
 In a message of felicitation addressed to the Prime Minister, Shri V P                       
 Singh, the Chinese Premier, Mr Li Peng expressed the hope that the good                      
 neighbourly relations between India and China would improve and develop                      
 further on the basi s of the Five Principles of Peaceful Co-existence. The                   
 Chinese Premier referred to the traditional friendship between the peoples                   
 of India and China. In his resp onse, the Prime Minister said that India                     
 was confident that the traditional friendshi p and mutual respect between                    
 the two peoples and the common commitment of both countries to the Five                      
 Principles of Peaceful Co-existence would help the furthe r development of                   
 bilateral relations and the resolution of outstanding issues. H e stated                     
 that the process of understanding and cooperation initiated in recent ti                     
 mes between India and China would be continued by the Government.                            
                                                                                              
 Messages of felicitations were also addressed by the Chinese Vice Premier                    
 Yao Yilin and the Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen to the Deputy Prime                          
 Minister, Shri Devi Lal and the External Affairs Minister, Shri I K                          
 Gujral, respectively on their assumption of office.                                          
                                                                                              
 The year was marked by the exchange of a number of high level visits                         
 between the two countries. Vice Premier Wu Xueqian of China paid a                           
 goodwill visit to India in October 1989 at the invitation of the then                        
 External Affairs Minister, Shri P V Narasimha Rao. During the visit. views                   
 were exchanged on a number of issu es of bilateral and international                         
 concern. Vice Premier Wu called on the then Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv                       
 Gandhi. He visited places of scientific, industrial and Cultural interest                    
 in Delhi, Bombay, Goa and Bangalore. The Chinese Minister for Agriculture,                   
 Animal Husbandry and Fishery, Mr He Kang visited India in March 1989. A                      
 Memorandum of Consultation in the field of Agriculture was signed during                     
 the visit. The Vice Minister of the State Science and Technology                             
 Commission, Madame Zhu Lilan visited India in March 1989 for the first                       
 meeting of the India-China Sub Group on Science and Technology under the                     
 Joint Group on economic relations, trade and science and technology. The                     
 Exchange Programme in Science and Technology for 1989-90 under the                           
 Agreement in Science and Technology was signed during the visit. Mr Zheng                    
 Tuobin, Minister for Foreign Economic Relations and Trade, visited India                     
 in September 1989 at the invitation of the then Commerce Minister for the                    
 first meeting of the India-China ministerial level Joint Group in trade,                     
 economic relations and science and technology. A Trade Protocol for the                      
 period September 1989 to September 1990 was concluded. The two sides                         
 stressed their resolve to redress imbalances in bilateral trade and to                       
 increase this trade. The possibilities of technology exchange, joint                         
 ventures and investment were also discussed.                                                 
                                                                                              
 From the Indian side, the visit of the then Minister for Steel and Mines,                    
 Shri M L Fotedar, to China in April-May 1989 resulted in the                                 
 identification of areas for cooperation in the geology and mining                            
 industries. Shri S B Chavan, then Finance Minister, visited Beijing for                      
 the ADB Board of Governors meeting in May 1989.                                              
                                                                                              
 The India-China Joint Working Group (JWG) on the boundary question held                      
 its first meeting in July 1989 at Beijing. The Indian delegation was led                     
 by the Foreign Secretary. The meeting discussed modalities for future                        
 consultations within the Group. It was resolved not to dwell on past                         
 differences but to look to the future in a practical, workmanlike and                        
 realistic manner in order to reach a fair, reasonable and mutually                           
 acceptable settlement of the boundary question. It was agreed that peace                     
 and tranquillity should be maintained in the border areas. The need for                      
 confidence-building measures was recognised. Other bilateral contacts                        
 covered such fields as biotechnology, contemporary international                             
 relations, trade fairs, standards and norms, public administration,                          
 literature and the arts, electronics, fisheries, and an India China                          
 seminar on tradition, modernity and change, at Beijing in November 1989.                     
                                                                                              
 India's relations with japan imporved steadily despite the vicissitudes of                   
 Japan's internal politics. Japan continues to be the biggest donor to                        
 india with ODA loan totalling Rs 1100 crores approximately (96,710 million                   
 Yen) for the fiscal year 1989. Th is represents an increase of 36.6% over                    
 the previous year. The most significant a spect of ODA loan to India in                      
 1989 was that Japan would henceforth, meet 85% of the total cost of                          
 projects whether incurred in foreign exchange or in local currenc y.                         
                                                                                              
 Grant aid for debt relief amounting to Rs 13 crores was received in                          
 February 1989; Rs 6 crores in October 1989; and Rs 5.5 crores in December                    
 1989 bringing total grant aid for debt relief to a figure of Rs 225 crores                   
 received by India since 1979. Similarly, in November 1989, approximately                     
 Rs 7 crores was allocated to India as grant aid to increase food                             
 production in India. This amount is to be utilised for import of                             
 fertilisers for agriculture which has been given the hig hest priority                       
 under the Seventh Plan.                                                                      
                                                                                              
 Around Rs 49 lakhs (41 million Yen) was further received in 1988-89 for                      
 the import of audio video equipment for the Indira Gandhi National Centre                    
 for Arts in March 1989 and Rs 7.3 crores (616 million Yen) in June 1989                      
 for supply of medic al equipment for regional cancer centres. The Seventh                    
 round of Indo-Japan Trade talks were held in Tokyo from 9 to May 11, 1989.                   
 Aid India Consortium meeting was held in Tokyo from 16 to 20 May 1989.                       
 Indo-Japan Business Cooperation Committee meeting was held at New Delhi on                   
 5 June 1989.                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 An Agreement on the Avoidance of Double Taxation was signed between India                    
 and Japan on 29 November 1989. A delegation led by the Director General,                     
 Anthropological Survey of India, visited Tokyo from 25 to 31 May 1989 to                     
 hold talks for computerisation plan for Project India 400.                                   
                                                                                              
 A Parliamentary delegation headed by the Hon'ble Speaker visited Japan                       
 from 27 August to 2 September 1989. With the Republic of Korea and the                       
 Democratic People's Republic of Korea India's relations progressed                           
 smoothly. The Cultural Exchange Programme between the Republic of Korea                      
 and India was signed for the years 1990-92 in November 1989. The Embassy                     
 of India, Seoul, organised various events in commemoration of Pandit                         
 Nehru's Birth Centenary. Chairman, Standing Committee of the Supreme                         
 People's Republic (Parliament Speaker) of Democratic People's Republic of                    
 Korea, Mr Fang Myong Sop, paid an official visit to India in April 1989 at                   
 the invitation of the Indian Parliamen t. He called on the then Prime                        
 Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi.                                                                 
                                                                                              
 Cultural and academic exchanges took place between India and Democratic                      
 People's Republic of Korea with the visits of an Odissi cultural troupe to                   
 Pyongyang and a 5-member delegation from the Indian Council for Social                       
 Sciences Research at the invitation of the DPRK Academy of Social                            
 Sciences. In July 198 9 the Minister of State for Youth Affairs and Sports                   
 with 10 Members of Parliamen t and a 350-strong Indian contingent visited                    
 Pyongyang to participate in the 13th World Youth Festival. The Group held                    
 discussions/meetings on NAM, women's rights, apartheid, disarmanent etc.                     
                                                                                              
 India's relations with Mongolia progressed significantly with the visit of                   
 H. E. Mr Jambyn Batmunkh, President of Mongolia, to India on 7 March 1989.                   
 During his visit a Protocol on Science and Technology was signed and it                      
 was announced that a Chair for Mongolian Studies would be set up at                          
 Jawaharlal Nehru University. A Mongolian Cultural troupe headed by                           
 Mongolia's Vice Minister for Culture, Madame Narantoya, visited India from                   
 9 to 27 March 1989, and gave performances in various parts of the country.                   
                                                                                              
 The Mongolian People's Republic issued a special commemorative stamp on                      
 the occasion of the Nehru Centenary Celebrations.                                            
 1989                                                                                         
 West Asia and North Africa                                                                   
                                                                        Top                   
 CHAPTER IV WEST ASIA AND NORTH AFRICA INDIA'S relations with the countries                   
 of the West Asia and North Africa region in the political, economic and                      
 cultural fields were further Consolidated and diversified during the year                    
 under review.                                                                                
                                                                                              
 The Palestinian issue remained the centre of international focus for the                     
 seco nd year in succession as the Palestinian uprising against the tight                     
 grip of contin ued Israeli occupation in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip                    
 showed no sign of slackening. Chairman Yasser Arafat visited India in                        
 March 1989 to brief Indian leaders on the various PLO initiatives to                         
 create a positive climate for resumpt ion of the peace process. India's                      
 firm and unequivocal support for the Palestinian ca use in international                     
 fora was reiterated. During his visit, the PLO Embassy in New De lhi was                     
 renamed "The Embassy of the State of Palestine." India strongly feels that                   
 the moderate and constructive proposals of Chairman Arafat need to be                        
 reciprocated by other involved countries in order to find a solution to                      
 the longstanding Mid dle- East problem. India is convinced that only the                     
 convening of an International P eace Conference under the UN auspices with                   
 the participation of all parties to the A rab- Israeli dispute including                     
 the PLO as the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people                      
 can lead to a just and comprehensive settlement of the Palestinian problem                   
 and durable peace in the region.                                                             
                                                                                              
 Close consultations between India and Egypt on matters of mutual interest                    
 continued during the period under review. The Minister of State for                          
 Foreign Affairs of Egypt, Dr Boutros Ghali visited India in April 1989.                      
 This was prece ded by the visit of the Egyptian Assistant Minister for                       
 Foreign Affairs Mr Wafaa Hegazi.                                                             
                                                                                              
 Relations with Syria continued to grow in strength. The Minister of                          
 Foreign Affairs of Syria, Mr Farouk Al-Shara visited India in April 1989.                    
 An informati on delegation form Syria visited India in August-September                      
 1989. A protocol on ra dio and television cooperation was signed during                      
 the visit. The Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, Dr Najma Heptullah                        
 visited Syria in September 1989 to attend the Conference of Arab                             
 Parliamentarians on Population and Development. An exclusive Indian                          
 industrial exhibition was held by the Trade Fair Authority of India in                       
 Syria in October 1989.                                                                       
                                                                                              
 India's relations with Jordan continued to grow. In March-April 1989, the                    
 third meeting of the Indo-Jordanian Trade Committee was field in Amman. In                   
 May, a delegation of C-DOT Technology Mission visited Jordan and signed a                    
 Memorandum of Understanding to set up a joint venture for digital                            
 switching equipment. In June, FICCI held the first Joint Investment Round                    
 Table Meeting in Amman. In September, TFAI held it trade and industrial                      
 exhibition in Jordan. India gifted a consignment of medicines to Lebanon                     
 in 1989. India's relation s with Somalia, Djibouti and Sudan remained                        
 friendly.                                                                                    
                                                                                              
 In the Maghreb region, Indo-Algerian relations continued to grow. A                          
 delegation led by Shri M S Gill, Secretary, Chemicals and Petrochemicals,                    
 visit ed Algeria in February. In July, a delegation from the Ministry of                     
 Heavy Industry of Algeria visited India to explore possibilities of                          
 cooperation. Talks were held between experts from both sides to finalise                     
 an agreement for Indian credit and for a Double Taxation Avoidance                           
 Agreement. A team of journalists visited Algeria i n October to report on                    
 Indian projects in the field of railways. Cultural cooper ation continued                    
 apace with cultural troupes from both sides holding performances. An                         
 exhibition of contemporary art of India was held in Algiers in July.                         
                                                                                              
 The Minister of State of Foreign Affairs of Tunisia, Mr Habib Ben Yahya                      
 visited India in October and held wide ranging talks on bilateral and                        
 internati onal matters of mutual interest. Indian dance troupes                              
 participated in the Carthage International Festival in Tunis.                                
                                                                                              
 India's relations with Libya continued to be good and efforts were made to                   
 resolve the problem of outstanding payments of Indian companies. In                          
 November, some payments were received in the form of a petroleum shipment.                   
 Shri Janakraj Gupta, MP, participated in the festivities marking the 20th                    
 Anniversary of Liby an Revolution in September. An Indian cultural troupe                    
 also gave performances du ring the celebrations. India's relations with                      
 Morocco remained cordial. Problems concerning supply of phosphoric acid by                   
 Morocco to India were resolved in October when Morocco agreed to withdraw                    
 arbitration claims and the supply of phosphoric acid to India was resumed.                   
 A Special Envoy of the President of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic,                    
 Mr Bashir Mustapha Sayeed visited India in August. A relief consignment of                   
 medicines was sent to the Sahrawi Government during the year.                                
                                                                                              
 India's cordial and mutually beneficial relations with the countries in                      
 the G ulf region were further strengthened, with renewed accent on the                       
 economic content i n bilateral relations. With the increase in demand for                    
 manpower, the number of Indians working in the Gulf region has risen to                      
 over 1.21 million. A labour delegation led by Sec retary (Labour), Shri                      
 Suresh Mathur, visited the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates                     
 and the Sultanate of Oman in September 1989 with a view to study the                         
 conditions of Indian labour and to renew contacts with the Ministries of                     
 Labour . There were two visits by Saudi medical recruitment teams during                     
 1989 resulting in large scale recruitment of Indian specialists,                             
 generalists and paramedical pers onnel by the Saudi Ministry of Health.                      
                                                                                              
 Shri Alfred Gonsalves, Secretary (West) in the Ministry of External                          
 Affairs visited Oman, Qatar, Bahrain and United Arab Emirates in April                       
 1989 as Prime Minister's Special Envoy. The Indian naval ships, INS Shakti                   
 and INS Godavari, paid a goodwill visit in November 1989 to Muscat                           
 (Sultanate of Oman), Doha (Qatar) and Kuwait. Dr Najma Heptullah, Deputy                     
 Chairman of Rajya Sabha visited Saudi Arabia in February 1989 as an                          
 emissary of Prime Minister. A delegation from the Saudi Command and Staff                    
 College visited a number of Indian defence establishments in July 1989.                      
                                                                                              
 Intensive efforts were undertaken in 1989 to further develop Indo-Iranian                    
 cooperations. A mutually acceptable settlement was reached over the long                     
 pendi ng issue of Kudremukh Iron Ore Project. The Iranian Foreign                            
 Minister, Dr Ali Akbar Velayati paid a visit to India on Aug 20, 1989. A                     
 broad agreement was reached during the visit on a wide range of political                    
 issues between India and Iran.                                                               
                                                                                              
 A major programme of reconstruction is beginning in Iran. There are                          
 expectations that India could play a positive role in this reconstruction.                   
 The Fifth Session of the Indo-Iranian Joint Commission is expected to meet                   
 in Tehran early in 1990. The External Affairs Minister will be leading the                   
 Indian delegation. The Joint Commission meeting would discuss the                            
 possibilities for augmenting the volume of bilateral trade, apart from                       
 identifying new avenues of mutually beneficial economic scientific and                       
 technical Cooperation.                                                                       
                                                                                              
 Mr Nizar Hamdoon, Permanent Under Secretary in the Iraqi Foreign office,                     
 visited New Delhi in February 1989, as Special Envoy of President Saddam                     
 Hussein. Shri Madhavrao Scindia, the their Minister of State for Railways                    
 paid a visit t o Iraq from 31 May to 2 June 1989. to participate in the                      
 first anniversary celebr ations of the 5-year Operations and Maintenance                     
 Contract between Rail India Technical Services and the Iraqi Railways.                       
                                                                                              
 A 2-member Iraqi defence delegation visited India in November 1989 to                        
 study the organisational infrastructure of the Institute for Defence                         
 Studies and Anal ysis (IDSA). Mr Mohd. Hamza Al Zubaidi, Iraqi Minister of                   
 Transport and Communications paid a visit to India from 1 to 4 February                      
 1990, at the invitati on of the Railway Minister, Shri George Fernandes.                     
 Apart from holding discussions with the Railway Minister, He also had                        
 discussions with the Ministers of Commerce, Petroleum and Natural Gas,                       
 Civil Aviation, and Transport and Communications. He called on the Prime                     
 Minister and the Minister for External Affairs.                                              
                                                                                              
 Thirtyfive Indian companies are active in Iraq. Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed                     
 Al Nahyan, Crown Prince of Abu Dhabi and Sheikh Mana Said Al Otaiba,                         
 Federal Minister of Petroleum and Minerals. United Arab Emirates, visited                    
 India in July and October 1989, respectively. Sheikh Sauood Muohammed                        
 Al-Oseimi, Kuwaiti Minister of State for Foreign Affairs visited India in                    
 March 1989. The then Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, met Bahraini Amir                    
 Sheikh Issa bin Salman Al-Khalifa during the Nonaligned Summit in Belgrade                   
 in September 1989. From Oman, Deputy Prime Minister for Security and                         
 Defence, H.E. Sayyid Faher bin Taimour Al-Said and Minister of Agriculture                   
 and Fisheries Sheikh Mohammed Al-Hinai visited India in March and                            
 September 1989, respectively. India and the People's Democratic Republic                     
 of Yemen signed a cultural exchange programme in September 1989 to enhance                   
 bilateral cooperation in media and other sectors.                                            
                                                                                              
 A high level delegation from the Oil and Natural Gas Commission visited                      
 the Yemen Arab Republic to explore the possibility of Indian                                 
 participation.                                                                               
 1989                                                                                         
 Africa (South of the Sahara)                                                                 
                                                                        Top                   
 CHAPTER V AFRICA (SOUTH OF THE SAHARA) DURING the year under review, there                   
 was a movement towards peace and normalisation in the Southern African                       
 region. Elections were held under UN supervision in Namibia. India                           
 contributed military, police and civilian person nel to the UN Transition                    
 Assistance Group deployed for this purpose. In addition to participating                     
 in the NAM and the Commonwealth Observer teams which visited Namibia,                        
 India opened an Observer Mission in Windhoek, Namibia, to monitor the                        
 peace process. After successful holding of elections to the Constituent                      
 Assembly, the transition process was firmly established. Sam Nujoma,                         
 leader of SWAPO, chaired the Constituent Assembly, and on the adoption of                    
 the Constitution was declared President-elect of Namibia. He will assume                     
 office, on Namibia attaining independence on Mar 21, 1990. Namibian                          
 leaders have warmly acknowledged India's bilateral assistance.                               
                                                                                              
 In the Republic of South Africa, the Government and the majority                             
 opposition are moving towards a negotiated settlement. President de Klerk,                   
 after assuming office on 15 August 1989, moved rapidly, on the one hand,                     
 to satisfy some of th e preconditions made by the ANC for commencing                         
 negotiations and, on the other, continued to safeguard some of the pillars                   
 of apartheid structure like the Peop le's Registration Act. This exercise                    
 culminated in the release of Nelson Mandela on 11 February 1990. Since                       
 then, India has established a Nelson Mandela Reception Committee, chaired                    
 by the Prime Minister. The Minister for External Affairs is the                              
 Vice-Chairman of the Committee. It consists of over 175 eminent Indians                      
 from a ll walks of life. The Prime Minister in an address to the nation,                     
 expressed relie f and satisfaction over Mandela's release. A Special Envoy                   
 of the Prime Minister cal led on Mandela, in South Africa, to convey his                     
 message and invitation to visit Indi a, which was accepted. India has                        
 cautiously welcomed the announcement made by the South African Government,                   
 while emphasising the need to dismantle apartheid forthwith and urged                        
 rapid transition of South Africa to a non-racial, democrati c state.                         
 Lessening of tensions in South Africa is bound to have a salutory effec t                    
 on the war-like situations in Angola and Mozambique, where the rebels have                   
 had overt and covert support of the South African Government and the                         
 ongoing peace initiatives are likely to benefit by the latest developments                   
 in South Africa.                                                                             
                                                                                              
 With the exception of Kenya, the economics of the countries on the East                      
 Coast of Africa are under stress. These countries are facing acute foreign                   
 exch ange shortages. India, in the spirit of South-South Cooperation, has                    
 maintained str ong economic links with these countries through its                           
 Technical and Economic Cooperation Programmes, Trade Agreements etc.                         
 Substantial technical and other assistance in the fields of agriculture,                     
 transport, industry, health, education , defence etc. is being extended.                     
 India has played a pioneering role in the establishment of small scale                       
 industries in a number of countries in the region. Despite disturbed                         
 conditions in Ethiopia, Technological Exposition of such machines was held                   
 in Addis Ababa in December 1989.                                                             
                                                                                              
 The year 1989-90 also saw the opening of new areas of cooperation in                         
 India's relations with West Africa. An intensification of interaction was                    
 particularly noticeable in relations with Nigeria.                                           
                                                                                              
 Economic trends were favourable in the Indian Ocean Island Countries                         
 Advantage in terms of enhanced economic cooperation was sought by the                        
 formation of a Joint Commission with Seychelles and the holding of the                       
 First Meeting of the Joint Business Council with Mauritius.                                  
                                                                                              
 At the bilateral level, India's relations with the countries of                              
 Sub-Saharan Africa continued to further improve and diversify during the                     
 year 1989-90. The re was a concerted attempt to deepen economic and                          
 technical relations as well as continue moral and material support to the                    
 Frontline States fighting for the abolition of apartheid and for democracy                   
 in Namibia and South Africa. India continued to enjoy close relations with                   
 the countries of Southern Afric a and the Liberation Movements fighting                      
 for freedom of Namibia and the dismantlement of the minority rule in the                     
 Republic of South Africa.                                                                    
                                                                                              
 An important event was the visit of the President, Shri R Venkataraman, to                   
 Zimbabwe and Zambia where he received very warm welcome. The President was                   
 in Zimbabwe on 6 and 7 June 1989 and had talks with President Mugabe. In                     
 Zambia on 8 and 9 June 1989 the President held talks with President                          
 Kenneth Kaunda and also with the President of the African National                           
 Congress, Oliver Tambo. The President also met the Indian community at                       
 Lusaka and Ndola. The visit served to strengthen the ties of friendship                      
 and cooperation between India and these countries.                                           
                                                                                              
 In May 1989, a composite delegation consisting of representatives of the                     
 Transvaal Indian Congress, Natal Indian Congress, and the Mass Democratic                    
 Movement visited India as guests of the Government of India. This was the                    
 firs t time in 40 years that a representative delegation from South Africa                   
 called on t he Prime Minister and the External Affairs Minister and had                      
 talks with the Members of Parliament and intellectuals. Talks were held at                   
 the official level too. T he delegation further visited Madras and Bombay.                   
                                                                                              
 Thomas N'kobi, Treasurer-General of the African National Congress                            
 accompanied by Mr I Coovadia, visited Delhi in April 1989. During this                       
 visit, a cheque for US $ 200,000 from the AFRICA Fund was handed over to                     
 the Treasurer-General. In July-August 1989, the Heads of the Legal and the                   
 Constitution Departments of the African National Congress, Dr Zola                           
 Skeweyiya and Mr Aziz Pahad visited Delhi for discussions regarding the                      
 anti-apartheid strugg le.                                                                    
                                                                                              
 A 12-member delegation of Zambian industrialists led by Mr Dev Babbar,                       
 Chairman, Zambia Association of Manufacturers visited India from 7 to 16                     
 April 1989 and met Indian industrialists and the various export                              
 organisations with a view to exploring the possibilities of joint                            
 ventures, transfer of technology and arrangements for collaboration in the                   
 projects included in the Fourth National Development Plan of Zambia. The                     
 team visited Delhi, Bangalore, Madras and Bombay.                                            
                                                                                              
 A defence delegation from Zambia visited India in July-August 1989 and had                   
 discussions with their Indian counterparts with a view to strengthening                      
 bilater al cooperation.                                                                      
                                                                                              
 Mr Fernando Muteka, Agriculture Minister of Angola visited India from 7 to                   
 12 May 1989 to familiarise himself with the progress made by India in the                    
 field of agriculture and agricultural engineering. He and his team had                       
 talks with the I ndian agricultural experts and researchers and the                          
 Officers of the Ministry of Agricu lture and visited tractor factories and                   
 agricultural implements production centres. Measures to strengthen                           
 Indo-Angolan cooperation in the field of agriculture wer e discussed.                        
                                                                                              
 In May 1989, Gen. Alberto Chipande, Defence Minister of Mozambique visited                   
 India and had talks with the then Defence Minister, Shri K C Pant. The                       
 close and friendly relations with Tanzania received further impetus with                     
 the visit in June 1989 of President R Venkataraman to Tanzania. Mr Julius                    
 Nyerere had visited in November 1989 for the meeting of the South                            
 Commission. President Mwinyi accompanied by his Foreign Minister and other                   
 members of the delegation, transited through Delhi in December 1989 and                      
 held fruitful discussi ons with the Prime Minister, Shri V P Singh on                        
 bilateral and international issues. The Tanzanian Foreign Minister also                      
 exchanged views with the External Affairs Minister, Shri I K Gujral.                         
                                                                                              
 Friendly relations with Ethiopia were further strengthened. Shri M. Dubey,                   
 Secretary (ER) represented India at the Technological Exposition and                         
 Workshop jointly organised in December 1989 by NSIC and its Ethiopian                        
 counterpart HASIDA in collaboration with the UNDP where some 1200 machines                   
 and equipment for thirtyeight small scale industrial projects were                           
 displayed. A 4-member Indian delegation visited Ethiopia in November 1989                    
 to explore possible cooperation in the field of agriculture.                                 
                                                                                              
 Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, Uganda's Minister of Transport and Communications                       
 visited India in May 1989 and held fruitful discussions. The second                          
 session of the Indo-Nigerian Joint Commission was held in New Delhi on 21                    
 and 22 August 1989. The Joint Commission decided on the establishment of                     
 Joint Committees at the official level, on cooperation in the area of                        
 Industrial Development and Science and Technology. The Minister of                           
 External Affairs of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, Maj. Gen. Ike                           
 Mwachukwu, paid an official visit to India from 19 to 23 August 1989. He                     
 announced the decision o f his Government to waive the US $ 31.5 million                     
 bond executed by Air India in 1987. The Senegalese Minister of industrial                    
 Development and Handicrafts Mr Famara Ibrahima Sagna visited India form 14                   
 to 20 May 1989. Mr. Sagna paid a courtesy call on the then Prime Minister.                   
 Shri Rajiv Gandhi, and held useful discussions With file Minister for                        
 Commerce and Ministers of State for External Affairs, Fertilisers and                        
 Industrial Development.                                                                      
                                                                                              
 The President of Burkina Faso, Capt. Blaise Campaore, was in India on a                      
 transit halt oil 16 and 17 September 1989 on his way back to Ouagadougou                     
 from China.                                                                                  
 The Ghanaian Minister of Local Government and Rural Development Mr Kwamena                   
 Ahwoi visited India from 20 to 23 November to attend the 33rd Executivc                      
 Committee Meeting of the Afro-Asian Rural Reconstruction Organisation                        
 (AARRO).                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 Relations between India and the Indian Ocean Island Countries continued to                   
 be strengthened. The foundation stone for the building of the Centre of                      
 Indian Studies, to be set up by Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Mauritius was                    
 laid by the Mauritian Prime Minister Sir Anerood Jugnauth on 15 August                       
 1989. A 15-member FICCI delegation visited Mauritius from 15 to 21                           
 September 1989 for the first meeting of the Indo-Mauritian Joint Business                    
 Council. The Mauritian Minister of Education, Arts and Culture had                           
 discussions with the then External Affairs Minister during a private visit                   
 to New Delhi on 22 and 23 September 1989. Shri M Dubey, Secretary (ER) in                    
 the Ministry of External Affairs, visited Mauritius on 9 and 10 October                      
 1989 as Special Envoy of the Prime Minister and called on the Mauritian                      
 Prime Minister and the Minister of External Affairs.                                         
                                                                                              
 The Prime Minister of Mauritius, Sit Anerood Jugnauth paid it State visit                    
 to India from 24 to 31 January 1990, and was the Chief Guest for the                         
 Republic Day celebrations. He called on the President, the Vice President                    
 and the Prime Minister. The Minister for External Affairs, the Minister                      
 for Finance, the Minister for Commerce and Tourism and the Minister of                       
 State for Science and Technology, called on him. During his visit,                           
 agreements were signed on Drug Trafficking and Related Matters and                           
 Cooperation in the fields of Science and Technology, and on the setting up                   
 of a Radio Telescope in Mauritius. Protocols on Cooperation in                               
 Oceanography and Ocean Development and on Cooperation in Sports and Youth                    
 Affairs were signed. Agreement on the Cultural Exchange Programme for                        
 1990-92 was also signed during the visit. The President, Shri R                              
 Venkataraman paid a State visit to Seychelles from 23 to 25 September.                       
 This was the first visit by an Indian Head of State to Seyche lles. During                   
 the visit, the establishment of a Joint Commission was announced as also                     
 the extension of a Rs 2 crore line credit by the EXIM Bank. A Cultural                       
 Exchang e Programme was signed during the visit.                                             
                                                                                              
 The AFRICA Fund constituted in September 1986, has so far received pledges                   
 in cash and kind including project assistance equivalent to US $ 428                         
 million fr om 54 countries the world over. An offer of US $ 50 million in                    
 the form of grants an d soft term loans was also earmarked by the                            
 International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) for AFRICA Fund                       
 projects in the area of agriculture and rural development. US $ 3.5                          
 million in cash has been received by the Fund.                                               
                                                                                              
 Contributions to the Fund were also received from individuals as well as                     
 organisations in India. A society called AFRICA (Public                                      
 Contributions-India) Fund was set up to manage these contributions in                        
 Indian rupees. The Society ha s received contributions totalling Rs 2.36                     
 crores. Out of the contributions rece ived by the Society, medicines worth                   
 Rs 25 lakhs have been supplied to Mozambique and a consignment of 45 jeeps                   
 valued at Rs 1 crore is being sent to Namibia.                                               
                                                                                              
 India had, at the AFRICA Fund Summit of January 1987, announced it                           
 contribution of Rs 50 crores. Several projects were identified for                           
 financing u nder this contribution. Out of the identified projects,                          
 material supplies have been arranged for ANC, about 300 vehicles have been                   
 delivered to Tanzania and a consignment of medical equipment has reached                     
 Botswana. Further, Angola has received medicines from India under the                        
 AFRICA Fund, 38 Angolan students are receiving higher education in Indian                    
 Universities and detailed project reports identifying priority areas for                     
 immediate attention have been prepared in the transport sector in Angola.                    
 Zimbabwe received a supply of tarpaulins and a consignment of 44 trucks.                     
 Transport vehicles, ambulance, X-ray machines and an electric generator                      
 have been sent to SWAPO. One hundred railway wagons in Semi Knocked Down                     
 condition have been delivered to Zambia and the assembly of these wagons                     
 by Zambian personnel trained in India is currently in progress.                              
                                                                                              
 Software for the Mozambican Railway Protection Force and consumer durables                   
 have already been shipped to Mozambique. By the end of the financial year                    
 1989-90, about 60% of the total Indian contributions is expected to be                       
 utilised or firmly committed. The execution of several other projects is                     
 underway with Implementing Agencies such as STC, PEC, TATAs, Mohan                           
 Exports, MECON, HSCC and NSIC. Agreements on the execution of Indian                         
 AFRICA Fund projects have been signed with Botswana, Tanzania, Angola,                       
 Mozambique, Zambia and Zimbabwe. Agreement with Namibia is being worked                      
 out.                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Several other donor countries also have already initiated a number of                        
 project s. Some projects have already been completed. New projects being                     
 taken up include assistance in transport sector, human resource                              
 development covering diverse sec tor -- agro-industry, agricultural                          
 sector, supply of foodstuff, medicines and other essential commodities.                      
                                                                                              
 As Chairman of the Fund, India has been in touch with anti-Apartheid                         
 Movements of UK, the Continent and Japan. These organisations have                           
 expressed keen interest to cooperate with the AFRICA Fund in mobilising                      
 public opinion and raising funds. Support for AFRICA Fund has also been                      
 specially sought in pamphlets distributed in UK by the anti-Apartheid                        
 Movement in UK. Efforts are underway to strengthen the existing ties and                     
 develop new ties with institutions and prominent individuals in the coming                   
 phase of the Fund. A film has been made on the AFRICA Fund which has been                    
 released in Europe and United States and it would be used as an instrument                   
 for mobilisation of public opinion and financial resources for the Fund in                   
 the future.                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 Five meetings have been held at the level of senior officials of the                         
 AFRICA Fund Committee. At these meetings, the Committee reviewed the                         
 progress achieved till the time of that meeting and chalked out its work                     
 for the ensuing period. At the Fifth Meeting in New Delhi in August 1989,                    
 the Committee finalised a comprehensive report since the inception of the                    
 Fund. This report was presented at the IXth Summit of the Nonaligned                         
 countries at Belgrade in September 1989. Till then 90% of the                                
 contributions pledged to the Fund had bee n earmarked and committed                          
 against identified projects and programmes, and benefit s had reached the                    
 recipients of the Fund to the tune of nearly 40% of the contributions                        
 pledged. Out of the cash contributions following disbursements w ere made:                   
                                                                                              
 South West Africa Peoples                                     US $ 400,000                   
 Organisation (SWAPO)                                                                         
 African National Congress (ANC)                               US $ 200,000                   
 Pan Africanist Congress of Azania (PAC)                       US $ 50,000                    
 United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF)                       US $ 70,000                    
 Children's Fund for Southern Africa (CHISA)                   US $ 50,000                    
                                                                                              
 Expressing satisfaction at the work done by the Committee and the progress                   
 achieved by the Fund, the Summit unanimously decided to extend the mandate                   
 of the AFRICA Fund and its Committee. Two new members-Egypt and Malaysia                     
 were included as members of the AFRICA Fund Committee. The Summit issued                     
 another appeal seeking support and assistance to the AFRICA Fund.                            
                                                                                              
 Shri J R Hiremath succeeded Shri N Krishnan as a Special Envoy of the                        
 Prime Minister for Africa on 15 November 1989. The Special Envoy,                            
 accompanied by the Joint Secretary in the Ministry of External Affairs,                      
 Shri P S Haer, paid visits to the Frontline States in January 1990. During                   
 these visits, a review of the project s under the AFRICA Fund was carried                    
 out with the concerned authorities. There was appreciation of India's                        
 policies towards the Southern African region, specially for the assistance                   
 extended by India to the Frontline States and Liberation Movemen ts under                    
 the AFRICA Fund. The Special Envoy was received by the Presidents of                         
 Angola and Botswana, the Prime Minister of Zambia and the President of                       
 SWAPO, Sam Nujorma.                                                                          
                                                                                              
 The VIth meeting of the AFRICA Fund Committee at the level of Senior                         
 Officials is scheduled to be held in the first week of April 1990 at                         
 Lusaka, Za mbia. At this meeting, the Committee would quantify the extent                    
 of utilisation of contributions pledged to the Fund and also finalise a                      
 framework for its activit ies in the coming phase of the Fund.                               
 1989                                                                                         
 Europe                                                                                       
                                                                        Top                   
 CHAPTER VI EUROPE SOVIET UNION A number of high level Indo-Soviet                            
 exchanges took place in this period, underlining the close interaction and                   
 growing cooperation between India and the Soviet Union on a wide range of                    
 issues.                                                                                      
                                                                                              
 The then Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, visited Moscow at President                      
 Gorbachev's invitation in July 1989. During the talks, views were                            
 exchanged on all major aspects of the current international Situation and                    
 bilateral relations we re reviewed. After the installation of the new                        
 Government, Soviet First Deputy Foreign Minister Yuli Vorontsov, visited                     
 India its Special Envoy of President Gorbachev. The Foreign Secretary                        
 visited the Soviet Union in the last week of January 1990, for annual                        
 bilateral consultations. Both countries have reiterat ed their commitment                    
 to continue and strengthen the traditional friendship and cooperation.                       
 Special emphasis is being laid on economic cooperation, particula rly in                     
 new forms such as joint ventures and cooperation in high technology. It                      
 has also been agreed that regular political interaction between the                          
 leaders of the two countries would be maintained.                                            
                                                                                              
 There were frequent contacts at the Ministerial level too in this period.                    
 Th ese included the visits of former Commerce Minister, Shri Dinesh Singh                    
 and the former Finance Minister, Shri S B Chavan to USSR, and the visits                     
 to India of Soviet Deputy Prime Ministers Alexandra Biryukova and V M                        
 Kamentsev. The 12th Session of the Indo-Soviet Joint Commission on                           
 Economic, Scientific and Technical Cooperation, held in Delhi from 7 to                      
 Mar 09, 1989 reviewed the implementation of ongoing projects and bilateral                   
 economic cooperation and identified new areas and forms of future                            
 Cooperation. The Joint Commission decided to set up two new Working Groups                   
 under its aegis in the field of Civil Aviation and for promotion of New                      
 Forms of Economic Cooperation, as well as a Sub Group on Transportation                      
 under the existing Working Group on Trade. In September 1989, two Credit                     
 Agreements worth 990 million Roubles for three Thermal power                                 
 projects-Kayamkulam, Mangalore and Maithon and associated transmission                       
 lines for Vindhayachal Thermal Power Project were signe d. The Soviet                        
 credit includes 170 million Roubles as assistance for local costs in India                   
 for the thermal power projects.                                                              
                                                                                              
 The importance of Indo-Soviet cooperation for the development of the                         
 economies of the two countries by taking advantage of mutual                                 
 complementarities is steadily increasing. Positive results were achieved                     
 in the realisation of th e Integrated Long Term Programme of Scientific                      
 and Technical Cooperation and other bilateral agreements.                                    
                                                                                              
 Indo-Soviet trade continued to grow and diversify steadily. A high level                     
 Sov iet delegation that visited India during October 1989 purchased large                    
 quantities of detergents, cosmetics, medicines and other consumer goods                      
 over and above the Trade Plan provisions to alleviate the shortages in                       
 Soviet market. The Indo-So viet Trade Plan for 1990 envisages a trade                        
 turn-over of over Rs 8800 crores as again st the 1989 Trade Plan provision                   
 of Rs 7000 crores.                                                                           
                                                                                              
 EASTERN EUROPE India's multi-faceted tics with the countries of Eastern                      
 Europe developed satisfactorily. During the year, radical changes have                       
 taken place all over Eas tern Europe. The Government of India warmly                         
 welcomed these trends in the direction of democratisation, political                         
 pluralism and the evolution of more representativ e systems and                              
 institutions reflecting popular aspirations. In keeping with India 's                        
 traditionally close and friendly relations with the people of these                          
 countries, the excellent ties of friendship, cooperation and understanding                   
 between India and these countries are bound to be strengthened and                           
 expanded in the future. Bilateral cooperation with Bulgaria developed                        
 satisfactorily in all fields. India organised exclusive Indian exhibitions                   
 of electronics and apparel in Sofia, and exploratory talks were held in                      
 Delhi in December 1989 for cooperation in the fi eld of civil aviation.                      
                                                                                              
 Relations with Czechoslovakia were marked by continuing warmth and                           
 friendship. The former General Secretary of Communist Party, Milos jakes,                    
 made a transit halt at Calcutta on 10 April 1989. Indo-Czechoslovak                          
 cultural coopera tion received a boost with the holding of "Days of Indian                   
 Culture" in Czechoslovakia in April 1989, inaugurated by the then Minister                   
 of State for Human Resource Development. Shri L P Sahi. A reciprocal "Days                   
 of Czechoslovak Culture" in India was held in November 1989 for which the                    
 former Czechoslovak Deputy Prime Minister Dr Matej Lucan visited India.                      
                                                                                              
 India's friendly relations with the German Democratic Republic were                          
 strengthened in all fields. The then Minister of State for External                          
 Affairs, S hri K Natwar Singh, visited GDR from 15 to 18 June 1989. A new                    
 dimension was added to Indo-GDR economic relations with the signing of the                   
 agreement on Avoidance of Double Taxation in New Delhi on 27 July 1989.                      
 The Indo-GDR Bilateral Committee on Shipping also met in 1989 to review                      
 bilateral shipping arrangement s. The GDR Deputy Foreign Minister E Moldt                    
 visited India in January 1990. The "Third Days of GDR Culture" were                          
 celebrated in India form 2 to 12 February. The traditionally friendly                        
 relations with Hungary received a valuable impetus with exchange of high                     
 level visits during the year. The then Minister of State , Shri K Natwar                     
 Singh, visited Hungary in June 1989. The Hungarian Minister of Defence                       
 visited India in September 1989 and the Hungarian Minister for Justic e                      
 Kalman Kulscar visited India in October 1989 to attend the Nehru Memorial                    
 Seminar. Indo-Hungarian trade and economic cooperation saw further                           
 expansion and diversification during the year.                                               
                                                                                              
 Relations between India and Poland continued to develop. The former Polish                   
 Vice President and President of the Polish-Indian Friendship Society Dr.                     
 Tadeus z Szelachowski visited India in April 1989. The then Minister of                      
 State. Shri K Natwar singh, visited Poland in June 1989. An agreement on                     
 Avoidance of Double Taxation between India and Poland was signed during                      
 the visit.                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 Indo-Romanian trade and economic cooperation were satisfactory during the                    
 year under review. Following the revolution in Romania in December 1989,                     
 the Government extended to the new Romanian Government, its support and                      
 cooperation, as also some urgently needed medical and humanitarian relif                     
 assistance.                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 Indo-Yugoslav bilateral contacts were intensive during the year. The                         
 former Prime Minister. Shri Rajiv Gandhi, visited Yugoslavia from 3 to 8                     
 September 1989 for the 9th NAM Summit. From the Yugoslav side, Foreign                       
 Minister Budimir Loncar visited Delhi in May 1989. and the Yugoslav                          
 Minister for Foreign Trade Franc Hot-vat visited India from 29 October to                    
 3 November to explore prospects of buying substantial quantities of                          
 consumer goods from India. During this visit, a bilateral Air Agreement                      
 was also concluded.                                                                          
                                                                                              
 WESTERN EUROPE                                                                               
 During the year under review, India's close relations with West European                     
 countries were further strengthened. A wide network of political,                            
 economic, commercial, scientific, technological and cultural contacts                        
 exists between Indi a and the countries of this region. in the areas of                      
 Joint ventures, investments and transfer of technology, the West European                    
 presence in India continues to increase. An important part of bilateral                      
 assistance as well as assistance thro ugh multilateral organisations is                      
 channelled through contacts and negotiations with major countries in this                    
 region. Several high level visits were exchanged durin g the period under                    
 review.                                                                                      
                                                                                              
 The President, Shri R Venkataraman visited the Federal Republic of Germany                   
 (FRG) in September 1989-the first such visit by an Indian President to                       
 that country. The visit was marked by discussions between the President                      
 and his counterpart, President Weizsacker, and meetings with the leaders                     
 of all major political parties. The President also had the opportunity of                    
 visiting various industrial and scientific establishments. The                               
 establishment of rapport at the highest level between the two countries,                     
 the decision to maintain a political dialogue on a regular basis and                         
 stimulating the interest of the Germa n business community in India were                     
 some of the positive results of the visit. Th e FRG now takes first place                    
 in the field of joint ventures with India apart from being the largest                       
 donor country and a leading trade partner in the EEC.                                        
                                                                                              
 The Nehru Centenary Celebrations were held in several West European                          
 countries. Seminars, colloquia and public functions were held in several                     
 countries of the region. The Vice President, Shri Shankar Dayal Sharma,                      
 participated in the closing ceremony of the celebrations in London in                        
 November 1989. He also held discussions with the Prime Minister of the UK                    
 and other political leaders.                                                                 
                                                                                              
 The former Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, visited Paris in July 1989                     
 to participate in the Bicentenary celebrations of the French Revolution                      
 and made use of the opportunity to exchange views with several Heads of                      
 Government including the Chancellor of FRG. Prime Minister of the UK.                        
 President and the Prime Minister of France and other world leaders.                          
 Together With the Presidents of Senegal and Venezuela, he called for the                     
 resumption of the North-South dialogue.                                                      
                                                                                              
 India has traditional ties of friendship and understanding with Cyprus.                      
 These were further strengthened during the visit of President Vassiliou to                   
 India in A pril 1989. He was accompanied by it large official and business                   
 delegation. The discussions were marked by close identity of views on                        
 international and regiona l issues. In a bid to create a framework for                       
 increased economic and commercial relations, an agreement on trade,                          
 economic, scientific and technological cooperation was signed by the                         
 Ministers of Commerce of the two countries.                                                  
                                                                                              
 The French Prime Minister, Mr Michel Rocard, paid an official visit to                       
 India on 18 and 19 January 1990. He was accompanied by Mme Rocard. The                       
 French delegation included the Minister of Agriculture and Forests;                          
 Minister of Equipment, Housing, Transport and Sea Affairs Minister                           
 Delegate for Foreign Affairs and senior officials. Though the primary                        
 purpose of the visit was to participate in the closing ceremony of the                       
 Year of France in India, the two Pri me Ministers exchanged views on                         
 various matters of mutual interest. A protocol fo r cooperation in the                       
 field of agriculture and rural development was signed.                                       
                                                                                              
 Within the West European region, India's relations with the Economic                         
 Community have special importance. The Community is India's largest                          
 trading partner and India's interest in expanding exports is with a view                     
 to achieving among other things a better balance of trade. The Community's                   
 progress towards greater integration and the establishment of a single                       
 market in 1992 is a subje ct of considerable interest to India. India is                     
 seeking to ensure that this integr ation does not lead to protectionist                      
 tendencies or create other problems for India in diverse areas including                     
 anti-Indian terrorist activity from European soil. Ind ia is also keen to                    
 improve the scope of the political dialogue with the emerging European                       
 entity. Towards this end, the annual TROIKA meeting at the Ministerial                       
 level was held in India in March 1989. India is one of the few individual                    
 countries with which the Community has arrangements for TROIKA meetings                      
 and it is recognised that the importance of this dialogue will increas e                     
 as political cooperation within the Community grows.                                         
                                                                                              
 There were Ministerial level visits and Joint Commission meetings with                       
 EEC, FRG and Turkey. Close contacts with Parliamentarians of several West                    
 European countries were maintained. The former Speaker of Lok Sabha led a                    
 delegation of Indian Parliamentarians to the FRG.                                            
 1989                                                                                         
 The Americas                                                                                 
                                                                        Top                   
 CHAPTER VII THE AMERICAS NORTH AMERICA THE positive trends in Indo-US                        
 relations that had become evident in recent years were. consolidated                         
 during this first year of the Bush Administration. There were a large                        
 number of exchanges in all spheres-political, economic, commercial,                          
 cultural, scientific and defence-related.                                                    
                                                                                              
 From India, the most important visit wits that of the then Defence                           
 Minister, Shri K C Pant, in June-July. This visit came after two US                          
 Defence Secretaries-Casper Weinberger and Frank Carlucci-had visited India                   
 in 1987 and 1988 respectively. The Minister was accompanied by a high                        
 level delegation of civil and armed services officials. The delegation                       
 visited several key US defence establishments and had discussions with the                   
 Defence Secretary, Mr Cheney and other high officials of the US Government                   
 on bilateral issues of mutual interes t.                                                     
                                                                                              
 During the year, there were visits by the US Congressman Stephen Solarz,                     
 Chairman of the Sub-Committee on Asian and Pacific Affairs of the House of                   
 Representatives Foreign Relations Committee; Representatives Theodore                        
 Weiss, Chester Atkins and Tony Hall: and Senators Daniel P Moynihan                          
 (former US Ambassador to India) and Dave Durenberger. All of them met the                    
 then Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi and high officials of the                             
 Government of India.                                                                         
                                                                                              
 There were some disturbing developments in the US Congress such as                           
 legislation affecting India proposed by Congressman Wally Herger on                          
 grounds of alleged violations of human rights in Punjab and India's                          
 refusal to permit organisations like Amnesty International to visit                          
 Punjab. In June 1989, the Ho use of Representatives voted narrowly (212                      
 against - 204 for) to defeat an Amendment by Representative Wally Herger                     
 to the US Foreign Aid Authorisation Bill seeking to deny bilateral                           
 assistance to India on these grounds.                                                        
                                                                                              
 The Foreign Secretary, Shri S K Singh, visited USA for annual                                
 consultations in November. He discussed with his counterpart, US Under                       
 Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Mr Robert Kimmitt, a wide range                    
 of issues concerning political developments globally and in South Asia;                      
 Indo-US exchanges in the field of defence; economic and trade exchanges;                     
 transfer of technology and narcotics. He extended an invitation to Mr                        
 Kimmitt to visit India in January 1990, which was accepted. Mr Kimmitt was                   
 in New Delhi on Jan 19, 1990. The bilateral issues which had figured in                      
 the Foreign Secretary's discussions with him in November were further                        
 discussed. The Foreign Secretary paid yet another visit to USA in                            
 January-February 1990, he met several leaders. In addition to the                            
 discussions on Indo-US bilateral matters, he also apprised the US leaders                    
 on the Kashmir situation. One of the most positive features of the                           
 relationship was the progress in the field of transfer of technology. The                    
 Annual Review meeting in January 1989 under the Indo-US Memorandum of                        
 Understanding on technology transfer helped in further streamlining                          
 procedures for import of high technology "controlled" equipment from USA.                    
 The next review meeting is scheduled for February 1990. Discussions were                     
 also held in the course of the year on arrangements for import of certain                    
 dual-use technologies and equipment which have missile-related                               
 applications. However, India's testing of the Agni missile in May 1989                       
 resulted in strong reactions in the US Congress and moves were initiated                     
 to deny transfer of certain missile-related equipment to India.                              
                                                                                              
 Discussions continued during the year on a pending application for a                         
 Supercomputer for the Indian Institute of Science (IIS), Bangalore, and                      
 other hi-tech equipment subject to special safeguards. Operations were                       
 completed successfully for the installation and operation of the first                       
 Supercomputer at the India Meteorological Department.                                        
                                                                                              
 Indo-US trade in 1989 surpassed the record of US $ 5.7 billion in 1988 and                   
 is expected to have exceeded US $ 6 billion in 1989, again with a positive                   
 balance in India's favour.                                                                   
                                                                                              
 The US Government on 25 May listed India along with Japan and Brazil under                   
 Section Super 301 of the US Trade Act 1988 for restrictive practices                         
 relating to investment and insurance, and put India on a priority                            
 watchlist along with seven other countries for allegedly inadequate and                      
 ineffective protection of Intellectual Property Rights. India continues to                   
 be on this priority watchlist along with four other countries. India's                       
 position has been that these issues are best discussed under the Uruguay                     
 Round and that India did not intend to enter into bilateral negotiations                     
 with the US under threat of punitiv e action.                                                
                                                                                              
 An agreement on avoidance of double taxation between the two countries                       
 which had been under negotiation for three decades was finally signed in                     
 September. Earlier in the year, an agreement was signed-for avoidance of                     
 taxat ion on enterprises operating ships and aircraft. These agreements                      
 await ratificati on by the US Senate.                                                        
                                                                                              
 Bilateral discussions were also held in the course of the year on                            
 cooperation in illicit narcotics trafficking and a draft agreement in this                   
 regard is being fin alised. Even in the absence of the agreement,                            
 cooperation in this field between the two Governments has been excellent.                    
                                                                                              
 Billateral talks on civil aviation were also held during the year which                      
 resul ted in agreements on security-related matters and procedures for                       
 notification in ca se of increase of traffic by airlines of both                             
 countries.                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 In May, a Memorandum of Understanding was concluded for the protection and                   
 tourism enhancement of major Indian heritage sites, including Taj Mahal,                     
 Sarnath and Bodhgaya, between the US National Park Service and the Indian                    
 Department of Tourism.                                                                       
                                                                                              
 A meeting of the Indo-US Sub-Commission on Education and Culture was held                    
 in June 1989 in Washington which further expanded educational and cultural                   
 exchanges and proposed a Festival of USA in India in 1992.                                   
                                                                                              
 During the period under review, bilateral relations between India and                        
 Canada continued to grow, particularly in the field of economic                              
 cooperation. While some new areas of collaboration progressed                                
 satisfactorily (eg, in the coal sector), one setback was the Canadian                        
 decision to withdraw its offer of funding for the Yamuna Nagar thermal                       
 power project because of budgetary constraints.                                              
                                                                                              
 The Punjab issue continued to attract a great deal of attention in the                       
 Canadi an media. In particular, the publication of a book "Soft Target" in                   
 mid-1989 generated a great deal of publicity and speculation on the                          
 Kanishka air crash. The book made wholly unwarranted and false allegations                   
 that Indian officials had conspired to blow up the Kanishka flight in                        
 order to discredit the Sikh communi ty in Canada.                                            
                                                                                              
 India and Canada continued to work closely in international fora,                            
 particularl y in the Commonwealth.                                                           
 CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN                                                  
                                                                                              
 During the period under review, India's traditionally friendly relations                     
 with the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean continued to develop                   
 satisfactoril y. India interacted with the countries in the region through                   
 common membership of the Commonwealth and the Non-Aligned Movement.                          
 Venezuela's entry into NAM as a full member was supported by India and                       
 this raised the number of NAM states in the region to 17.                                    
                                                                                              
 Contacts and consultations were maintained with top leaders of this                          
 region. During the French bicentenary celebrations in Paris in July 1989,                    
 Prime Ministe r Rajiv Gandhi met President Sarney of Brazil, President                       
 Carlos Andres Perez of Venezuela and President Carlos Salinas of Mexico.                     
 During the NAM Summit in Belgrade in September 1989, the Prime Minister                      
 met President Carlos Menem of Argentina, President Ortega of Nicaragua,                      
 President Garcia of Peru and other leaders from the region. The Prime                        
 Minister used both the occasions to discuss Latin American leaders means                     
 of enhancing cooperation at bilateral and multilateral levels.                               
                                                                                              
 The then External Affairs Minister, Shri Narasimha Rao attended the G-77                     
 special ministerial meeting in Caracus in June 1989 where he was received                    
 by th e President of Venezuela. He visited Cuba immediately thereafter to                    
 convey India 's willingness to set up an Indo-Cuban Joint Commission for                     
 Economic Cooperation. This visit was preceded by the visit of the Cuban                      
 Minister for Economic Cooperation to India in March 1989.                                    
                                                                                              
 Shri Eduardo Faleiro, then Minister of State in the Ministry of Finance,                     
 attended President Menem's inauguration on 8 July in Buenos Aires as a                       
 Special Envoy of the Prime Minister. The following week, Shri Faleiro                        
 represented th e Government of India at the Tenth Anniversary Celebrations                   
 of the Nicaraguan Revolution. He handed over to President Ortega, a                          
 special message from the Prime Minister.                                                     
                                                                                              
 The prospects of bilateral cooperation in defence with Argentina were                        
 explored during the visit to that country in April 1989 of Admiral                           
 Nadkarni, Chief of Naval Staff. This was the first-ever visit to Argentina                   
 by any of the Service Chiefs. In October 1989, the Chairman of the                           
 Argentine Senate Defence Committee visited India, and called on Admiral                      
 Nadkarni and other senior officials in the Ministry of External Affairs                      
 and the Ministry of Defence.                                                                 
                                                                                              
 Secretary, Department of Science and Technology, visited Brazil and Cuba                     
 in June 1989 to identify areas of bilateral cooperation. Director General                    
 of Tourism and Chairman of ITDC visited Cuba in September-October 1989 in                    
 response to an invitation from Cuban authorities to discuss India's                          
 assistance to develop their tourist industry. Secretary, Department of                       
 Electronics, visited Brazil in July 1989 and signed a protocol for                           
 cooperation in "informatics" and a MOU between CMC and its Brazilian                         
 counterpart.                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 Nicaragua's Minister for Economic Cooperation visited New Delhi in                           
 September 1989 for talks with External Affairs Minister Shri Narasimha                       
 Rao. A three-member official delegation from the Department of Irrigation                    
 and Water Resources visited Brazil in June 1989 and identified projects                      
 for possibl e cooperation in agriculture and irrigation.                                     
                                                                                              
 As a follow up of the first meeting of the Indo-Guyanese Joint Commission                    
 in January 1989, officials of the two sides met in Delhi in September 1989                   
 to sign a credit agreement. Jamaica imported buses from India for the                        
 first time under an EXIM Bank credit.                                                        
                                                                                              
 Cultural links with the people of Indian origin in the Caribbean were                        
 sustained, especially through the two Indian Cultural Centres in Guyana                      
 and Suriname. A token financial assistance was extended to four                              
 hurricane-struck islands in Eastern Caribbean.                                               
                                                                                              
 With the countries of Latin America, there was a continuous flow of                          
 activitie s under the cultural exchange programmes. ICCR sponsored dance                     
 troupes performed to appreciative audiences in Mexico, Guatemala, Costa                      
 Rica, Peru and Colombia (October and November 1989).                                         
                                                                                              
 Jawaharlal Nehru's Birth Centenary was celebrated in many Latin American/                    
 Caribbean capitals. Top leaders of some countries participated in these                      
 celebrations. Articles on Nehru were published in the local press and                        
 photo an d book exhibitions were held and seminars organised. Special                        
 messages were received by the President and the Prime Minister, Prof.                        
 Perez Esquivel, the No bel Peace Laureate from Argentina, participated in                    
 the Nehru Seminar held in New Delhi in October 1989.                                         
                                                                                              
 India watched with concern the unrest in Panama following the annulment of                   
 the elections in May 1989. On the US intervention in Panama in December                      
 1989, the Minister for External Affairs, Shri I K Gujral, stated that                        
 India deplored the US action. While the 2500 strong Indian community in                      
 Panama did not suffer any casualty, many of their shops in the capital                       
 were looted.                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 As a member of the Nine Member Committee on Central America, India has                       
 consistently called for a negotiated, durable and peaceful settlement of                     
 the problems in the region. India welcomed the Tela Accord of August 1989                    
 reached by the five Central American presidents and supported the efforts                    
 made by the OAS (the Latin American Group of 8) and particularly those of                    
 the UN to bring peace in the region.                                                         
                                                                                              
 Latin America and the Caribbean were represented in the 'South Commission'                   
 Meeting in New Delhi (11 to 14 November 1989) by the Vice President of                       
 Cuba, the Prime Minister of Jamaica, the Foreign Minister of Venezuela and                   
 the Mexica n Ambassador in Beijing.                                                          
                                                                                              
 Secretary for Economic Relations in this Ministry visited Brazil in                          
 November 1989 as the Prime Minister's Special Envoy and he was received by                   
 President Sarney. Brazil and Mexico have expressed their concurrence to                      
 membership of th e newly formed Group of 15 for South-South Cooperation                      
 and Consultation. A MOU with Brazil which provides for regular high level                    
 contacts is expected to b e signed in Brasilia during the first quarter of                   
 1990.                                                                                        
 1989                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 United Nations and International Conferences                                                 
                                                                        Top                   
 CHAPTER VIII UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES THE year 1989                      
 saw the growing importance of the United Nations in international affairs.                   
 This enhanced role of the UN, was also owing to the UN Secretary General's                   
 continuing efforts at resolving problems regarding Afghanis tan, the                         
 Iran-Iraq problem, Western Sahara and Cyprus. The UN's increasing peace-                     
 keeping or supervisory efforts in areas like Namibia and Central America                     
 testif y to the growing reliance being placed on the Organisation's role                     
 in the maintenance of international peace and security.                                      
                                                                                              
 "Consensus" was the key word during the 44th Session of the General                          
 Assembly. In all the seven main Committees including in the First                            
 Committee dealing with security and disarmament issues, an overwhelming                      
 number of resolutions was adopted by consensus. The entire session was                       
 marked by total absence of confrontation and cold war rhetoric. For the                      
 first time ever, the U SA and the Soviet Union cosponsored a resolution on                   
 strengthening international security.                                                        
                                                                                              
 In his address to the 44th Session of the UN General Assembly on Oct 05,                     
 1989 , the then External Affairs Minister welcomed the renewed confidence                    
 in the UN on the part of major powers. As a staunch supporter of the UN                      
 ideals, India played its customarily active, at times key role, in the                       
 consideration of impor tant issues and in the formulation of their                           
 solutions. The contribution of the Indi an delegation was widely                             
 appreciated in all the UN General Assembly Committees.                                       
                                                                                              
 Political Issues The General Assembly adopted a resolution on Afghanistan                    
 by consensus. India welcomed this spirit of compromise and pledged its                       
 support in finding a political solution to the problem of Afghanistan                        
 through full implementation of the Geneva Agreements, both in letter and                     
 in spirit.                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 The question of Palestine continued to occupy the attention of the                           
 international community. India continues to maintain that a UN-sponsored                     
 Peace Conference on the Middle-East remains the most appropriate framework                   
 to resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict. Such a conference should address the                   
 fundamental is sues namely, self-determination for the Palestine people,                     
 and the right of all State s in the region including the States of                           
 Palestine and Israel to live in peace and se curity within internationally                   
 recognised borders.                                                                          
                                                                                              
 However, at the 44th Session, A PLO-Arab draft resolution intending to                       
 clarify that the designation "Palestine," recognised under resolution                        
 41/177, w ould henceforth apply to the State of Palestine, did not succeed                   
 due to US oppositio n. India consistently maintained its principled                          
 position on the question of the recognition of the State of Palestine.                       
                                                                                              
 India continued to play an active role in seeking a solution to the                          
 problem o f Cambodia. It was one of 19 participants in the International                     
 Conference on Cambodia held in Paris from 30 July to 30 August 1989. India                   
 was nominated Co-Chairman of the First Committee dealing with the                            
 important question of International Control Mechanism. While the                             
 Conference did not come up with a comprehensive political settlement, it                     
 did achieve progress in identifying and elaborating possible elements for                    
 a settlement.                                                                                
                                                                                              
 India welcomed the withdrawal of the Vietnamese forces from Cambodia. It                     
 is for this reason that, while being appreciative of the efforts of the                      
 ASEAN at t he UN General Assembly, India continued to abstain on the draft                   
 resolution on this question since it felt that the resolution did not                        
 fully reflect the changes in the situation brought about by the withdrawal                   
 of Vietnamese forces from Cambodia. The draft also did not explicitly                        
 condemn the genocidal policies of the Khmer Rouge.                                           
                                                                                              
 India continued to support the 1971 Declaration on the Indian Ocean as a                     
 Zone of Peace and the early convening of a Conference to implement the                       
 Declaration. It worked actively in the UN Ad hoc committee on the Indian                     
 Oce an. and subsequently, in the Geneva Assembly, in line with its own                       
 position and tha t of the Belgrade NAM Declaration. It continued to attach                   
 importance to the holding of such a Conference with the participation of                     
 all the major maritime u sers and inclusive of all major powers with                         
 military presence in the Indian Ocean. As in previous years, negotiations                    
 between Treaty parties and non-Treaty members failed to produce a                            
 consensus text for a draft resolution on Antarctica . Consistent with its                    
 anti-apartheid policy India voted in favour of a draft reso lution calling                   
 for the exclusion of South Africa from all the meetings of the Treaty                        
 parties. India did not participate in the voting on the substantive draft                    
 reso lution on Antarctica since it did not consider the text to be                           
 sufficiently balanced. India remains committed to broaden and universalise                   
 the Antarctic Treaty . It supports all proposals relating to the                             
 protection of the fragile Antarctic environment and related ecosystems and                   
 favours bringing the results of scientif ic research in Antarctica                           
 increasingly to the attention of developing countries to their benefit.                      
                                                                                              
 During the discussion on the Law of the Sea in the General Assembly                          
 Session and in other fora India supported the efforts of the signatories                     
 to the Convent ion on the Law of the Sea to explore possibilities to                         
 secure universal participatio n in the Convention. The Indian approach was                   
 also directed towards defeating attemp ts at undermining the Convention or                   
 its unified character.                                                                       
                                                                                              
 Disarmament Issues During 1989 India played a leading role in the three                      
 main multilateral disarmament fora, viz, the Conference on Disarmament in                    
 Geneva, the UN Disarmament Commission, and the First Committee of the UN                     
 General Assembly. In addition, India also made a significant contribution                    
 at the Paris Conference on Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the                           
 International Government-Industry Conference against Chemical Weapons held                   
 in Canberra and the Third Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty                     
 on the Prohibition of the Emplacement o f Nuclear Weapons and Other                          
 Weapons of Mass Destruction on the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor and in the                    
 Subsoil Thereof (Sea-Bed Treaty).                                                            
                                                                                              
 The Indian approach to disarmament continued to be based on the principle                    
 that in the nuclear age, disarmament is necessary for the survival of                        
 mankind. The 'Action Plan for a Nuclear Weapon-Free and Non-Violent World                    
 Order' tabled at SSOD-III, by India in 1988 was a continuation of India's                    
 well-known policy oil disarmament. In the Conference on Disarmament, the                     
 sole multilateral negotiati ng body, India played a leading role in the                      
 Group of Neutral and Non-Aligned Countries (G-21). The Indian delegation                     
 coordinated G-21's positions on the crucial issues of "Cessation of the                      
 Nuclear Arms Race and Nuclear Disarmament" and "Prevention of Nuclear War                    
 and Other Related Matters." On both the items, India highlighted the                         
 urgent need for commencing multilateral negotiations. In the Ad hoc                          
 Committee on Chemical Weapons, India played an active role in seeking the                    
 early conclusion of a Chemical Weapons Convention. India also chaired one                    
 of the Working Groups of the Ad hoc Committee. Indian experts participated                   
 in the meeting of the Ad hoc Group of Scientific Experts working towards                     
 elaboration of a global seismic monitoring system to monitor a                               
 Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and in the Chemical Weapons negotiations.                      
 The then Minister of State for Exter nal Affairs addressed the Conference                    
 on Disarmament and urged it to consider India' s Action Plan as a                            
 comprehensive basis for multilateral negotiations. He emphasi sed the need                   
 for the elimination of nuclear weapons within a time-bound framework.                        
                                                                                              
 In the First Committee of the 44th Session of the UN General Assembly,                       
 India introduced three resolutions. The resolution "Conventions on the                       
 Prohibi tion of the Use of Nuclear Weapons" highlights the task of                           
 preventing a nuclear war. The resolution received widespread support and                     
 113 countries voted in favour. The resolution "Nuclear arms freeze" calls                    
 upon all nuclear weapon States to agree to a comprehensive freeze that                       
 would prohibit testing, manufacture, development and deployment of nuclear                   
 weapons as also production of fissionable material for weapon purposes.                      
 This resolution received the support of 115 countries. The th ird                            
 resolution "Scientific and technological developments and their impact on                    
 international security" was a continuation of the initiative taken in                        
 1988. On e hundred and thirteen countries voted in favour. It calls for an                   
 assessment of scientific and technological trends and an evaluation of                       
 their impact on the international security environment with a view to                        
 ensuring that scientific and technological developments are used solely                      
 for peaceful purposes and for the common good of mankind. The assessment                     
 report by the UN Secretary General is expected to be tabled in 1990.                         
 Indian experts are contributing to this assessm ent as also to the UN                        
 study on Verification.                                                                       
                                                                                              
 The Indian delegation to the Paris Conference on Prohibition of Chemical                     
 Weapons was led by the former Minister of State for External Affairs.                        
 India's views on the urgency of concluding a comprehensive, global and                       
 non-discriminatory Chemical Weapons Convention are fully reflected in the                    
 Final Declaration of the Paris Conference. Both in Paris and at the                          
 International Government-Industry Conference against Chemical Weapons at                     
 Canberra, India was able to ensure that the focus of both the Conferences                    
 remained on the need for early conclusion of the Geneva negotiations on                      
 the Chemical Weapons Convention. India was able to effectively mobilise                      
 the nonaligned and developing countries to prevent discriminatory measures                   
 of non-proliferation from being adopted at the Conferences.                                  
                                                                                              
 Economic Issues Environment and Development held centre stage at the 44th                    
 Session of the General Assembly with a clear division between those who                      
 believe that the imperative need to address environmental problems should                    
 not be sidetracked by developmental preoccupations and those who stress                      
 that without developmental needs being met, particularly in the field of                     
 environmental protection, any action in respect of the latter could face                     
 failure. Despite this cleavage the Session came up with a landmark                           
 resolution on a UN Conference on Environment and Development to be held in                   
 Brazil in 1992. India played a leading role in the intense deliberations                     
 within the Group of 77 and in the Second committee in drafting the                           
 resolution on the subject. India's concerns relating to transfer of                          
 technology, new and addition al financial resources for developing                           
 countries in the environmental field. the inter-relationship between                         
 environment and development, and the need to have a special international                    
 fund in this area were reflected in the resolution adopted.                                  
                                                                                              
 Other noteworthy decisions recorded by the Second Committee included the                     
 adoption of an outline for the International Development Strategy for the                    
 Fourth UN Development Decade (1991-2000); the acceptance of a linkage                        
 between the preparatory process for the 1992 Environment and Development                     
 Conference and the follow up to the report of the World Commission on                        
 Environment and the Environmental Perspective to the year 2000 and beyond;                   
 further impetus to work on protecting the global climate, keeping in view                    
 the needs of developing countries as well as the work leading upto the                       
 1992 Environment Conference; a consensus on a step by step reduction and                     
 eventual cessation of large scale pelagic driftnet fishing; and a                            
 resolution on the UN's operational activities that incorporates ideas of                     
 greater UN dependence on the capabilities of the recipient country                           
 concerned.                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 Two other areas of interest related to the debt crisis and the landlocked                    
 countries. In respect of the former, India was keen to protect the                           
 interests o f developing countries which, despite heavy repayment burdens                    
 are making consistent efforts to manage their debt service. The resolution                   
 eventually ado pted refers to the need to forestall the proliferation of                     
 debt and prevent its furth er aggravation. In addition, India attempted to                   
 balance the resolution by elimina ting from it, too detailed a                               
 categorisation of debt-affected countries that could ha ve the result of                     
 fragmenting international consideration of the problem (eg, speci al                         
 attention to "middle-income countries").                                                     
                                                                                              
 On landlocked countries, the draft resolution proposed by Nepal and other                    
 cosponsors, while taking into account several concerns of transit                            
 developing countries like India, came up with certain new concepts that                      
 India found diffic ult to accept in toto. As a result, the draft in its                      
 final form did not have the b alance that India would have liked to see in                   
 it. In particular, an important referenc e to an article from the UN                         
 Convention on the Law of the Sea safeguarding the interests of transit                       
 countries was omitted from the draft which obliged India t o abstain on                      
 the resolution as a whole.                                                                   
                                                                                              
 The resolution on the report of the Trade and Development Board was                          
 adopted by consensus. The Indian delegation had sought-certain                               
 modifications i n the original draft in order to ensure that while                           
 welcoming the contributions of UNCTAD, the resolution of the Trade and                       
 Dvelopment Board on Debt adopted in October 1989 did not receive                             
 unqualified endorsement since that resolution contained certain references                   
 to special treatment to middle income countries which the Indian                             
 delegation could not support. The need for commensurate attention to all                     
 areas of negotiation in the Uruguay Round has been stressed in this                          
 resolution.                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 India was a member of the Economic and Social Council during 1989 and as                     
 the first Vice President, chaired the First (Economic) Committee. India                      
 played an active role in the second regular session. Some of the                             
 resolutions tabled by t he Group of 77 in the area of environment, on the                    
 1992 conference on environment and development and on additional financial                   
 resources to developing countries, were initiated by India. The role                         
 played by it in facilitating agreements on resolutions on regional                           
 cooperation, operational activities for development and environment earned                   
 wide appreciation. The North-South dialogue has, for many years remained                     
 at a standstill in international fora. During this period, rapid changes                     
 have taken place in the political, economic and scientific fields as well                    
 as in the structure and the functioning of the international economic                        
 system. To revitalise the North-Sout h dialogue so that the emerging                         
 problems of an increasingly inter-dependent world economy can be dealt                       
 with in an equitable way, it was felt essential to propose Summit Level                      
 consultations. With this end in view, the then Indian Prime Minis ter,                       
 along with the Presidents of Egypt, Senegal and Venezuela met in Paris in                    
 July 1989, and called for initiating a proposal for Summit Level                             
 consultations betwe en the leaders of the North and the South. The                           
 initiative has been welcomed by th e Non-Aligned Movement and has evoked a                   
 positive response from most of the major industrialised countries.                           
                                                                                              
 The establishment of the South Commission, an independent body comprising                    
 28 eminent individuals from the developing world, was seen as an important                   
 endeavour by developing countries to reshape their strategies in the                         
 develop ment dialogue with the North and to give impetus to promoting                        
 cooperation among themselves. The South Commission held an important                         
 meeting in Delhi in November 1989. It is hoped that the South Commission's                   
 report would be an important input in the work of the Non-Aligned Summit                     
 Level Group and would also clarify ideas for the revival of the                              
 North-South dialogue.                                                                        
 Administrative and Budgetary Matters                                                         
                                                                                              
 India played an active role in the UNDP Governing Council Meeting to                         
 ensure that supplementary increases in the Indicative Planning Figures of                    
 developing countries during the fourth cycle are fully delivered and not                     
 withhe ld by UNDP because of fears about rise in the value of the Dollar                     
 against European currencies.                                                                 
                                                                                              
 The UN Secretary General's proposed budget for 1990-91 was approved by the                   
 Fifth Committee, without vote. All other resolutions in the Fifth                            
 Committee we re also adopted by consensus. India played an important role                    
 in the process towar ds this consensus.                                                      
                                                                                              
 The question of outstanding payments to certain member States including                      
 India, who had contributed troops to two earlier UN Peace Keeping                            
 operations namely, UN Emergency Forces I and UN Operations in Congo, was                     
 revived at the initiative of India.                                                          
                                                                                              
 The Fifth Committee adopted a resolution requesting the UN Secretary                         
 General to approach member States for expeditious payment in full of all                     
 outstanding assessed contributions to peace keeping operations. India,                       
 along w ith other developing countries, made efforts to improve the                          
 methodology for determination of the scale of ad hoc assessments                             
 particularly, the distribution of ad hoc relief. This will now be applied                    
 in a uniform manner based on objective, rational and transparent criteria.                   
 With regard to the recruitment of women in the UN Secretariat, the                           
 developing countries including India, were able to have a paragraph                          
 included in the resolution requesting the Secretary General to increa se                     
 the representation of women from the developing countries in the UN                          
 Secretariat .                                                                                
                                                                                              
 Social and Humanitarian Issues                                                               
 India continued to play an important role in the UN bodies such as UN                        
 General Assembly and the Commission on Human Rights concerning social and                    
 humanitarian issues. India's profile in this regard was based on its                         
 principle d position on matters relating to human rights and social                          
 justice. At the 44th Session of the UN General Assembly, India continued                     
 to play an important role in the deliberations of the Third Committee.                       
 India supported th e adoption by the Third Committee and later by the                        
 General Assembly, of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Among the                    
 resolutions cosponsored by India was the resolution for convening in                         
 February 1990, of a Special Session o f the General Assembly to discuss                      
 measures to control illicit trafficking in drug s.                                           
                                                                                              
 The Indian delegation had participated actively in the 45th Session of the                   
 Commission on Human Rights which was held in Geneva from 30 January to 10                    
 March 1989 and the 41st Session of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of                       
 Discrimination and Protection of Minorities which was held in Geneva from                    
 7 August to 1 September 1989. At the session of the Commission on Human                      
 Rights, India made several statements on agenda items such as apartheid in                   
 South Africa , continued colonisation of Namibia, and illegal occupation                     
 by Israel of Arab territories including Palestine. India played an                           
 important role in giving a fi nal shape to the Draft Convention on the                       
 Rights of the Child. It also continued to contribute positively to the                       
 ongoing exercise of the drafting of a Convention o n the Rights of Migrant                   
 Workers and their Families and to the discussion for implementing the                        
 Declaration on the Right to Development adopted by the 41st UN General                       
 Assembly Session.                                                                            
                                                                                              
 As in previous years, the violence in Sri Lanka came up for discussion                       
 during the 45th Session of the Commission on Human Rights. The Indian                        
 delegation stressed that the most durable guarantee of the human rights of                   
 the people of t he northern and the eastern provinces of Sri Lanka lies in                   
 the fullest restoration of the democratic process. The Indian delegation                     
 expressed the hope that groups which have kept out of the process will                       
 give up terrorism and join the democratic pro cess without further delay.                    
 In this regard, the Indian delegation also highlighted the fact that the                     
 Indo-Sri Lanka Agreement of July 1987, has as its aim, the establishme nt                    
 of peace and normalcy in Sri Lanka. It was further pointed out that India                    
 has firmly and consistently supported the peace processes in Sri Lanka.                      
                                                                                              
 Apartheid The situation in South Africa continued to remain grim, despite                    
 welcome developments in Namibia. Under the renewed state of emergency, the                   
 Pretoria regime continued its repressive measures and what its enforcement                   
 machinery could not achieve was sought to be accomplished through covert                     
 means including the use of "vigilante" activities. A disconcerting recent                    
 development was the increasing use of the judiciary to eliminate opponents                   
 through the invocation o f the common purpose doctrine and tendentious                       
 criminalisation of peaceful dissent.                                                         
                                                                                              
 Some cosmetic steps towards "dismantling" of apartheid were taken by the                     
 Pretoria regime which included release of a few political prisioners,                        
 desegrega tion of some public beaches and limited permission for peaceful                    
 demonstrations. The se measures were designed to give an impression that                     
 apartheid was being reformed and progress was being made towards change.                     
 They were in no way indicative of any genuine desire on the part of the                      
 Pretoria regime for a real change and wer e made necessary to ease the                       
 economic burden on South Africa due to global sanctions.                                     
                                                                                              
 A consensus declaration was adopted by the Special Session of the UN                         
 General Assembly on Apartheid, held from 12 to 14 December 1989; the first                   
 instance of the international community adopting a common position on                        
 apartheid by consensus. It laid down necessary conditions for the creation                   
 of a climate conducive to negotiations and also contained an outline of                      
 the manner in which the negotiations- should proceed and the basic                           
 principles which the future politica l system in South Africa should be                      
 based upon.                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 India continued to actively espouse the cause of the struggle against                        
 apart heid in various international fora, including the United Nations and                   
 the Commonwealt h.                                                                           
                                                                                              
 Decolonisation India continued to play an important role in United Nations                   
 bodies relating to Decolonisation, in particular, the Special Committee of                   
 24 on Decolonisation an d the United Nations Council for Namibia. India's                    
 Permanent Representative was re-elected Vice President of the Council for                    
 Namibia and India also participate d actively in its associated subsidiary                   
 committees.                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 Significant developments took place during the year in Southern Africa,                      
 particularly those leading to the decolonisation of Namibia, where                           
 elections fo r a Constituent Assembly were held in November 1989 as the                      
 first step towards full independence. In keeping with India's unwavering                     
 support for the cause of the Namibian people it continued to play an                         
 important role at the United Nations in furthering the goal of an                            
 independent Namibia. Major General (Retd.) Prem Chand continued to head                      
 the military component of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group                     
 (UNTAG) in Namibia. As part of participation in this major peace keeping                     
 exercise, India contributed 20 military observers and 90 police monitors                     
 to be United Nations Force in Namibia. India also deputed 20 electora l                      
 supervisors to assist UNTAG in ensuring that the Namibian elections were                     
 conducted in a free and fair manner.                                                         
                                                                                              
 India participated in various observer missions despatched to Namibia by                     
 the Non-Aligned Movement and the Commonwealth, to evaluate the situation                     
 prevailing there. A Permanent Observer Mission was also set up in                            
 Windhoek. India provided 20 observers to the United Nations Mission in                       
 Angola to verify the withdrawal of Cuban forces from that country.                           
                                                                                              
 Elections to UN Bodies and other International Organisations                                 
 India's prestige and role in the United Nations was reflected in the                         
 results of elections to important bodies with India securing the highest                     
 number of votes among candidates from the Asian Group or being unanimously                   
 elected in a number of instances. Among the elections successfully                           
 contested by India were those to the International Court of Justice,                         
 Executive Council of the International Civil Aviation Organisation,                          
 Council of the International Maritime Organisation, Executive Council of                     
 the World Tourism Organisation, UNESCO Executive Board, UNIDO Programme                      
 and Budget Committee, UNIDO Industrial Development Board, FAO Executive                      
 Council, UNDP Governing Council, Administrative Council of the                               
 International Telecommunications Union, International Narcotics Control                      
 Board, Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes of the World Food                       
 Programme, Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,                     
 and the UPU Consultative Council for Postal Studies.                                         
                                                                                              
 Activities of the Non-Aligned Movement The year 1989 saw a number of major                   
 NAM activities starting with the Ministerial Meeting on Reforms and                          
 Methodology of NAM held in Cyprus in January 1989, followed by the                           
 Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau in Harare in May 1989, to                     
 prepare for the summit, and culminating in the 9th Conference of Heads of                    
 State or Government of the Movement of Non- Aligned countries, held at                       
 Belgrade, from 4 to 7 September 1989.                                                        
                                                                                              
 The Non-Aligned Movement worked towards reduction and relaxation of                          
 tensions globally, and the promotion of dialogue and cooperation in the                      
 international community. The Coordinating Bureau of the Movement met                         
 regularly in New York to deal with urgent matters on which the Movement                      
 focused its concern such as the developments in Southern Africa, promotion                   
 of economic and social growth among the developing countries, the Middle                     
 East and Palestine, decolonisation issues and strengthening the role and                     
 effectiveness of the Unite d Nations.                                                        
                                                                                              
 A Group of 18 NAM countries including India was mandated by the                              
 Coordinating Bureau to monitor developments in Namibia. This arrangement                     
 was endorsed by the Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau in                        
 Harare in May 1989. The Group of 18 played an active role in bringing NAM                    
 concerns about Namibia to the attention of the UN Secretary General.                         
                                                                                              
 The Nicosia Ministerial Conference of 1988 had decided that an Extraordina                   
 ry Ministerial Conference of NAM on Peace mid International Law would be                     
 held at The Hague from 26 to 29 June 1989, to commemorate the 90th                           
 anniversary of the First World Conference on Peace. At this Conference                       
 members and observers from countries and groups from outside the Movement                    
 were also invited. It adopted T he Hague Declaration on Peace and the Rule                   
 of Law in International Affairs, which called upon the UN General Assembly                   
 to declare the decade 1990-1999 as a decade of International Law. It also                    
 called for the establishment of a commiss ion comprising distinguished                       
 jurists to organise the activities of the decade and t o prepare for a                       
 Third Peace Conference. The Working Group on the Peaceful Settlement of                      
 Disputes, of which India is a member, participated actively in th e                          
 preparations for The Hague Meeting.                                                          
                                                                                              
 After the Nicosia Meeting on Reforms and Methodology of NAM, the                             
 Coordinating Bureau held several meetings to workout a document which was                    
 subsequently submitted to the Summit on the question of enhancing the                        
 effectiveness and work procedures of the Movement. In March 1989 and again                   
 in August 1989, India hosted meetings of the Governing Council of the                        
 Centre for Science and Technology of nonaligned and other developing                         
 countries. As a result of these meetings, the Centre is being set up in                      
 New Delhi and is expected to become operational shortly. In its early ye                     
 ars the Centre will have to be supported largely by the Government of                        
 India, but it is hoped that gradually it will become an important                            
 instrument in the scientific a nd technological development of developing                    
 countries and in promoting cooperation among them in this important area.                    
 Several nonaligned countries have pledged financial support to the Centre.                   
                                                                                              
 The 13th meeting of the coordinators of NAM countries in the field of heal                   
 th met in March 1989. The 5th meeting of experts on health also met in                       
 Havana in March 1989, to explore ways of achieving the goal of "health for                   
 all" by. the y ear 2000.                                                                     
                                                                                              
 The Institutional Committee for Research and Information systems met in                      
 New Delhi in March 1989. Progress made by the respective institutions in                     
 diffe rent areas of research and networking were reported by the delegates                   
 during the meeting.                                                                          
                                                                                              
 The 10th meeting of the Inter-governmental Council for Coordination of                       
 Information and Communication of NAM countries was held in Harare from 31                    
 July to 2 August 1989. It was attended by India at the Ministerial level.                    
 It reviewed recent developments and made preparations for COMINAC III.                       
 Reports by the Chairman of NANAP and BONAC were also adopted at this                         
 meeting. The meeting urged media organisations of all NAM countries to                       
 give prominence to th e NAM Summit in Belgrade.                                              
                                                                                              
 The Indian delegation to the 9th NAM Summit was headed by the former Prime                   
 Minister. Addressing the plenary, he proposed three important initiative s                   
 namely, the establishment of a Planet Protection Fund, interaction among                     
 expert s to pool resources of the developing countries for South-South                       
 Cooperation, and establishing a Summit Level Group of 15 developing                          
 countries for South-South consultations and cooperation. India played an                     
 important role as the Chairman of the Economic Committee. The Summit also                    
 decided that India should continue as Chairman of the AFRICA Fund.                           
                                                                                              
 The proposal about the Planet Protection Fund was intended to bring about                    
 a greater balance in international environment discussions and to                            
 highlight the m ajor difficulties of the developing countries relating to                    
 access to technology on reasonable terms and the need for additionality of                   
 resources in meeting environmental threats. The proposal was also                            
 considered at the Commonwealth Summit in Kualalumpur in October 1989,                        
 which supported the development of such an international funding                             
 mechanism. It is now being pursued in the UN for a.                                          
                                                                                              
 The decision to establish a Summit Level Group on South-South Consultation                   
 and Cooperation was one of the most significant outcomes of the Belgrade                     
 Summit. Fifteen important developing countries are participating in this                     
 Group . These are Argentina, Brazil, Jamaica, Mexico, Peru, Venezuela                        
 (Latin America), Algeria, Egypt, Nigeria, Senegal and Zimbabwe (from                         
 Africa), India, Indonesia, Malaysia (from Asia) and Yugoslavia. The Summit                   
 is expected to hold its first meeting in April-May 1990. It is hoped that                    
 the Group will be able to give an impetus to South-South Cooperation.                        
                                                                                              
 The Summit issued a Declaration summarising the perspective and role of                      
 the Movement in the context of the global political and economic                             
 situation. It emphasised the importance of six priority areas for NAM,                       
 viz, disarmament and international security, environment, development,                       
 human rights, decolonisation, and strengthening of multilateralism and the                   
 role of the UN.                                                                              
                                                                                              
 Commonwealth The Indian delegation to the Commonwealth Heads of Government                   
 Meeting held at Kualalumpur, from 18 to 24 October 1989, was led by the                      
 former External Affairs Minister, as the then Prime Minister was unable to                   
 attend. The Summit adopted important measures on Southern Africa and the                     
 Environment. Other important issues discussed by the meeting related to                      
 Drugs and Illicit Traffick ing, the world economic situation, and the                        
 question of the Commonwealth's contribution to the strengthening of                          
 democratic institutions in member countrie s, as enshrined in the                            
 Singapore Declaration of the Commonwealth Principles in 1971. The then                       
 External Affairs Minister's statements both on Southern Africa and on the                    
 Environment were greatly appreciated. The British Prime Minister, Mrs                        
 Thatcher's separate statement on South Africa was, however, criticised by                    
 sever al Heads of Government. India welcomed Pakistan's re-entry into the                    
 Commonwealth. Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto led the Pakistani delegation                     
 to th e Summit Meeting.                                                                      
                                                                                              
 As the present Secretary General of the Commonwealth, Mr Ramphal is due to                   
 retire in June 1990, the Heads of Delegations held a secret closed meeting                   
 to decide on his successor. Of the two candidates namely, Mr Fraser, the                     
 former Australian Prime Minister and Chief Emeka Anyaoku of Nigeria, the                     
 ballot went in favour of Chief Anyaoku.                                                      
                                                                                              
 Conferences / Seminars During the year under review, the Conference Cell                     
 provided logistical support and managerial assistance for all the                            
 international conferences convened by the Ministry of External Affairs. It                   
 also arranged various functions concerning the visits to India of foreign                    
 dignitaries. Noteworthy among these events, was the successful                               
 Organisation of the conference on "Humanism, International Politics and                      
 Nehru's Thought" held in New Delhi from 2 to 4 October 1989.                                 
                                                                                              
 The Conference was held to commemorate the Birth Centenary of Pandit                         
 Jawaharlal Nehru. The delegates to the Conference included Nobel                             
 Laureates, Gandhian philosophers, former Heads of Government, Heads of                       
 international agencies and Indian intellectuals, academicians, etc. Yet                      
 another important meeting which the Conference Cell helped to organise was                   
 the Sixth Meeting of the South Commission held in New Delhi from 11 to 14                    
 November 1989.                                                                               
                                                                                              
 The Meeting was attended by Dr Julius K Nyerere, former President of                         
 Tanzania and presently Chairman of the South Commission, Mr Carlos Rafael                    
 Rodriguez, Vice President of Cuba, Mr Michael Norman Manley, Prime                           
 Minister, of Jamaica, Mr Shridath Ramphal, Commonwealth Secretary General,                   
 Dr Reinaldo Figueredo Planchart, Foreign Minister of Venezuela and several                   
 former Ministers of the respective Governments in their capacity as                          
 Members of the South Commission.                                                             
                                                                                              
 The Conference Cell shared its expertise with other departments of the                       
 Government in the organisation of their conferences. The available                           
 equipment was loaned, free of cost, to various Government organisations                      
 from time to time. All these measures resulted in considerable savings in                    
 expenditure to the Government, including foreign exchange. All                               
 illustrative list of conferences/functions organised during the year is                      
 given in Appendix XIII.                                                                      
                                                                                              
 International Law: Development and Activities The 41st Session of the                        
 International Law Commission was held at Geneva from 2 May to 21 July                        
 1989. It considered several matters of importance includ ing legal                           
 problems concerning the use of international rivers for non-navigational                     
 purposes, the development of a draft code of crimes against the peace and                    
 secur ity of mankind, the legal principles concerning liability for                          
 injurious consequence s for acts of States not prohibited under                              
 international law, drafting of an internati onal convention on the                           
 privileges and immunities of diplomatic bag and diplomatic courier and                       
 legal principles concerning jurisdictional immunities of States for                          
 various acts.                                                                                
                                                                                              
 This Session of the Commission succeeded in finalising draft articles on                     
 th e diplomatic bag and diplomatic courier and recommended to the General                    
 Assembly that these may be adopted in the form of an international                           
 convention. The Commission also began its second reading of the draft                        
 articles on jurisdictiona l immunities of States and their property and                      
 dealt with 12 articles out of a tot al of 33 articles in this regard.                        
 Further, the Commission was able to make progress on the subject of the                      
 use of international rivers and finalised about 23 articles so far and                       
 completed nearly two/third of its work.                                                      
                                                                                              
 On the question of the development of a draft code of crimes, the Commissi                   
 on was able to move forward despite differences of opinion and considered                    
 definiti on of war crimes and crimes against humanity. It has so far                         
 finalised about 15 ar ticles with commentaries and forwarded them to the                     
 General Assembly for consideration. The Commission was also concerned with                   
 rationalization of the procedures of its work and it established a                           
 planning group under the Chairmansh ip of Dr P S Rao, the Indian Member,                     
 and made several recommendations in this regard for the consideration of                     
 the Commission. In response to several incidents involving illegal traffic                   
 of hazardous wa stes between developed and developing countries and their                    
 dumping in developing countries, particularly in Africa, under the UN                        
 Environment Programme, a global convention on the control of transboundary                   
 movement of hazardous wastes and their disposal was concluded at Basel                       
 (Switzerland) on 22 March 1989. The Convention covers 47 categories of                       
 wastes. However, it excludes nuclear wastes from its scope and did not                       
 also deal directly with dumping of wastes at high se as. The Convention                      
 provides for the export of hazardous wastes under controlled conditions to                   
 countries which have not otherwise decided to prohibit import of such                        
 wastes. Export of wastes under the Convention could only be done after                       
 receiving the consent of the importing country in writing to the specific                    
 impor t. The Convention also deals with movement of hazardous wastes                         
 through a transit country and territory or areas under its jurisdiction.                     
 The transit countries a re entitled to receive copies of notification of                     
 the transboundary movement of was tes through the UNEP Secretariat to be                     
 established under the Convention. Export of hazardous wastes to Antartica                    
 is totally prohibited under the Convention. Th e question of liability and                   
 compensation for damage resulting from transboundary movements and                           
 disposal of hazardous wastes was left under the Convention to be dealt                       
 with by the Parties to the convention at a later date with a view to adop                    
 ting a Protocol on this subject.                                                             
                                                                                              
 Despite the reservations expressed by several African countries, the                         
 Convention is hailed as the best that could be achieved under the present                    
 conditions and is regarded as filling up a vacuum which otherwise existed                    
 witho ut any regulation of dumping of hazardous wastes. Under the auspices                   
 of the International Atomic Energy Agency a Working Group has been                           
 established to examine various legal problems concerning liabili ty for                      
 nuclear damage. The second session of the Working Group was held at Vienna                   
 from 30 October to 3 November 1989. The Paris Convention on Third Party                      
 Liability for Nuclear Damage, 1960, the Brussels Supplementary Convention                    
 of 1963 (Supplementary to the Paris Convention), the Vienna Convention on                    
 Liabilit y for Nuclear Damage, 1963 and the Joint Protocol relating to the                   
 application of the Vienna Convention and the Paris Convention, 1988                          
 presently deal with the existi ng civil liability for nuclear damage.                        
 While the Paris Convention and the Brussel s Supplementary Convention is                     
 applicable among only the European countries parties to it, the Vienna                       
 convention is open for universal subscription. Howev er, the Vienna                          
 Convention hits not come into force so far. Under both the Conventions,                      
 the limits of liability conceived for the operator, the financial limits                     
 for State intervention are considered to be not satisfactory given the                       
 contempo rary conditions and nature of claims in case of a massive nuclear                   
 incident like the Chernobyl accident. The Working Group is considering                       
 various ways and means in which the existing civil liability regime could                    
 be revised and supplemented by other concepts of liability like State                        
 liability, State responsibility or State inter vention. While it is agreed                   
 that innocent victims of nuclear damage should be compensate d as fully as                   
 possible, there have been several proposals on the financial limits of                       
 operator's liability and the mode and modalities of State intervention and                   
 the need to cover principles like State liability and State responsibility                   
 in this conne ction. Several countries, particularly from the Western                        
 developed countries and USA an d Japan opposed strongly any idea of                          
 imposing liability on States and much less t o bring in a regime of State                    
 responsibility in case of nuclear damage. These iss ues are likely to be                     
 further discussed.                                                                           
                                                                                              
 The Legal Sub-Committee of the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of                          
 Outerspace (COPUOS) held its 28th Session in New York from 20 March to 7                     
 April 1989. The Sub-Committee discussions during the Session pertained to                    
 the use of Nuclear Power Sources (NPS) in outerspace; definition and                         
 delimitation of outerspace and matters related to the Geostationary Orbit                    
 (GSO); and a new agenda item on the sharing of benefits of outerspace                        
 taking into particular acc ount the needs of the developing countries. The                   
 Working Group of the Sub-Committee on NPS discussed all the outstanding                      
 principles of the Canadian draft which constituted the basis of its                          
 deliberations. However, consensus would be record ed on only two                             
 principles dealing with consultations and settlement of disputes. Under                      
 the overall item on definition and delimitation of outerspace and matters                    
 relat ed to the GSO, the discussions focused on GSO and a working                            
 non-paper presented by some developing countries was taken as a starting                     
 point containing some ideas t hat could be discussed. A major development                    
 at the 28th Session of the Legal Sub- Committee is on the new agenda item                    
 concerning the sharing of benefits of outerspace particularly taking into                    
 account the needs of the developing countri es. In deference to the                          
 assertions of the developing countries for the establishmen t of a Working                   
 Group on this item during the present session and in view of the                             
 opposition to it by certain developed States, a compromise formula was                       
 accepted which recommended that a Working Group to deal with this item                       
 would be set up not later than at the Thirtieth Session of the Legal                         
 Sub-Committe in 1991.                                                                        
                                                                                              
 India actively participated in the Session and played a significant role i                   
 n the promotion of the new agenda item on sharing of outerspace benefits                     
 particularly by the developing countries. While underscoring the Indian                      
 policy that outerspace is meant only for peaceful uses as opposed to                         
 military purposes, India stressed on the need for speedy resolution of the                   
 question related to evolution of appropriate guidelines and criteria for                     
 safe use of NPS in outerspace as well as on the establishment of a                           
 clear-cut definition and delimitation of outerspace. It was emphasised                       
 that GSO is a part of outerspace and that it lies within the mandate of                      
 sub-committee to discuss it.                                                                 
                                                                                              
 India held talks in Bangkok in October 1989 with Thailand and Myanmar for                    
 the establishment of the trijunction point between India, Myanmar and                        
 Thailand in continuation of the 1978 Agreement with Thailand and the 1986                    
 Agreement with Myanmar. Talks were held between India and Thailand to                        
 extend the maritime boundary between the two countries from the terminal                     
 point of Indo-Thailand boundary as delimited in accordance with the 1978                     
 Agreement to the trijunction point. The Agreemments were finalised and                       
 initialled at the technical levels on 6 October 1989 at Bangkok.                             
                                                                                              
 India participated in the Conference convened by the FAO at Rome from 3 to                   
 7 April 1989. The Conference was convened with a view to adopting a Draft                    
 Agreement for the Establishment of the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission.                         
 Delegations maintained differing views on several of the provisions of the                   
 draf t as well as on the need to establish such a Commission. The                            
 Conference could not adopt any clauses of the Agreement and the basic                        
 question of the establishment of the commission was left open. India                         
 emphasised, among other things, the sovere ign rights of the coastal                         
 states for the purpose of exploring and exploiting, conse rving and                          
 managing the natural resources of the superjacent waters of the EEZ, and                     
 th at any such commission should protect and safeguard the interests of                      
 the developin g coastal states and no financial burden should be placed on                   
 these states in the process.                                                                 
                                                                                              
 There were 11 items on the agenda for consideration by the Sixth Committee                   
 of the UN dealing with legal matters. The Committee approved one decision                    
 and 12 resolutions. Eight resolutions and decisions were adopted by                          
 consensus. In dia cosponsored three resolutions, viz, on Peaceful                            
 Settlement of Disputes between States; the Report of the International Law                   
 Commission on the work of its 44th Session; and the Draft Articles on the                    
 Status of the Diplomatic Courier and the Diplomatic Bag not accompanied by                   
 Diplomatic Courier.                                                                          
                                                                                              
 The Committee's approval of the Draft Convention against Mercenaries was                     
 among the Session's major achievements and an important contribution to                      
 the development of International Law. The adoption of a Draft Decision on                    
 the Peaceful Settlement of Disputes was similarly important and                              
 incorporated resort to a Commisssion of Good Offices, Mediation or                           
 Conciliation within the United Nations.                                                      
                                                                                              
 The Draft resolution on the Report of the International Law Commission's                     
 Fortyfirst Session includes Draft Articles on the Status of the Diplomatic                   
 Cour ier and two Draft Optional Protocols attached thereon, and provides                     
 for informal consultations on the subject during the General Assembly's                      
 45th Session in 1990 . The Assembly would take note, in the Preamble of                      
 the Draft, of the Committee's recommendations for Convening an                               
 International Conference of Plenipotentiaries to conclude a Convention on                    
 the subject.                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 The resolution on the Report of the 22nd Session of UNCITRAL contains a                      
 recommendation to convene an International Conference of Plenipotentiaries                   
 at Vienna from 8 to 25 April 1991, to consider a Draft Convention prepared                   
 by UNCITRAL on the Liability of Operators of Transport Terminals in                          
 International Trade.                                                                         
                                                                                              
 The Report of the Sixth Committee was considered by the General Assembly                     
 in 72nd Plenary Meeting on 4 December 1989. The General Assembly adopted                     
 the following:                                                                               
 (i) Progressive Development of the Principles and Norms of Internation al                    
 Law relating to the New International Economic Order;                                        
 (ii) Peaceful Settlement of Disputes between States;                                         
 (iii) Draft Code of Crimes against the Peace and Security of Mankind.                        
 Resolutions on items relating to: United Nations Programme of Assistance                     
 in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of                              
 International Law, Measures to Prevent International Terrorism which                         
 endangers or takes innocent human lives or jeopardises fundamental                           
 freedoms and Study of the Underlying Causes of those forms of Terrorism                      
 and acts of violence; Report of the ad hoc Committee on the Drafting of an                   
 International Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and                         
 Training of Mercenaries; Report of the International Law Commission on the                   
 work of its Fortyfirst Session, Report of t he Special Committee on the                      
 Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the                    
 Organisation; Report of the Committee on Relations with Host Country;                        
 International Criminal Responsibility of Individuals and Entities enga ged                   
 in Illicit Trafficking in Narcotic Drugs across national frontiers and                       
 other Transnational Criminal activities; Establishment of an International                   
 Criminal C ourt with jurisdiction over such crimes; and a Decision to                        
 Resort to a Commission of Good Offices, Mediation or Conciliation within                     
 the United Nations, were also adopted.                                                       
                                                                                              
 The 22nd Annual Session of the UNCITRAL was held in Vienna from 16 May to                    
 2 June 1989. It discussed the Draft Convention on Liability of Operators                     
 of Transport Terminals in International Trade. This Draft Convention was                     
 prepar ed by the UNCITRAL Working Group on International Contract                            
 practices. With the completion of the work on this Draft Convention,                         
 UNCITRAL has accomplished the task of drafting International Legislative                     
 Instruments intended to establis h a unified regime in the field of                          
 International Maritime Transport. India took ac tive part in the work of                     
 this Working Group because of its vast and major maritime interests in the                   
 developing world.                                                                            
                                                                                              
 Under the Plan of Action for the SAARC Year for Combating Drug Abuse and                     
 Drug Trafficking, a meeting of legal experts was held in New Delhi from 20                   
 to 22 December 1989, for making a comparative study of existing laws with                    
 a view t o harmonising drug laws in the region. The meeting made a number                    
 of recommendations regarding the area in which the national legislations                     
 of the member countries needed to be harmonised. These included the                          
 question of drugs and substances to be controlled, the illegal activities                    
 to be established as of fences, the quantum of punishment to be prescribed                   
 for the various offences, extraditio n laws and mutual legal assistance.                     
 1989                                                                                         
 Foreign Economic Relations                                                                   
                                                                        Top                   
 Jan 01, 1989 CHAPTER IX FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS Bilateral Cooperation                     
 through ITEC THE Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC)                            
 Programme administered by the Ministry of External Affairs is the main                       
 instrument through which India makes available technical and economic                        
 assistance to other developing countries. The programme which was first                      
 launched in 1964, has expanded rapidly both in terms of the number of                        
 countries as well as range of activities covered. Under this programme,                      
 India has made available project aid , technical experts, training                           
 facilities both civilian and defence to over 70 dev eloping countries. A                     
 number of techno-economic surveys have also been carried out in selected                     
 countries to identify projects relevant to the needs and conditions of                       
 those countries.                                                                             
                                                                                              
 In addition to ITEC, the Ministry, has also strengthened India's economic                    
 cooperation with regional bodies such as the Economic Commission for                         
 Africa and the Southern African Development Cooperation Council.                             
                                                                                              
 In April 1988, the Special Commonwealth African Assistance Programme                         
 (SCAAP) was transferred to this Ministry from the Ministry of Finance.                       
 During the past one year the number of trainees covered under this                           
 programme has expanded significantly.                                                        
                                                                                              
 Brief description of activities covered under these programmes during                        
 1989- 90 is as follows: Project Assistance As in the past, a significant                     
 proportion of the ITEC budget was devoted to the supply of equipment from                    
 India for various projects in recipient countries. Du ring the year under                    
 review, some of the major projects completed were the Common Facility                        
 Centre and Pilot Weaving Centre in Ethiopia, Rice Research Centre and the                    
 Buffalo Fodder Research Centre in Vietnam, the Industrial Estate Project                     
 an d the Indira Gandhi Institute of Child Health in Kabul and the Textile                    
 Technology School and the Sir Sewasagar Ramgoolam Centre in Mauritius.                       
                                                                                              
 The Fifth meeting of the Indo-Mauritius Joint Commission was held in March                   
 1989 and identified more than a dozen new projects for technical                             
 assistance to that country. Action on several of the projects has already                    
 been initiated. As part of the revival of India's cooperation programmes                     
 with Afghanistan, a feasibility report on a 300-bed maternity hospital in                    
 Kabul is being prepared b y the Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation.                   
 The CPWD is now engaged in the construction of 10 additional industrial                      
 sheds at the Indian aided Industrial E state Project in Kabul.                               
                                                                                              
 Feasibility Study During the year under review, several feasibility                          
 studies were commissioned in a number of developing countries. These                         
 included studies on multi-purpose smal l industrial services centre in                       
 Vietnam, a soap manufacturing unit in Angola and a "tea efficiency study"                    
 in Mauritius.                                                                                
                                                                                              
 Training A large number of nominees of developing countries were accepted                    
 for training in Indian institutions covering a wide variety of disciplines                   
 includin g agriculture, rural development, health, education, developing                     
 of water resource s, industry, legal metrology and standardisation. These                    
 training courses varied f rom a period of 6 weeks to 18 months. Till the                     
 end of November 1989, two hundred and seventyfive nominees were admitted                     
 to these training programmes in addition to 52 trainees admitted in the                      
 previous year but who continued their training during the year under                         
 review.                                                                                      
                                                                                              
 Experts During the year, over 100 proposals for deputation of ITEC experts                   
 were taken up with Foreign Assignment Section (FAS), Department of                           
 Personnel and Administrative Reforms, and selection of 40 experts was                        
 finalized. The main beneficiary countries were Mauritius, Zambia, People's                   
 Democratic Republic of Yemen, Yemen Arab Republic, Vietnam, Ethiopia and                     
 Afghanistan. Short term experts were also deputed to Nicaragua, Vietnam                      
 and Mauritius. The work of ITEC experts in developing countries, covering                    
 virtually every aspect of development, has won much appreciation from                        
 recipient governments.                                                                       
                                                                                              
 Visits Three visits of high level officials, one each from Malaysia,                         
 Zambia and Madagascar took place during the year. The visits were in the                     
 form of study to urs aimed at familiarising senior officials of friendly                     
 developing countries with I ndia's capabilities in the field of science                      
 and technology. Such visits have already led to requests for increased                       
 cooperation in several fields, in particular, agricultur e and small                         
 industry.                                                                                    
                                                                                              
 SCAAP In the current year, about 400 nominees from African Commonwealth                      
 countries are expected to receive training in India at the cost of about                     
 Rs 2 c rores. This is a record achievement when compared with 300 trainees                   
 received during th e previous year and only about 70 nominees received                       
 during 1987-88, when the scheme was with the Ministry of Finance. The                        
 areas in which training was impar ted included agriculture, mass                             
 communications, audit of receipts, police, cooperati ve management,                          
 maintenance engineering, development banking, life insurance, financial                      
 management, standardisation, legal metrology, textiles, mill manageme nt                     
 and curriculum design. A police advisor was also deputed to Seychelles.                      
 Other Assistance In response to requests for urgent relief, India supplied                   
 medicines worth Rs 5 lakhs to Vietnam and some modest food aid to Angola.                    
 Medical equipment and supplies were also gifted to the People's Democratic                   
 Republic of Yemen. Some 5 0 looms are being sent as a gift to Burkina                        
 Faso. These gestures have generated considerable goodwill for India among                    
 the countries concerned.                                                                     
                                                                                              
 INDIA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC USA ETHIOPIA VIETNAM AFGHANISTAN MAURITIUS                    
 ANGOLA RUSSIA ZAMBIA YEMEN NICARAGUA MALAYSIA MADAGASCAR SEYCHELLES                          
 BURKINA FASO                                                                                 
 1989                                                                                         
 Policy Planning and Research                                                                 
                                                                        Top                   
 Jan 01, 1989                                                                                 
 CHAPTER X POLICY PLANNING AND RESEARCH DURING the year under review, the                     
 Policy Planning Division interacted with other Ministries in the                             
 Government and the officials participated on a regular basis in                              
 inter-ministerial and inter-departmental meetings, in particular, the                        
 Joint Intelligence Committee.                                                                
                                                                                              
 The Division continued to maintain active contacts amongst academic circle                   
 s and the University Grants Commission and Area Study Centres of various                     
 Universities specialising in international affairs. The Division also                        
 interacted with various non-governmental organisations i n organising                        
 conferences and seminars on international issues.                                            
                                                                                              
 The Historical Division, which is the Research Wing of the Ministry of                       
 External Affairs, prepared a number of research papers and backgrounders                     
 on various issues relating to international developments. The Division                       
 interacts with Territorial Divisions of the Ministry as well as with other                   
 Ministries. The Di vision rendered all necessary help to various                             
 Departments of the Government of India a s well as to Indian Missions                        
 abroad whenever they needed any information or documents on international                    
 developments.                                                                                
                                                                                              
 The Historical Division coordinates with other Divisions of the Ministry a                   
 nd deals with requests of research scholars to consult old records of the                    
 Governme nt of India. The Division also scrutinises the excerpts of                          
 records on restricted areas submitted by the research scholars in the                        
 National Archives of India for final approval and release. A close                           
 coordination is maintained from time to time wit h the National Archives                     
 of India in relation to framing of the rules of access to the records of                     
 the Government of India.                                                                     
                                                                                              
 The Historical Division carries out scrutiny of maps of India to examine                     
 whether the external boundaries of India are accurately depicted.                            
 Inaccuracies in foreign publications are taken up for necessary corrective                   
 measures.                                                                                    
                                                                                              
 The Division studies active assistance on various boundary problems with                     
 India's neighbours. To support the research efforts, a well stocked                          
 Library is maintained with over one hundred thousand books and documents                     
 in its collection. During 1989 alone, 2100 books, 100 maps, 600 pamphlets                    
 and 36 reels of microfilm were added. The Library subscribes to 570                          
 periodicals (451 foreign and 119 Indian) besides 36 d aily newspapers (23                    
 foreign and 13 Indian).                                                                      
                                                                                              
 From April 1986, the Library has initiated computerisation of                                
 Documentation / Bibliographic Services. All new documents, books,                            
 periodicals, articles etc. a re being fed into in-house micro-computers to                   
 create Database on Foreign Affairs. Using this Database, the Library                         
 provides Current Awareness Service and Bibliographical Services. In                          
 addition, the Library regularly issues a monthly Chronicle of Events, a                      
 Foreign Affairs Documentation Bulletin and an annotated monthly list of                      
 books added to the Library.                                                                  
                                                                                              
 From January 1990, all databases and library operations are being                            
 gradually integrated as computer-based Foreign Affairs Information                           
 Retrieval System (FAIRS). Library users including Research Scholars will                     
 shortly be allowed on- line access to computer-based information held in                     
 Library.                                                                                     
 1989                                                                                         
 External Publicity                                                                           
                                                                        Top                   
 CHAPTER XI EXTERNAL PUBLICITY DURING the year under review the External                      
 Publicity Division was actively engaged in pursuing the objective of                         
 projecting the rationale of India's foreig n policy while countering                         
 adverse publicity and giving due emphasis to the posit ive aspects of                        
 India's economic, industrial and technological advances. In striving for                     
 the above, the Division continued to regularly brief the fo reign and                        
 Indian media about India's policy on various issues. A marked emphasis was                   
 laid on giving wider coverage to important international events,                             
 especially in the neighbouring countries-Sri Lanka, Nepal, Pakistan and                      
 Afghanistan and India's policy towards them. Detailed backgrounders for                      
 briefing the local media in fo reign countries were supplied to Indian                       
 Missions on subjects such as Indian Defence a nd Defence Exports, Communal                   
 situation in India, Urban Development, General Elections etc. Separate                       
 background notes were also supplied to the Missions on Indo-Nepal and                        
 Indo-Sri Lanka relations. Efforts were made to give adequate publicity to                    
 the Ninth General Elections in India.                                                        
                                                                                              
 The Division made suitable arrangements for press and media coverage as                      
 wel l as special briefing during VVIP Visits. From April to December 1989                    
 over 20 VVIP Visits were covered. Interviews and Press Conferences were                      
 also arranged for v isiting VIPs such as the Hungarian Justice Minister,                     
 Prof. Kulcsar and Maulana Kausar Niazi, Urdu Poet and ex-Minister of                         
 Pakistan.                                                                                    
                                                                                              
 The Division, while keeping abreast of the latest developments in Punjab,                    
 f ed the Indian Missions abroad on a continuous basis with accurate                          
 information with a v iew to correcting misconceptions and possible                           
 distortions. Similarly, the activitie s of pro- Khalistan elements in                        
 certain countries were closely monitored for devising eff ective measures                    
 to counter adverse publicity emanating from such sources.                                    
                                                                                              
 Close liaison and coordination was maintained with the countries/agencies                    
 f or work relating to the expansion of the activities of the Nonaligned                      
 News Agency                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 Pool as well as cooperation in the formation of a new International                          
 Information and Communication order.                                                         
                                                                                              
 Quality literature depicting different facets of India's national life                       
 were printed and published in the English, French, Spanish, Portuguese,                      
 German and Arabic languages. The magazine India Perspectives, brought out                    
 in English, French and Spanish drew acclaim from foreign readers for                         
 excellent production and comprehensive content. The Division also                            
 publishes the monthly 'Foreign Affair s Record' apart from bringing out                      
 publications covering Prime Minister's statemen t on foreign policy and                      
 his visits abroad as also on various summits, conferences etc. in which                      
 India participated. The main publications brought out during the curr ent                    
 year are 'India-Democracy on the Move,' 'India and Disarmament-An                            
 Anthology' and an attractive brochure, 'India Goes to the Polls.' The                        
 Division continued to offer hospitality to select media men from all ove r                   
 the world and assist visiting foreign media men in their travel within the                   
 coun try to enable them to meet a cross section of the Indian people. It                     
 also continued to process cases of foreign journalists for the grant of                      
 regular/temporary accreditation. The Division also took various press                        
 parties consisting of Indi an as well as foreign journalists to Nepal, Sri                   
 Lanka and Maldives to apprise them of the latest developments there.                         
                                                                                              
 The External Publicity Division continued to process requests by foreign                     
 fil m makers wanting to make documentary films in India. In some. cases                      
 hospitality was also accorded to these film makers. The Division continued                   
 to process requests from foreign and Indian organisations to interview                       
 important dignitaries such a s the President, the Prime Minister, Cabinet                    
 Ministers, Governors etc.                                                                    
                                                                                              
 A major task before the External Publicity. Division was to provide the                      
 necessary logistical and infrastructural support to enable the world media                   
 in v ery large numbers to adequately cover the Ninth General Elections.                      
 For the year long birth centenary celebrations of Jawaharlal Nehru, the                      
 External Publicity Division contributed the following: (a) A photographic                    
 exhibition on Nehru's life and times and his contrib ution to the making                     
 of a modern and dynamic India was commissioned and supplied to 70 Indian                     
 Missions abroad. This exhibition was attended in these countries by large                    
 number of visit ors;                                                                         
 (b) A 30-minute documentary, 'Jawaharlal Nehru,' was supplied to all                         
 Indian Missions abroad. The documentary was telecast in many countries by                    
 local television stations;                                                                   
 (c) A large number of photographs and portraits of Jawaharlal Nehru w ere                    
 sent to all Indian Missions abroad;                                                          
 (d) A 16 mm documentary on Jawaharlal Nehru was supplied to a large number                   
 of Missions; and                                                                             
 (e) A large number of articles on Jawaharlal Nehru was supplied to Ind ian                   
 Missions abroad for use by newspapers and journals in those countr ies.                      
 The audio visual medium is becoming more and more important as a medium of                   
 publicity worldwide. The External Publicity Division is now supplying                        
 audio visual equipment to those Missions which so far do not have it. The                    
 Missions abroad have been provided with video libraries on various aspects                   
 of Indian lif e. The External Publicity Division intends to carry out a                      
 comprehensive review of Missions' video libraries and supply them material                   
 covering latest developments . The structure of India magazine capsule is                    
 being altered. In place of the curr ent style of India magazine capsule,                     
 thematic cassettes will be prepared. The them atic capsules are likely to                    
 be more popular and convenient for the cultural organisations, educational                   
 institutions and individuals abroad interested in In dia.                                    
                                                                                              
 The External Publicity Division has begun a phased programme of installing                   
 satellite antennae at Missions abroad. Initially the Missions in                             
 neighbouring countries have been given satellite antenna to enable them to                   
 watch Doordarshan programmes via INSAT satellite. The installation of                        
 satellite TV antenna at In dian Missions in Eastern Europe is underway.                      
 The satellite antenna in these countri es will enable the Missions to                        
 receive TV news from all parts of the world.                                                 
                                                                                              
 To meet the increasing demand for Indian films across the world, the                         
 Extern al Publicity Division circulated a large number of Indian films                       
 subtitled in Engli sh, Arabic, French and Spanish for screening by                           
 Missions abroad. The Division is a lso assisting in the production of two                    
 documentaries on Contemporary Indian Culture . The first documentary is on                   
 contemporary Indian painters and the second is on contemporary Indian                        
 dance. The Division has also sponsored production of two documentaries                       
 namely, Investment Opportunities in India and India-Continuity in Change.                    
                                                                                              
 As part of the general election publicity, the External Publicity Division                   
 produced a documentary 'Indian General Election-A Scene Setter.' The                         
 documentary was telecast by 30 television stations in various countries.                     
 The Division is also supplying documentaries to 35 countries for telecast                    
 on their TV stations on Jan 26, 1990. The Division is supplying; with the                    
 help of Doordarshan, material for telecast to television stations of many                    
 countries und er the cultural exchange programmes.                                           
                                                                                              
 The photo libraries of Missions abroad containing photographic slides on                     
 different aspects of development of India are being continuously                             
 strengthened. The Division is also meeting the special requirement of                        
 photographs of the Missions as and when they need the photographs for                        
 their own publications or for the local media.                                               
                                                                                              
 The External Publicity Division has endeavoured to fulfil its objectives                     
 of building and sustaining an accurate image of India. As a pivotal                          
 publicity org an of the Ministry, it will continue to further coordinate                     
 efforts in disseminating w ell packaged and timely information.                              
                                                                                              
 INDIA USA AFGHANISTAN NEPAL PAKISTAN SRI LANKA MALDIVES CENTRAL AFRICAN                      
 REPUBLIC                                                                                     
 1989                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Indians Overseas                                                                             
                                                                        Top                   
 INDIA                                                                                        
 USA MAURITIUS                                                                                
 1989                                                                                         
 Protocol                                                                                     
                                                                        Top                   
 Jan 01, 1989                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 CHAPTER XIII PROTOCOL DURING the year under review, the Heads of Missions                    
 of the following 24 countries left India on completion of their tenure:                      
                                                                                              
 Pakistan, Yugoslavia, United States of America, Cyprus, Zambia, Zimbabwe,                    
 Tanzania, Afghanistan, Newzealand, Algeria, Myanmar, Syria, Mongolia,                        
 Sweden, Somalia, Poland, Sri Lanka, Papua New Guinea (non-resident),                         
 Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Greece, Kenya, Qatar, Indonesia and                   
 Ireland. During the same period, the Heads of Missions of the following 30                   
 countrie s presented their credentials to the President of India:                            
                                                                                              
 Lesotho (non-resident), Malta (nonresident), Ghana, Democratic Peopl e's                     
 Republic of Korea, Singapore, Greece, Poland, Benin (non-reside nt),                         
 Indonesia, Sri Lanka, Somalia, Iran, Ethiopia, Switzerland, Alg eria,                        
 Mongolia, Newzealand, Tanzania, Zimbabwe, Sweden, Afghanistan, Zambia,                       
 Cyprus, Myanmar, Cote d' Ivoire (non-resident), Yugo- slavia, United                         
 States of America, Pakistan, Guinea and Ireland.                                             
                                                                                              
 A list of Heads of State, Vice Presidents, Heads of Government, Foreign                      
 Ministers and others who visited India during 1989-90 is at Appendix XIV.                    
 1989                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Passport and Consular Services                                                               
                                                                        Top                   
 Jan 01, 1989                                                                                 
 CHAPTER XIV PASSPORT AND CONSULAR SERVICES WITH the opening of an office                     
 in Nagpur in October 1989, the number of Passport Offices in the country                     
 has risen to 22. In addition, there are two Liaison Offices in Shimla and                    
 Trivandrum respectively.                                                                     
                                                                                              
 During the year 1,562,837 new passports were issued. Appendix VI details                     
 the input-output figures in respect of passports and miscellaneous                           
 services. Appendix VIII gives the revenue-expenditure figures (April to                      
 October 1989). T he proportion of expenditure to income is roughly 1/3.                      
                                                                                              
 Periodic inspections were made of the Passport Offices with a view to                        
 streamlining their procedures and increasing their output. By the end of                     
 the year, new passports were issued within 5 working days of the receipt                     
 of satisfactory verification reports. Passport Adalats in the Offi ces                       
 concerned were organised. The Passport Offices also held out-of-station                      
 camps. Computerisation of Passport Offices proceeded apace. As an                            
 experimental measure, reports. on present status of applications have been                   
 computerised in t he Passport Office, Delhi in cooperation with the                          
 National Informatics Centre and an "On Line Status Enquiry System" has                       
 been installed. Computerisation of references in the case of lost                            
 passports has also been introduced partially.                                                
                                                                                              
 Visits by Indian nationals to South Africa have been partly liberalised.                     
 The Passport Offices in India and Indian Representatives abroad have been                    
 authorise d to endorse such passports for South Africa when the object of                    
 the visit is to v isit relatives in emergencies like serious illness,                        
 death of a close relative, etc.                                                              
                                                                                              
 The Complaints & Grievances Cell of the Division handled approximately 900                   
 complaints regarding delay in the issue of new passports or renewal of old                   
 passports. Around 500 complaints were resolved while in the remaining                        
 cases th e complainants were informed of progress made. Around 200 cases                     
 of forgery of or tempering with passports were reported and are being                        
 enquired into. It is prop osed to introduce a More Secured Passport (MSP)                    
 shortly.                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 Twelve cases of appeal against the impounding of passports/denial of passp                   
 ort facilities by the Passport Offices Were received. Orders on 7 of these                   
 cases w ere passed either allowing or rejecting the appeal.                                  
                                                                                              
 As part of a preventive measure, the Government of India have introduced                     
 the requirement of compulsory medical examination of foreigners other than                   
 exempted categories who intend to stay in India for a period of more than                    
 one year, for AIDS.                                                                          
                                                                                              
 The Visa Manual Which was last issued in 1981 has been updated. In 1989 a                    
 total number of 989 diplomatic and 5604 official passports were issued. In                   
 addition, 8209 miscellaneous services were rendered. During 1988, seven                      
 hundred and three cases of deportation of Indian nation als by foreign                       
 Governments were brought to notice. Indian Missions and Posts abroa d                        
 repatriated 155 Indian nationals who were in distress abroad and financial                   
 assistance was extended to deserving cases. During the year, 4128 Indian                     
 natio nals were arrested in foreign countries. All possible consular                         
 assistance was rende red to them and in some cases their release and                         
 return to India was facilitated. Four hundred and fortysix cases of death                    
 of foreign nationals in India wer e also handled. Around 865 cases of                        
 death compensation in respect of Indian nationals dying abroad were                          
 processed. Ninetyfive thousand eight hundred and thirtytwo documents                         
 received from the public for submission to foreign authorit ies were                         
 attested/authenticated by the Division.                                                      
 1989                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Administration and Organisation                                                              
                                                                        Top                   
 CHAPTER XV ADMINISTRATION AND ORGANISATION SHRI Inder Kumar Gujral assumed                   
 charge as Minister for External Affairs on Dec 05, 1989. Earlier, Shri P V                   
 Narasimha Rao demitted charge as Minister for External Affairs on 1                          
 December 1989. Shri K Natwar Singh, Minister of Sta te for External                          
 Affairs, also demitted charge on 1 December 1989.                                            
                                                                                              
 The sanctioned strength of the IFS and IFS(B) both at Headquarters and                       
 Missions abroad is 3710. This includes 28 posts of the combined Research                     
 cadre and 30 posts of the Interpreters cadre. The grade-wise strength is                     
 given at Appendix IX.                                                                        
                                                                                              
 A list showing the number of Officers of this Ministry who have qualified                    
 in foreign languages is given at Appendix X.                                                 
                                                                                              
 Presently there are 1830 posts of locally recruited staff in Indian Missio                   
 ns/ Posts abroad. Of these, foreign nationals are 1192 and Indian                            
 nationals 638. A new Consulate General of India was established in Ho Chi                    
 Minh City (Vietnam). The Ministry now has 140 resident Missions/Posts                        
 abroad manned by India-based officials. Proposal for opening an Indian                       
 Mission in Malta is unde r consideration.                                                    
                                                                                              
 During the year, the Ministry stepped up its policy of purchasing properti                   
 es both built up office accommodation and plots for construction of                          
 chancery building, embassy residence and staff residences. Some of the                       
 construction pro jects have already commenced.                                               
                                                                                              
 Administrative inspection of Indian Missions/Posts in New York,                              
 Washington, Karachi, Islamabad, Warsaw, Georgetown, Kualalumpur, Singapore                   
 and Rangoon was undertaken. During the year, the Computer Cell of the                        
 Ministry developed some more application software packages for use of                        
 various divisions. The Cell also participated in organising training                         
 programmes for MEA officials in Xenix/Lyrix . The total number of MEA                        
 personnel trained by the year end by Computer Cell under auspices of FSTI                    
 was 170.                                                                                     
 1989                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Foreign Service Training Institute                                                           
                                                                        Top                   
 Jan 01, 1989                                                                                 
 CHAPTER XVI FOREIGN SERVICE TRAINING INSTITUTE DURING 1989-90, the Foreign                   
 Service Training Institute (FSTI) achieved significant further progress                      
 over the previous year in its training and other related activities. It                      
 not only incorporated changes to improve on the scope, range, quality and                    
 content of existing training courses, but also introduced a number of new                    
 courses and diversified its activities in other areas by initiating a                        
 publi cation programme, introducing language orientation in its                              
 professional course for IFS Probationers, and establishing contacts with                     
 comparable institutes in India and abroad.                                                   
                                                                                              
 In 1989-90, FSTI organised the following training courses:                                   
                                                                                              
 (i) Professional Course in Diplomacy and International Relations for IFS                     
 Probationers - 1 course:                                                                     
 (ii) Orientation Programme for Spouses - 2 courses;                                          
 (iii) Mid-career Refresher Course for Commercial Officers in Missions                        
 abroad - 1 course;                                                                           
 (iv) Orientation Programme for Union Territory/State Government Protocol                     
 Officials - 1 course;                                                                        
 (v) Programme on Crisis Management for Mid-career Officials - 1 course;                      
 (vi) Induction Course for newly recruited Assistants/UDCs/LDCs/ PAs - 5                      
 courses;                                                                                     
 (vii) Administration/Accounts Workshop - 4 courses;                                          
 (viii) Basic Professional Course for IFS(B) Personnel due for postings                       
 abroad - 6 courses;                                                                          
 (ix) Refresher Course for Section Officers and Dealing Hands on arriva l                     
 at New Delhi - 1 course;                                                                     
 (x) Joint ASCI-FSTI Training Course for Senior Commonwealth Diplomats - 1                    
 course;                                                                                      
 (xi) Programme on Effective Communication - 1 course; and                                    
 (xii) Familiarisation Programme for Foreign Diplomats resident in India -                    
 1 course. The total number of trainees covered in 1989-90 was 640, as                        
 compared to 612 in 1988-89. They included nominees from other Ministries                     
 like Defence, I & B a nd Tourism, Public Sector Undertakings, Nationalised                   
 Banks and Union Territory/ State Governments. Two young diplomats from                       
 Mauritius attended selected modules of the IFS Probationers Programme in                     
 1989. A total of 4 diplomats, 2 from Bhutan and 2 from Zambia attended                       
 modules of the same programme in 1990.                                                       
                                                                                              
 The activities of FSTI were coordinated by a full time Dean of the rank of                   
 Secretary to the Government of India. He was assisted by a directing staff                   
 consisting of live IFS officers. FSTI also drew upon an extensive guest                      
 facult y from the government, academia, business, media, public affairs                      
 etc. The pedagogy included lecture discussions, simulation exercises, case                   
 studies, role play, tu torials, syndicate studies and examinations. FSTI                     
 also provided the participants of eac h course with a list of reading                        
 materials useful and relevant to participants' wo rk.                                        
                                                                                              
 In 1989, FSTI brought out, as a part of its publication programme, a wri                     
 tten symposium entitled "Role of the Junior Diplomats in Missions Abroad."                   
 The symposium was well received by the trainees and by various                               
 institutions in Indi a and abroad. On receipt of a written request, copies                   
 of this publication were a lso supplied to the Director, Foreign Service                     
 Programme, Oxford University (UK) for distribution to its trainees.                          
                                                                                              
 During 1989-90, FSTI continued to maintain close contacts with other train                   
 ing institutes in India like LBSNAA, Mussoorie; ASCI, Hyderabad; IIPA, New                   
 Delhi; SIS, JNU, New Delhi; Central University, Pondicherry; NDC, New                        
 Delhi and IIFT, New Delhi. FSTI also established contacts with comparable                    
 institutes abr oad. In April 1989, a 3 member FSTI team visited the                          
 Diplomatic Academy and the Institute of International Relations in Moscow;                   
 the Ecole Nationale d' Administration (ENA) and the Institute                                
 International d' Administration Publique (IIPA) in Paris; the FCO Training                   
 Department in London, and the Oxford University; Instituto Rio Branco in                     
 Brasilia; and the Foreign Service Institute , the Maryland University, the                   
 School of Foreign Service, Georgetown University, and the Johns Hopkins                      
 University (SAIS) in Washington. The visit enabled the team on return to                     
 re-model some of its training programmes by incorporating newer ideas and                    
 techniques in the field of training. Separately, the Dean attended t he                      
 Annual Conference. of Association of Directors of Diplomatic Academies and                   
 Institute of International Relations (ADDAIIR) in Washington in September                    
 1989. During this period, FSTI was also able to identify and locate 23                       
 suitable short and long term courses abroad for placement of MEA                             
 officials.                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 During the year under review, FSTI was also able to purchase most of its                     
 training related equipment, class room furniture and other infrastructural                   
 fitt ings with newly delegated financial powers, and to convert four halls                   
 in its present premises in Akbar Bhavan into functional class rooms.                         
 Besides, a Library was s et up which became fully operational after the                      
 joining of the Librarian in Decembe r 1989. The total number of books and                    
 periodicals in the Library in January 1990 stood at 3500 out of which more                   
 than 1000 books and periodicals had been procured in 1989. With the                          
 acquisition of a modem photocopying machine and a binder, FSTI became                        
 fully self-reliant in providing printed and bound training materials to                      
 the trainees.                                                                                
                                                                                              
 FSTI also continued its search for independent permanent premises and a                      
 plo t of land for their construction during 1989-90.                                         
 1989                                                                                         
 Use of Hindi in Official Work                                                                
                                                                        Top                   
 Jan 01, 1989                                                                                 
 CHAPTER XVII USE OF HINDI IN OFFICIAL WORK USE of Hindi in this Ministry                     
 has two aspects-implementation of the Offici al Language Policy of the                       
 Government of India and propagation of Hindi in foreign countries through                    
 Indian Missions abroad.                                                                      
                                                                                              
 During the year under review, the Ministry continued its efforts to                          
 impleme nt Official Language Policy at Headquarters, in its Missions                         
 abroad and also in it s passport offices at home. This year, too, the                        
 incentive scheme carrying cash p rizes for officials who do their maximum                    
 official work in Hindi was continued. An incentive scheme carrying cash                      
 prizes for officers who give dictation in Hindi was also introduced during                   
 the year under report. The competition scheme in respec t of Regional                        
 Passport Offices continued this year too, with the winning RPO receivi ng                    
 the shield.                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 As in the previous year, in the period under report, a Hindi module for                      
 IFS probationers was organised in collaboration with the Foreign Service                     
 Training Institute. Hindi workshops were also conducted for officials of                     
 the Ministry. In pursuance of the directions of the Department of Official                   
 Language, a Hindi Week was organised in the Ministry. Various Hindi                          
 competitions were held to encourage the officials to use Hindi in their                      
 official work. The successful candidates were presented awards. The                          
 Officers and Sections at Headquarters an d Regional Passport Officers were                   
 also provided with standard kits of Hindi aid material.                                      
                                                                                              
 The Ministry continued its efforts to fulfil its responsibility towards                      
 propagation of Hindi abroad. Missions were supplied with presentation                        
 books, text-books, Hindi aid material etc. for presentation.                                 
                                                                                              
 As in the past, during the year, the Embassy of India, Seoul, organised a                    
 Hindi speech contest in Hongkuk University, Hongkuk, South Korea with the                    
 objective of popularising Hindi in that country. Other Missions have also                    
 been advised to organise such events in the countries of their                               
 accreditation to give fillip to the objective of propagating Hindi abroad.                   
 Hindi teaching scheme for childr en in Missions abroad continued                             
 satisfactorily and more classes were added.                                                  
                                                                                              
 During the year under review, Passport offices at Jaipur, Bombay, Goa,                       
 Bhubaneshwar, Calcutta, Guwahati, Bangalore, Kozhikode, Cochin and                           
 Trivandrum were inspected with a view to assessing the progress of Hindi                     
 in the se offices. As a result of these inspections, the pace of progress                    
 of Hindi in of ficial work in these offices has accelerated.                                 
                                                                                              
 In pursuance of the decision of the Hindi Advisory Committee of the Minist                   
 ry of External Affairs, OSD (Hindi) was deputed to PMI, New York on                          
 temporary duty to assist the members of the Indian delegation to the UN,                     
 should any one o f them wished to speak in Hindi in the UN General                           
 Assembly. The then Minister for External Affairs, Shri P V Narasimha Rao                     
 addressed the UN General Assembly in Hindi.                                                  
 1989                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Cultural Relations                                                                           
 CHAPTER XVIII                                                                                
 Cultural Relations                                                                           
                                                                        Top                   
 THE Indian Council for Cultural Relations, established in 1950 with a view                   
 to developing and strengthening cultural relations with other countries,                     
 worked steadily during 1989-90 to further expand and consolidate its                         
 activities. With Headquarters in New Delhi, the Council has a network of                     
 six Cultural Centres abroad and seven Regional Offices in India, for                         
 looking after the welfare of fo reign students in India and for                              
 coordination of foreign visits by performing artistes and by eminent                         
 individuals. The Cultural Centres are located at Port Louis, Georgetown,                     
 Suva, Jakarta, Paramaribo and Moscow and the Regional Offices in India are                   
 at Bombay, Calcutta, Madras, Chandigarh, Lucknow, Bangalore and                              
 Trivandrum.                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 The highlights of the year under review were the special activities                          
 planned in connection with the centenary celebrations of Pandit Jawaharlal                   
 Nehru and Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, the founder-President of the ICCR. An                     
 Indo-Soviet seminar on the "Future of Humanity : Nehru's Vision" was                         
 organised in October 1989, in collaboration with the Nehru Memorial Museum                   
 Library. The main participants were Soviet recipients of the Nehru Award                     
 for Indo-Soviet Friendship and Indian recipients of the Sovietland Nehru                     
 Award. In August 1989, Chairman Yasser Arafat's name was announced for the                   
 Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding for the year 1988.                    
 Special present a- tion items consisting of books on and by Pandit Nehru,                    
 and commemorative coins were distributed to our Missions abroad for                          
 presentation to libraries, institut ions and individuals.                                    
                                                                                              
 An international seminar on "Tradition and Modernity" was organised as                       
 part of the Maulana Azad Centenary celebrations from 14 to 16 February                       
 1990 at Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi. The Vice President of India and                            
 President of the ICCR, Dr Shankar Dayal Sharma delivered the inaugural                       
 address for the Seminar.                                                                     
                                                                                              
 The inaugural session of the seminar was addressed by the Prime Minister                     
 of India, Shri Vishwanath Pratap Singh, the Minister for External Affairs,                   
 Shri I K Gujra l, and Dr Najma Heptulla, Deputy Chairman, Rajya Sabha and                    
 the Chairperson of the Organising Committee for the Seminar. Eminent                         
 academicians, scholars and journalists from over 15 countries presented                      
 papers and participated actively i n the discussions.                                        
                                                                                              
 The Centenary Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Memorial Lecture was delivered in                      
 New Delhi by Smt Aruna Asaf Ali on 3 November 1989 on the theme "Science,                    
 Socialism and Humanism." To mark the centenary celebrations, the Council                     
 brought out a special four-tome set of Commemorative Volumes on Maulana                      
 Azad (in English, Hindi and Urdu), and published the Centenary Azad                          
 Memorial Lecture as a book.                                                                  
                                                                                              
 The Festival of France in India, which was inaugurated in November 1989 in                   
 Bombay formally concluded in New Delhi on 18 January 1990. The highlights                    
 of Festival of France were the performances given by the renowned Mime                       
 Maestro Marcel Marceau, by a modern dance group: L' Esquisse, by the                         
 Puppet group Compagnie Philippe Genty, by a group of Jugglers by the Rock                    
 music group Cyclope, and finally, as part of the concluding events, by the                   
 National Theatre Group from Strasbourg and the 167-member Choeur de L'                       
 Orchestre de Paris and Orchestre Francais des Jeunes.                                        
                                                                                              
 Equally successful were the smaller yet intensive series of cultural                         
 events held, such as the "Days of Indian Culture" in Czechoslovakia in                       
 April 1989; "Days of Czechoslovak Culture" (in India) held in November                       
 1989 and the "Days of GDR Culture" (in India) in February 1990. There was                    
 a marked shift in the regional emphasis of activities towards developing                     
 countries. Thus, of the 62 incoming visitors received by ICCR under the                      
 distinguished Visitors' Programme, close to 65% were from Asia, Africa and                   
 Latin America. Similarly, of the 83 performing delegations sent abroad                       
 during 1989-90, about 20% were sent to neighbouring countries and almost                     
 25% to countries of West Asia and Africa. Overall, about 60% of the                          
 Council's outgoin g performing delegations visited developing countries of                   
 Asia, Africa and Latin America.                                                              
                                                                                              
 The Council sponsored visits abroad of 82 cultural troupes covering 64                       
 countries.                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 Incoming and Outgoing Visitors under ICCR's Distinguished Visitors                           
 Programme During the year, there was more or less a parity between the                       
 numbers of incoming and outgoing visitors under ICCR's Distinguished                         
 Visitors Programme. There were 62 visitors from 23 countries such as                         
 Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nepal, Bhutan, Mauritius, Madagascar, Argentina,                       
 Costa Rica, Syria and Turkey. The visitors included Nobel Prize winners,                     
 eminent indologists, writers, artistes a nd creative individuals.                            
                                                                                              
 The Council sent abroad 68 visitors to 40 countries. These included visito                   
 rs under Cultural Exchange Programmes for participation in international                     
 conferenc es and visits for creative interaction by Indian dancers,                          
 artistes, critics, emine nt writers and academicians.                                        
                                                                                              
 Exhibitions The Council organised 9 exhibitions in India during the year.                    
 These includ ed exhibitions by renowned artist Guljee from Pakistan,                         
 exhibitions from Turkey, South Korea and Japan, and an exhibition of                         
 African art owned by private collectors in Delhi. The Council organised a                    
 prestigious exhibition under the Indo- US Sub-Commission on Education and                    
 Culture, 'A Collectors' Eye,' from the Olga Hirshhorn collection of fine                     
 arts. Most of these exhibitions were also held in different cities in                        
 India including Lucknow, Ahmedabad, Chandigarh, Bombay and Calcutta.                         
 During the year, two seperate such exhibitions of Madhubani painting s                       
 were successfully displayed in Nicosia, Ankara, Istanbul and Belgrade.                       
 Seminars/Conferences Seminars and Conferences were organised on various                      
 subjects, including a seminar on Indian theatre in September 1989, to                        
 coincide with the Sangeet Nata k Akademi's Nehru Centenary-Theatre                           
 Festival. ICCR coordinated arrangements for the visit of Peter Brook (of                     
 'Mahabharata' fame) with his group of actors/actre sses, the                                 
 script-writer, producer and others for theatre workshops in five cities. T                   
 his was in addition to the three Indian seminars organised in                                
 commemoration respectivel y of the Jawaharlal Nehru and Maulana Azad                         
 Centenary Celebrations.                                                                      
                                                                                              
 The Council, as the Indian Secretariat for the Indo-US Sub-Commission on                     
 Education and Culture, continued to arrange meetings of the Sub-Commission                   
 and its Sub-Committees, and to coordinate with other organisations on the                    
 implementation of various programmes agreed upon at these meetings. The                      
 Sub-Commission met in Washington in June 1989. The two Sub-Committees,                       
 namely, the Joint Media Committee and the Sub-Committee for cultural                         
 heritage and endeavour also held meetings in Washington in January 1990.                     
 Students Welfare The Council is responsible for the welfare of foreign                       
 students in India. A number of programmes in this connection were                            
 undertaken during the year. These consisted of study tours and summer                        
 camps, orientation courses for newly arrive d foreign students, social                       
 gatherings and celebrations of various events includin g international and                   
 national festivals. Cultural scholarship in the field of fin e arts were                     
 given in to 18 foreign students from 13 countries. In order to improve th                    
 e infrastructural facilities and the quality of assistance being given to                    
 foreign students, an All India Foreign Students Advisors' meeting was held                   
 in December 1989 involving 38 Foreign Students Advisors from different                       
 universities/institu tions and 12 officials from various departments of                      
 the Government of India. The Fore ign Students Associations and the                          
 International Students Club have been assisted in organising various                         
 functions. Both the Delhi office and the Regional offices o f the ICCR                       
 have been active in providing infrastructural and personal assistance to                     
 foreign students in India. It is estimated that there may be as many as                      
 20,000 foreign students in India scattered all over the country in various                   
 universitie s.                                                                               
                                                                                              
 Foreign Cultural Centres in India The Council supervises the work of                         
 Foreign Cultural centres in India, especially those operating in places                      
 where there is no official representation of thecountry concerned. Thus,                     
 the Council supervises the operations of nine British Council Libraries in                   
 Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Bhopal, Lucknow, Patna, Ranchi, Trivandrum and                         
 Hyderabad; the Alliance Francaise in Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Bhopal, Bombay,                   
 Calcutta, Chandigarh, Goa, Hyderabad, Madras, Pondicherry, Pune,                             
 Trivandrum and Delhi; the Max Mueller Bhavan in Bangalore, Bombay,                           
 Hyderabad, Pune, Madras, Calcutta and Delhi and the House of Soviet                          
 Culture in Trivandrum. The Council provides administrative support to                        
 these foreign centres and also collaborates with them whenever possible in                   
 organising cultura l programmes.                                                             
                                                                                              
 Presentation Cell The Council runs a Presentation Cell which maintains a                     
 regular stock of presentation items including books, handicrafts, musical                    
 instruments and art objects. These items are regularly despatched to                         
 Missions abroad for presentat ion to institutions/universities. The                          
 Council also supplies items to be utilised a s prizes for competitions                       
 organised by the Missions abroad.                                                            
                                                                                              
 The Council Library continued to offer its services to readers and                           
 specially to research scholars. The library, now has 75,000 volumes and                      
 has had more than 4500 visitors this year. Several prominent research                        
 scholars have utilised the library services and have acknowledged the                        
 Library's contribution. Exhibitions of book s were organised by the                          
 Library on the occasion of "Africa Day" in June 1989 and during the "Days                    
 of Bhutan" in March 1989. The library is in charge of the computer section                   
 and all efforts are being made to bring about full computerisa tion of all                   
 information services in the Council including accounts and other adminis                     
 tra- tive branches.                                                                          
                                                                                              
 Publications Division The Publications Division of the Council continued                     
 to publish six quarterl y journals: 'Indian Horizons' and 'Africa                            
 Quarterly' in English, 'Gagananchal' in Hindi, 'Thaqafat-ul-Hind' in                         
 Arabic, 'Rencontre avec 1' Inde' in French and 'Papeles de la India' in                      
 Spanish.                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 In addition the Council processed for publications, the following works:                     
 (1) Commemorative volumes on Maulana Abul Kalam Azad (4 volume boxed set);                   
 (2) Science, Humanism and Socialism (Azad Memorial Lecture by Smt Aruna                      
 Asaf Ali);                                                                                   
 (3) Shakuntala and Kannagi (Illustrated classics for children in Spanish                     
 and French);                                                                                 
 (4) The First two Decades (1966 to 1985);                                                    
 (5) Indian Music (Re-print);                                                                 
 (6) Panchatantra in Swahili (Illustrated classic for children);                              
 (7) Buddhism and National Culture: Seminar Proceedings;                                      
 (8) International Symposium on India and World Literature;                                   
 (9) Tradition: A Continual Renewal (Seminar Proceedings);                                    
 (10) Directory of Cultural Organisations in India (revised edition). The                     
 Council participated with the National Book Trust, in the Frankfurt Bo ok                    
 Fair, the Moscow International Book Fair, the Singapore and Malaysia Book                    
 fairs .                                                                                      
                                                                                              
 Audio Visual Reference Section As part of the efforts to streamline the                      
 work of the Council, a special ef fort was made to improve the Audio                         
 Visual Reference Section. In this connection, th e Council organised a                       
 series of programmes of Indian dance and music and recorded these                            
 programmes to strengthen the reference section. During the year, over 47                     
 programmes featuring many well-known as well as younger musicians and                        
 dancers were presented in Azad Bhavan and other venues in Delhi. The                         
 Advisory Panel for Music and Dance met in November 1989 to review the                        
 reference panels and selection process of the Council.                                       
                                                                                              
 Indian Cultural Centres Abroad For promoting greater awareness and                           
 appreciation of India's cultural herita ge abroad, the Council has                           
 established Indian Cultural Centres in Suva (Fiji), Georgetown (Guyana),                     
 Jakarta (Indonesia), Port Louis (Mauritius), Moscow (USSR) and Paramaribo                    
 (Suriname). Indian music and dance as well as Indian languages are taught                    
 at the Centres by Indian teachers deputed by the Council. The Centre at                      
 Moscow also Conducts courses on Yoga with the help of teachers deputed                       
 from India. These Centres maintain libraries and reading rooms, organi se                    
 lectures, symposia, exhibitions, essay competitions, performances of dance                   
 and music, staging of plays, screening of films and publication of news                      
 bulletins. The Centres are expected to develop and maintain contacts with                    
 a wide cross section of local. citizens including students, teachers,                        
 scholars and cultural personaliti es.                                                        
                                                                                              
 The Jawaharlal Nehru Indian Cultural Centre in Jakarta was formally                          
 inaugurated on Jun 09, 1989. Chairs of Indian Studies Abroad Under various                   
 schemes, the Council also sends abroad Visiting Professors for teaching                      
 indology, Indian languages and allied subjects. During the period und er                     
 report, 16 academics were in position in Universities in China, Indonesia,                   
 Thai land, Republic of Korea, Turkey, Trinidad & Tobago, Guyana and                          
 Suriname.                                                                                    
                                                                                              
 Regional Offices within India Within India, the Regional offices located                     
 at Bombay, Bangalore, Chandigarh, Calcutta, Lucknow, Madras and Trivandrum                   
 have also been active in promoting the Council's work in Centres other                       
 than Delhi. The Council has taken up several projects for acquiring land                     
 and buildings so that these regional offices can fu nction more                              
 effectively. The Calcutta Cultural Complex cum Regional office project sh                    
 ould be going into the construction phase shortly.                                           
 1989                                                                                         
 Appendix I Division-wise List of Countries                                                   
 Jan 01, 1989                                                                                 
                                 APPENDIX I                                                   
     Ministry of External Affairs              Division-wise List of                          
                                               Countries                                      
     AFRICA DIVISION                           AFRICA DIVISION-Contd.                         
 1.  Angola                                41. Zaire                                          
 2.  Benin                                 42. Zambia                                         
 3.  Botswana                              43. Zimbabwe                                       
 4.  Burkina Faso                                                                             
 5.  Burundi                                                                                  
 6.  Cameroon                                  AMS DIVISION                                   
 7.  Cape Verde Islands                                                                       
 8.  Central African Republic              1.  Canada                                         
 9.  Chad                                  2.  United States of                               
                                               America (including                             
                                               Bahamas)                                       
 10. Comoros                                                                                  
 11. Congo                                                                                    
 12. Equatorial Guinea                         IAP DIVISION                                   
 13. Ethiopia                              1.  Afghanistan                                    
 14. Gabon                                 2.  Iran                                           
 15. Gambia                                3.  Pakistan                                       
 16. Ghana                                                                                    
 17. Guinea                                                                                   
 18. Guinea Bissau                                                                            
 19. Cote d' Ivoire                            BSM DIVISION                                   
 20. Kenya                                 1.  Bangladesh                                     
 21. Lesotho                               2.  Indian Ocean                                   
 22. Liberia                               3.  Maldives                                       
 23. Madagascar                            4.  Myanmar                                        
 24. Malawi                                5.  Sri Lanka                                      
 25. Mali                                                                                     
 26. Mauritius                                                                                
 27. Mozambique                                EAST ASIA DIVISION                             
 28. Namibia                                                                                  
 29. Niger                                 1.  People's Republic of                           
     China                                                                                    
 30. Nigeria                               2.  Japan                                          
 31. Rwanda                                3.  Democratic                                     
     People's Republic of Korea                                                               
 32. Sao Tome & Principe                   4.  Republic of Korea                              
 33. Senegal                               5.  People's Republic of                           
     Mongolia                                                                                 
 34. Seychelles                            6.  Hongkong                                       
 35. Sierra Leone                                                                             
 36. South Africa                                                                             
 37. Swaziland                                 EE DIVISION                                    
 38. Tanzania                              1.  People's                                       
     Socialist Republic of Albania                                                            
 39. Togo                                  2.  People's                                       
     Republic of Bulgaria                                                                     
 40. Ugandat Republic                      3.  Czechoslovak Socialis                          
                                               A-3                                            
     EE DIVISION--Contd.                       LAC DIVISION                                   
 4.  German Democratic Republic            1.  Antigua & Barbuda                              
 5.  Hungarian People's Republic           2.  Argentina                                      
 6.  Republic of Poland                    3.  v Barbados                                     
 7.  Republic of Romania                   4.  Belize                                         
 8.  Union of Soviet Socialist Republics   5.  Bolivia                                        
 9.  Socialist Federal Republic of         6.  Brazil                                         
     Yugoslavia                                                                               
                                           7.  Chile                                          
                                           8.  Colombia                                       
     EW DIVISION                           9.  Costa Rica                                     
                                           10. Cuba                                           
 1.  Austria                                                                                  
 2.  Belgium                               11. Commonwealth of Dom                            
     inica                                                                                    
 3.  Cyprus                                12. Dominican Republic                             
 4.  Denmark                               13. Ecuador                                        
 5.  Finland                               14. El Salvador                                    
 6.  France                                15. Grenada                                        
 7.  Germany, Federal Republic of          16. Guatemala                                      
 8.  Gibraltar                             17. Guyana                                         
 9.  Greece                                18. Haiti                                          
 10. Holy See, The                         19. Honduras                                       
 11. Iceland                               20. Jamaica                                        
 12. Ireland                               21. Mexico                                         
 13. Italy                                 22. Nicaragua                                      
 14. Liechtenstein                         23. Panama                                         
 15. Luxembourg                            24. Paraguay                                       
 16. Malta                                 25. Peru                                           
 17. Monaco                                26. St. Christopher and N                          
     evis                                                                                     
 18. Netherlands                           27. St. Lucia                                      
 19. Norway                                28. St. Vincent and the G                          
     renadines                                                                                
 20. Portugal                              29. Suriname                                       
 21. San Marino                            30. Trinidad & Tobago                              
 22. Spain                                 31. Uruguay                                        
 23. Sweden                                32. Venezuela                                      
 24. Switzerland                                                                              
 25. Turkey                                                                                   
 26. United Kingdom of Great Britain           NORTHERN DIVISION                              
     and Northern Ireland                  1.  Bhutan                                         
                                           2.  Nepal                                          
     GULF DIVISION                                                                            
 1.  Bahrain                                   SOUTHERN DIVISION                              
 2.  Iraq                                                                                     
 3.  Kuwait                                1.  Australia                                      
 4.  Oman                                  2.  Brunei                                         
 5.  Qatar                                 3.  Combodia                                       
 6.  Saudi Arabia                          4.  Fiji                                           
 7.  United Arab Emirates                  5.  Indonesia                                      
 8.  People's Democratic Republic of Yemen 6.  Kiribati                                       
 9.  Yemen Arab Republic                   7.  Laos                                           
                                               A-4                                            
     SOUTHERN DIVISION-Contd.                  WANA DIVISION                                  
 8.  Malaysia                              1.  Algeria                                        
 9.  Nauru                                 2.  Djibouti                                       
 10. New Caledonia                         3.  Egypt                                          
 11. Newzealand                            4.  Israel                                         
 12. Papua New Guinea                      5.  Jordon                                         
 13. Philippines                           6.  League of Arab States                          
 14. Western Samoa                         7.  Lebanon                                        
 15. Singapore                             8.  Libya                                          
 16. Society Islands                       9.  Mauritania                                     
 17. Solomon Islands                       10. Morocco                                        
 18. Thailand                              11. Palestine                                      
 19. Tonga                                 12. SADR (Sahrawi Arab                             
                                               Democratic Republic)                           
 20. Tuvalu                                13. Somalia                                        
 21. UN Trust Territories in South Pacific 14. Sudan                                          
 22. Vanuatu                               15. Syria                                          
 23. Vietnam                               16. Tunisia                                        
                                               A-5                                            
 1989                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Appendix II Treaties/Conventions/Agreements                                                  
                                                                                              
 APPENDIX II                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or renewed by India with other                     
 countries in                                                                                 
 1989.*                                                                                       
 ---------------------------------------------------                                          
 --------                                                                                     
 Sl.Title of Convention/Treaty   Date         Date of        Date of                          
 No.   /Agreement                of       Ratification/     entry into                        
                                Signature     Accession        force                          
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------                      
                                                                                              
 (1)  (2)                           (3)            (4)        (5)                             
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------                      
 MULTILATERAL  Customs Convention                                                             
                                                                                              
  1. Protocol of Amendment of the Nairobi Con-                                                
     vention on Mutual Assistance for the Preven-                                             
     tion, Investigation and Repression of Customs                                            
     offences         .........              Jun 04, 1989      27.6.1989                      
     European Economic Community                                                              
                                                                                              
  2. Financing Agreement between the Republic of                                              
     India and the European Economic Corn-                                                    
     munity-Agricultural Markets in Kerala, India                                             
     (Agreement AIA/88/18)       ..........    30.3.1989    30.3.1989                         
                                                                                              
  3. Financing Agreement between the Republic of                                              
     India and the European Economic Corn-                                                    
     munity-Inland Fisheries Development (Ag-                                                 
     reement AIA/88/04)        ..........    5.4.1989     5.4.1989                            
                                                                                              
  4. Financing Agreement between the Republic of                                              
     India and the European Economic Community                                                
     South Bhagirathi II, Integrated Watershed                                                
     Management (Agreement AIA/88/11) ...... 6.4.1989     6.4.1989                            
                                                                                              
  5. Financing Agreement between the Republic of                                              
     India- and the European Economic Corn-                                                   
     munity-Tank Irrigation Systems, Phase II,                                                
     Tamil Nadu (Agreement AIA/88/11)  ......   27.4.1989    27.4.1989                        
                                                                                              
  6. Amendment to the Financing Agreement bet-                                                
     ween the Republic of India and the European                                              
     Economic Community-Supply of Fertilisers                                                 
     (1983) (Agreement AIA/83/26)  ......      27.7.1989  27.7.1989                           
                                                                                              
 ----------------------------------------------------------                                   
 --------                                                                                     
    *This list is not exhaustive.                                                             
                                                                                              
                                         A-6                                                  
                                                                                              
 --------------------------------------------------------------                               
                                                                                              
 (1)           (2)         (3)            (4)      (5)                                        
 ---------------------------------------------------------------                              
 7. Memorandum of Understanding between the                                                   
   Government of India and the European Corn-                                                 
   mission on Cooperation and Exchange Prog-                                                  
   ramme between India and European Manage-                                                   
   ment Training Institutions              28.11.1989   28.11.1989                            
   Global System of Trade Preferences                                                         
                                                                                              
 8.   Agreement on the Global System of Trade                                                 
      Preferences among Developing Countries 13.4.1988 20.3.1989 19.4.1989                    
      United Nations Development Programme                                                    
                                                                                              
 9. Agreement between India and the United                                                    
    Nations Development Programme regarding                                                   
    Project No. IND/89/103/A/01/13-Advanced                                                   
    studies in Biochemical Engineering and                                                    
    Biotechnology         .........    31.3.1989             31.3.1989                        
                                                                                              
 10. Agreement between India and the United                                                   
     Nations Development Programme regarding                                                  
     Project No. IND/89/101-Development of In-                                                
     dira Gandhi Rastriya Uran Academy  31.3.1989            31.3.1989                        
                                                                                              
 11. Agreement between India and the United                                                   
     Nations Development Programme regarding                                                  
     Project No. IND/89/A/01/01-Wind Energy                                                   
     Centre at Bangalore                 2.5.1989            2.5.1989                         
                                                                                              
 12. Agreement between India and the United                                                   
     Nations Development Programme regarding                                                  
     Project No. IND/88/017-Establishment of                                                  
     Notional Drilling Training Centre, Nagpur 2.5.1989       2.5.1989                        
                                                                                              
 13. Agreement between India and the United                                                   
     Nations Development Programme regarding                                                  
     Project No. IND/89/107-Energy Conservation                                               
     Audits in Selected Areas                  7.6.1989       7.6.1989                        
                                                                                              
 14. Agreement between India and the United                                                   
     Nations Development Programme regarding                                                  
     Project No. IND/89/100-Training of Trainers                                              
     AVTS programme                          14.6.1989       14.6.1989                        
                                                                                              
 15. Agreement between India and the United                                                   
     Nations Development Programme regarding                                                  
     Project No. IND/89/041-Establishment of                                                  
     Computerised Numerical Centre (NC/CNC)                                                   
     Training Facilities and programmes at Adv-                                               
     anced  Training  Institute,  Bombay  and                                                 
     Kanpur                                14.6.1989       14.6.1989                          
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
                                         A-7                                                  
  (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)                                   
                                                                                              
 16.  Agreement between India and the United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme regarding                                                 
      Project No. IND-89/099-Provision of Pro-                                                
      curement services--High-Tech equipment 14.6.1989    14.6.1989                           
                                                                                              
 17.  Agreement between India and the United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme regarding                                                 
      Project No. IND/89/074-Strengthening Tech-                                              
      nical Capabilities of BICP & DGTD    18.7.1989      18.7.1989                           
                                                                                              
 18.  Agreement between India and the United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme regarding                                                 
      Project No. IND/88/004-Development of                                                   
      New Techniques of Earthquake Risk                                                       
      Management                        31.7.1989           31.7.1989                         
                                                                                              
 19.  Agreement between India and the United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme regarding                                                 
      Project No. IND/88/006/A/01/11-Modernisa-                                               
      tion of Hotel and Catering Institutes  10.8.1989      10.8.1989                         
                                                                                              
 20.  Agreement between India and the United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme regarding                                                 
      Project No. IND/89/128-Strengthening of Pes-                                            
      ticide Development Centre, Phase II    12.9.1989     12.9.1989                          
                                                                                              
 21.  Agreement between India and the United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme regarding                                                 
      Project No. IND/89/117/A/01/11-Management                                               
      Consultancy Development (Phase III)     12.9.1989     12.9.1989                         
                                                                                              
 22.  Agreement between India and the United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme regarding                                                 
      Project No. IND/89/130-Development of a                                                 
      special Facility for Electronic Packaging Tech-                                         
      nology and Ergonomics Design            12.9.1989     12.9.1989                         
                                                                                              
 23.  Agreement between India and the United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme regarding                                                 
      Project No. IND/89/144-Assistance to non-                                               
      wood based pulp and paper industry    12.9.1989      12.9.1989                          
                                                                                              
                                                                  A-8                         
 (1)   (2)                                   (3)         (4)     (5)                          
                                                                                              
 24.  Agreement between India and the United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme regarding                                                 
      Project No. IND/89/134-Transfer of Know-                                                
      ledge through Expatriate National (TO-                                                  
      KIEN-INDIA) Phase III                    14.11.1989  14.11.1989                         
                                                                                              
 25.  Agreement between India and the United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme regarding                                                 
      Project No. IND/89/136-Strengthening the                                                
      National Management programme        17.11.1989      17.11.1989                         
 26.  Agreement between India and the United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme regarding                                                 
          Project No. IND/88/047/A/01/15 Development                                          
      of Civil Aviation Training Centre    27.12.1989   27.12.1989                            
     BILATERAL Austria                                                                        
                                                                                              
 27.  Air Services Agreement between India and                                                
      Austria                                26.10.1989   8.12.1989                           
      Belgium                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 28.  Agreement between the Government of the                                                 
      Republic of India and the Government of the                                             
      Kingdom of Belgium relating to the granting                                             
      of financial assistance                       4.10.1989  4.10.1989                      
          Federal Republic of Germany                                                         
                                                                                              
 29.  Agreement between the Government of the                                                 
      Republic of India and the Government of the                                             
      Federal Republic of Germany Concerning                                                  
      Financial Cooperation in 1989             12.4.1989   12.4.1989                         
      German Democratic Republic                                                              
 30.  Agreement between the Government of the                                                 
      Republic of India and the Government of the                                             
      German Democratic Republic on Scientific                                                
      and Technological Cooperation    7.12.1988  27.7.1989    27.7.1989                      
                                                                                              
 31.  Agreement between the Government of the                                                 
      Republic of India and the Government of the                                             
      German Democratic Republic for the Avoi-                                                
      dance of Double Taxation with respect to                                                
      Taxes on Income and on Capital    26.7.1989  24.11.1989   24.11.198                     
      Hungary                                                                                 
                                                                                              
               A-9                                                                            
 (1)   (2)             (3)             (4)   (5)                                              
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
 32.   Credit Agreement between the Government of the                                         
       Republic of India and the Government of the                                            
       Hungarian People's Republic               7.7.1989    7.7.1989                         
                                                                                              
       Japan                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 33.   Exchange of Notes between India and Japan                                              
       regarding Japanese Debt-Relief Grant Assistance                                        
       (1108.621 million yen)               22.2.1989      22.2.1989                          
                                                                                              
 34.   Convention between the Government of the Re-                                           
       public of India and the Government of Japan for                                        
       the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Preven-                                       
       tion of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on                                        
       Income                    7.3.1989     21.11.1989  29.11.1989                          
                                                                                              
 35.   Exchange of Notes between India and Japan re-                                          
       garding Japanese Cultural Grant Aid to Indira                                          
       Gandhi National Centre for Arts (fortyone million                                      
       yen)                                        20.3.1989    20.3.1989                     
                                                                                              
 36.   Exchange of Notes between India and Japan re-                                          
       garding Japanese Grant Aid of six hundred million                                      
       yen for import of fertilisers (DAP)       8.5.1989    8.5.1989                         
                                                                                              
 37.   Exchange of Notes between India and Japan re-                                          
       garding Japanese Grant Assistance of Yen 616                                           
       million for improvement of equipment in regional                                       
       cancer centres in India            27.6.1989    27.6.1989                              
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
 38.   Exchange of Notes between India and Japan re-                                          
       garding Japanese Debt-Relief Grant Assistance                                          
       (Yen 505,501,000)                 9.10.1989      9.10.1989                             
                                                                                              
 39.   Exchange of Notes between India and Japan re-                                          
       garding Japanese Loan Assistance of ninetyone                                          
       million, one hundred and sixtyfour million yen                                         
                                            5.11.1989    5.11.1989                            
 40.   Exchange of Notes between India and Japan re-                                          
       garding Japanese Grant Assistance of Yen six                                           
       hundred million for increasing food production-                                        
         Import of fertilisers from Japan     21.11.1989  21.11.1989                          
                                                                                              
 41.   Exchange of Notes between India and Japan re-                                          
       garding Japanese Debt-Relief Grant Assistance of                                       
       Yen 467.097 million Jordan        13.12.1989      13.12.1989                           
                                                                                              
             A-10                                                                             
 (1)    (2)                           (3)      (4)  (5)                                       
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
 42.   Air Services Agreement between India and                                               
       Jordan Nepal                          16.10.1989    16.10.1989                         
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
 43.   Agreement between the Government of the Repub-                                         
       lic of India and His Majesty's Government of Nepal                                     
       for construction of a bridge over Mohana River in                                      
       Nepal                                  31.5.1989    31.5.1989                          
                                                                                              
       Netherlands                                                                            
                                                                                              
 44.   Convention between the Republic of India and the                                       
       Kingdom of the Netherlands for the Avoidance of                                        
       Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal                                           
       Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income and on                                         
       Capital                      30.7.1988   21.1.1989    21.1.1989                        
                                                                                              
 45.   Loan Agreement for DFL 105 million between the                                         
       President of India and De Netherlands Investings                                       
       bank, out wikkelings lander        10.11.1989    10.11.1989                            
                                                                                              
       Pakistan                                                                               
                                                                                              
 46.   Cultural Cooperation Agreement between the                                             
       Government of the Republic of India and the                                            
       Government of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan.                                        
       Thailand                 31.12.1988    18.6.1989   18.6.1989                           
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
 47.   Agreement on the establishment of a Joint Commis-                                      
       sion for Bilateral Cooperation between the Govern-                                     
       ment of India and the Government of Thailand 29.3.1989  29.3.1989                      
       United Arab Emirates                                                                   
                                                                                              
 48.   Agreement between the Government of the Repub-                                         
       lic of India and the Government of the United                                          
       Arab Emirates for the Avoidance of Double Taxa-                                        
       tion of Income derived from International Air                                          
       Transport United States of America          3.3.1989  1.12.1989                        
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
 49.   Agreement between India and the United States of                                       
       America by exchange of letters for the Avoidance                                       
       of Double Taxation of Income of Enterprises                                            
       operating Ships and Aircraft                                                           
       Union of Soviet Socialist Republics2.4.1989    12.4.1989                               
                                                                                              
                         A-11                                                                 
 (1)    (2)               (3)            (4)     (5)                                          
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
 50.   Agreement between the Government of the Repub-                                         
       lic of India and the Government of the Union of                                        
       Soviet Socialist Republics on economic and techni-                                     
       cal cooperation in the setting up of "Vindhyachal-                                     
       Bine-Nagda" power transmission system      12.9.1989     12.9.1989                     
                                                                                              
 51.   Agreement between the Government of the Repub-                                         
       lic of India and the Government of the Union of                                        
       Soviet-Socialist Republics on economic and techni-                                     
       cal cooperation in setting up the TPPS "Maithon,"                                      
       "Kayamkulam" and "Mangalore"            12.9.1989   12.9.1989                          
                                                                                              
       Yugoslavia                                                                             
                                                                                              
 52.   Agreement between the Government of the Repub-                                         
       lic of India and the Federal Executive Council of                                      
       the Assembly of the Socialist Federal Republic of                                      
       Yugoslavia in the field of                                                             
       information Activities   14.7.1988    22.6.1989 22.6.1989                              
                                                                                              
                                                                 A-12                         
 1989                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Appendix III Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars                               
 APPENDIX III                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars etc. organised by                          
 Inter-overn-mental Organisations at which Government                                         
 of India was represented in 1989-90.                                                         
 Sl.No.  Title of Conferences etc.   Venue               Date                                 
 (1)               (2)                     (3)   (4)                                          
                                                                                              
 1.  ILO/CLI/ADMITRA/ARPLA Regional                                                           
     Training Course on Labour Inspection Skills                                              
     in the Textile Industries     Bombay       3 to @@19890421 e ,                           
                                   Bombay       3 to @                                        
 2.  Annual Session of the Executive Council of                                               
     the Universal Postal Union              Berne   4 to 28 April 1989                       
                                                                                              
 3.  11th International Road Federation World                                                 
     Meeting                                 Seoul  16 to 21 April 1989                       
                                                                                              
 4.  Ninth Session of ILO Committee on  Work                                                  
     Plantation                               Geneva   12 to 20 April 1989                    
                                                                                              
 5.  Meeting of Experts on the Safety in the Use                                              
     of Mineral and Synthetic Fibres        Geneva   17 to 25 April 1989                      
                                                                                              
 6.  12th Session of UNCHS (United Nations                                                    
     Commission  on  Human  Settle-                                                           
  Cartagene de  ments)      India (Colombia)      24 April to 3 May 1989                      
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
 7.  Labour Information in Asia; the role of                                                  
     regional centres in promoting national net-                                              
     works                                   Pattaya   1 to 6 May 1989                        
                                                                                              
 8.  42nd Session of  the World Health Assem-                                                 
     bly                                      Geneva   8 to 19 May 1989                       
                                                                                              
 9.  Turin/ILO/ARPLA Regional Training Semi-                                                  
     nar on Self Employment Expansion and the                                                 
     role of Employment Services            Karachi   11 to 16 May 1989                       
                                                                                              
 10.  15th Session of the Governing  Council of                                               
      UNEP                                   Nairobi  15 to 26 May 1989                       
                                                                                              
 11.  Project Development Workshop  on Higher                                                 
      Productivity and a better place  to work in                                             
          Asia                             Turin   22 May to 2 June 1989                      
                                                                                              
 12.  243rd Session of Governing Body of                                                      
 ILO                                    Geneva  25 May to 3 June 1989                         
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
                              A-13                                                            
 (1)           (2)                       (3)            (4)                                   
                                                                                              
 13.  62nd Session of IMO Council         London    5 to 9 June 1989                          
                                                                                              
 14.  36th Session of the Governing Council of                                                
      UNDP                         New York        5 to 30 June 1989                          
                                                                                              
 15.  76th Session of the International Labour                                                
      Conference of ILO              Geneva         7 to 28 June 1989                         
                                                                                              
 16.  IAEA  Board  of   Governors  Meet-                                                      
      ing                           Vienna         12 to 16 June 1989                         
                                                                                              
 17.  Group of 77 Meeting          Caracas        17 to 26 June 1989                          
                                                                                              
 18.  95th Session of the FAO  Council Rome       19 to 30 June 1989                          
                                                                                              
 19.  2nd Regular Session  of ECOSOC    Geneva     5 to 28 July 1989                          
                                                                                              
 20.  Workshop for Trainers in Safety, Health                                                 
      and Welfare in the Construction Industry  Bangkok  17 to 21 and                         
                                                   24 to 28 July 1989                         
                                                                                              
 21.  Second Session of the Group of Qualified                                                
      Governmental Experts to undertake the                                                   
      study of role of UN in the field of Verifica-                                           
      tion.                     New York   24 July to 4 August 1989                           
                                                                                              
 22.  Meeting of the Commonwealth Committee                                                   
      of Foreign Ministers on South                                                           
      Africa                      Canberra    7 to 9 August 1989                              
                                                                                              
 23.  Annual Meeting of the Executive Council of                                              
      the Asia Pacific Postal Union and Meeting                                               
      of Governing Board                Manila      7 to 15 August 1989                       
                                                                                              
 24.  IILS/ILO Workshop on Workers Parti-                                                     
      cipation and the role of the                                                            
      Unions                   USSR     28 August to 10 September 1989                        
                                                                                              
 25.  International Government-Industry Confe-                                                
      rence on Chemical Weapons   Canberra   18 to22 September 1989                           
                                                                                              
 26.  44th Session of the United Nations General                                              
      Assembly                    New York   September to December 1989                       
                                                                                              
 27.  ARPLA  High Level Meeting   Pattaya   2 to 5 October 1989                               
                                                                                              
 28.  63rd Session of the International Maritime                                              
      Organisation and 16th Assembly Session of                                               
      IMO                          London      6 to 20 October 1989                           
                                                                                              
               A-14                                                                           
                                                                                              
 (1)               (2)                     (3)      (4)                                       
                                                                                              
 29.  Labour Inspection Skills in the Oil Re-                                                 
      fineries                         Bombay  9 to 27 October 1989                           
                                                                                              
 30.  Meeting of Experts on Special Protective                                                
      Measures for Women and Equality of                                                      
      Opportunity and Treatment       Geneva  10 to 17 October 1989                           
                                                                                              
 31.  Commonwealth Heads of Government                                                        
      Meeting                        Kualalumpur 18 to 24 October 1989                        
                                                                                              
 32.  Meeting of Experts on Procedures for the                                                
      Inspection of Labour Conditions on Board                                                
      Ships                            Geneva  19 to 26 October 1989                          
                                                                                              
 33.  Six-week Workshop in connection with Pro-                                               
      ject on Prevention and Assistance Program-                                              
      me for Workers with Drug and Alcohol                                                    
      related Problems        Turin     23 October to 1 December 1989                         
                                                                                              
 34.  ILO Workshop on Setting up of Safety                                                    
      Information Services in Selected Asian                                                  
      Countries                  Geneva     25 to 29 October 1989                             
                                                                                              
 35.  Meeting of the Universal Postal Union to                                                
      discuss Works of Committee 3, 4, 5, 6 & 7                                               
      of the Congress         Berne      29 October 1 November 1989                           
                                                                                              
 36.  The Pre-Congress Conferences of the                                                     
      Commonwealth Postal Administration and                                                  
      Meeting of the 20th UPU Cong-                                                           
      ress      London & Washington  2 November to 15 December 1989                           
                                                                                              
 37.  244th Session of the Governing Body of                                                  
      ILO            Geneva       2 to 17 November 1989                                       
                                                                                              
 38.  ILO/ARPLA Regional Seminar on the                                                       
      Effective Implementation of Labour Laws                                                 
      in Small and Medium-sized Establish-                                                    
      ments         Pattaya       6 to 10 November 1989                                       
                                                                                              
 39.  49th Session of the International Centre for                                            
      Advanced Technical and Vocational Train-                                                
      ing             Geneva       6 to 11 November 1989                                      
                                                                                              
 40.  Seminar cum Study Tour on Inland Water-                                                 
      ways Transport   Washington  9 to22 November 1989                                       
                                                                                              
 41.  25th Session of FAO Congress  Rome 11 to 30 November 1989                               
                                                                                              
 42.  Third Meeting of  the  Asian Employment                                                 
      Planners              New Delhi    20 to 22 November 1989                               
                                                                                              
  A-15                                                                                        
 (1)            (2)                (3)    (4)                                                 
                                                                                              
 43.  3rd UNIDO Conference   Vienna      20 to 24 November 1989                               
                                                                                              
 44.  Regional seminar on the Recruitment                                                     
      and Placement of Asian Seafarers                                                        
                                Manila 20 to 25 November 1989                                 
                                                                                              
 45.  4th Regional Training Seminar on Ice and                                                
      Snow Hydrology      Lahore     25 to 29 November 1989                                   
                                                                                              
 46.  National Tripartite Workshop on the Social                                              
      and Economic Conditions in Plantations in                                               
      India                    Coonoor   27 to 30 November 1989                               
                                                                                              
 47.  First Session of the Hotel Catering and                                                 
      Tourism Committee of ILO.  Geneva  6 to 14 December 1989                                
                                                                                              
 48.  Regional Training Workshop for Senior                                                   
      Project Personnel of ILO assisted Popula-                                               
      tion/Family Welfare Education Service                                                   
      Programmes in Asia Phuket(Thailand) 7 to 15 December 1989                               
                                                                                              
 49.  Third Session of the Group of Qualified                                                 
      Governmental Experts to undertake study                                                 
      on the role of United Nations in the field of                                           
      Verification     New York        8 to 19 January 1990                                   
                                                                                              
   A-16                                                                                       
 1989                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Appendix IV Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars                                
                                                                                              
 APPENDIX IV                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars etc. organised by                          
 Non-Governmental                                                                             
 Organisations in which Indian experts participated in their personal                         
 capacity                                                                                     
 with Government assistance in 1989-90.                                                       
 Sl.      Title of Conferences etc.          Venue             Date                           
 No.                                                                                          
                                                                                              
 1.  22nd International Trade Fair/Symposia                                                   
     (BAUMA-89)                       Munich   10 to Apr 16, 1989                             
                                                                                              
 2.  Workshop on Transport Statistics Moscow    31 May to 9 June 1989                         
                                                                                              
 3.  23rd Annual Meeting of the Law of the Sea                                                
     Institute                        Noordwijk   12 to 15 June 1989                          
                                                                                              
 4.  ESCAP Committee on Development Plan-                                                     
     ning and Statistics            Bangkok  24 to 28 July 1989                               
                                                                                              
 5.  ESCAP/SIAP Seminar on Managing                                                           
     National Statistical Services in the                                                     
     1990s                        Bangkok  31 July to 4 August 1989                           
                                                                                              
 6.  47th Session of the International Statistical                                            
     Institute                     Paris    29 August to 6 September 1989                     
                                                                                              
 7.  43rd International Congress of the Interna-                                              
     tional Fiscal Association    Rio-de-Janeiro  10 to 15 September 1989                     
                                                                                              
   A-17                                                                                       
 1989                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Appendix V Miscellaneous Major International Conferences etc                                 
                                                                                              
 APPENDIX V                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 Miscellaneous Major International Conferences etc. in 1989-90 at which                       
 Government of                                                                                
 India was represented or in which Indian experts participated with                           
 Government of                                                                                
 India's assistance in their personal capacity.                                               
 Sl.      Title of Conference etc.               Venue            Date                        
 No.                                                                                          
                                                                                              
 1.  15th Commonwealth Defence Conference                                                     
     on Operational Clothing and Combat                                                       
     Equipment                    Ottawa               15 to May 26, 1989                     
                                                                                              
 2.  UN Secretary General's Panel on Scientific                                               
     and Technological Development    New York          31 May 1989                           
                                                                                              
 3.  Commonwealth Aeronautical Advisory Re-                                                   
     search Council (CAARC)     MeetingOttawa    31 May to 2 June 1989                        
                                                                                              
 4.  Pan Commonwealth Meeting of Senior Offi-                                                 
     cials from Law Ministries      London    19 to 23 June 1989                              
                                                                                              
 5.  International Conference on Nuclear                                                      
     Weapons Free Zones             Berlin  27 and 28 June 1989                               
                                                                                              
 6.  Commonwealth Advisory Aeronautical Re-                                                   
     search Council (CAARC) Structures, Coor-                                                 
        dinators and Specialists Meeting                                                      
                                   Montreal/Ottawa    9 to 15 August 1989                     
                                                                                              
 7.  National Delegates Meeting of the Com-                                                   
     monwealth Advisory Aeronautical Research                                                 
     Council (CAARC) Meeting   Melbourne          3 to 6 October 1989                         
                                                                                              
 8.  Commonwealth Meeting of the Working                                                      
     Group on Protection of Cultural                                                          
                             Heritage London      15 to 17 November 1989                      
                                                                                              
 9.  Expert Group Meeting on the reconciliation                                               
     of the SNA/MPS Standards on National                                                     
     Accounting          Moscow            4 to 9 December 1989                               
                                                                                              
        A-18                                                                                  
 1989                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Appendix VI                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 APPENDIX VI                                                                                  
                                                                                              
  Meetings/Conferences held under the aegis of the                                            
  Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) during 1989-90.                                                  
                                                                                              
 Sl.     Name of Meeting/Conference   Venue       Date                                        
 No.                                                                                          
                                                                                              
 1.  Coordinating Bureau meeting of Nonaligned                                                
     countries                      Harare       10 to May 19, 1989                           
                                                                                              
 2.  NAM Meeting on Peace and International                                                   
     Law                            The Hague   26 to 30 June 1989                            
                                                                                              
 3.  9th NAM Summit                 Belgrade   26 August to                                   
                                              9 September 1989                                
 A-19                                                                                         
 1989                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Appendix VII Statement showing the number of Passports/                                      
 Miscellaneous services                                                                       
 Jan 01, 1989                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 APPENDIX VII                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 Statement showing the number of Passports/Miscellaneous services                             
 applications                                                                                 
 received and number of Passports/Miscellaneous                                               
 services rendered during 1989.                                                               
                                                                                              
 (Some of the figures in Columns (4) & (6) are inclusive of backlog)                          
 Sl. Station    No. of        No. of        No. of       No. of Misc.                         
 No.            Passport      Passports     Applications services                             
                              Applications  issued       for Misc.                            
                              received                   rendered                             
                                                         received                             
 (1)       (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)        (6)                            
                                                                                              
  1.Ahmedabad         97,521        101,037        72,162      82,630                         
                                                                                              
  2.Bangalore         62,500         61,107        32,807      32,884                         
                                                                                              
  3.Bareilly          61,000         58,543        33,392      31,681                         
                                                                                              
  4.Bhopal            20,211         21,349        11,320      10,650                         
                                                                                              
  5.Bhubaneshwar      5846           5616          3200        2950                           
                                                                                              
  6.Bombay            208,206        210,329       227,503     226,997                        
                                                                                              
  7.Calcutta          55,061         57,013        32,642      32,634                         
                                                                                              
  8.Chandigarh        87,269         71,344        40,308      41,413                         
                                                                                              
  9.Cochin            147,009        155,405       74,347      72,473                         
                                                                                              
 10.Delhi             95,794         88,850        77,860      79,296                         
                                                                                              
 11.Goa               11,745         10,955        11,866      11,717                         
                                                                                              
 12.Guwahati          4669           4968          1515        1412                           
                                                                                              
 13.Hyderabad         126,919        147,202       73,577      74,689                         
                                                                                              
 14.Jaipur            64,922         59,138        33,547      31,788                         
                                                                                              
 15.Jalandhar         100,548        87,102        45,010      45,520                         
                                                                                              
 16.Kozhikode         123,848        142,018       70,592      72,194                         
                                                                                              
 17.Lucknow           74,591         65,795        22,917      22,272                         
                                                                                              
 18.Madras            75,879         72,792        61,727      61,222                         
                                                                                              
 19.Nagpur            2409           1372          512         493                            
                                                                                              
 20.Patna             19,009         16,560        10,109      9925                           
                                                                                              
 21.Srinagar          11,606         11,000        4746        4900                           
                                                                                              
 22.Tiruchirapalli    113,014        108,650       51,374      54,839                         
                                                                                              
 23.Trivandrum                                                                                
 (Liaison officer                                                                             
 functioning under                                                                            
 RPO, Cochin)         Nil            Nil           48,822      48,795                         
                                                                                              
 GRAND TOTAL        1,569,576      1,558,145     1,041,855   1,053,374                        
                                                                                              
                           A-20                                                               
                                                                                              
 1989                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Appendix VIII Statement showing Revenue earned and Expenditure incurred                      
                                                                                              
 Jan 01, 1989                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 APPENDIX VIII                                                                                
                                                                                              
 Statement showing Revenue earned and Expenditure incurred by Passport                        
 Offices                                                                                      
 from 1 April to Oct 31, 1989.                                                                
 Sl.      Station              Revenue                   Expenditure                          
 No.                           (in  Rupees)              (in Rupees)                          
                                                                                              
  1.     Ahmedabad              52,46,558                 20,35,990                           
                                                                                              
  2.     Bangalore              34,38,257                 22,26,189                           
                                                                                              
  3.     Bareilly               30,27,181                 16,44,193                           
                                                                                              
  4.     Bhopal                 10,41,196                 581,388                             
                                                                                              
  5.     Bhubaneshwar           293,694                   297,643                             
                                                                                              
  6.     Bombay                 1,31,25,585               52,50,688                           
                                                                                              
  7.     Calcutta               31,79,151                 14,65,856                           
                                                                                              
  8.     Cochin                 69,38,435                 26,20,761                           
                                                                                              
  9.     Chandigarh             48,83,260                 19,01,922                           
                                                                                              
 10.     Delhi                  66,67,734                 39,58,527                           
                                                                                              
 11.     Goa                    740,715                   872,014                             
                                                                                              
 12.     Guwahati               71,688                    137,187                             
                                                                                              
 13.     Hyderabad              61,27,688                 24,02,015                           
                                                                                              
 14.     Jaipur                 33,98,848                 12,39,779                           
                                                                                              
 15.     Jalandhar              61,66,625                 18,91,321                           
                                                                                              
 16.     Kozhikode              61,11,532                 29,40,353                           
                                                                                              
 17.     Lucknow                28,10,552                 15,75,803                           
                                                                                              
 18.     Madras                 44,63,314                 22,42,783                           
                                                                                              
 19.     Patna                  912,540                   450,647                             
                                                                                              
 20.     Srinagar               654,661                   287,099                             
                                                                                              
 21.     Tiruchirapalli         60,41,969                 13,48,029                           
                                                                                              
         Total                8,53,41,183               3,73,70,172                           
                                                                                              
                                                              A-21                            
 1989                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Appendix IX Cadre strength at Headquarters                                                   
                                                                                              
 Jan 01, 1989                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 APPENDIX IX                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 Cadre strength at Headquarters and 140 Missions/Posts abroad during                          
 1989-90.                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 Sl.     Cadre/Post             Posts at          Posts at     Total                          
 No.                            Head-             Missions     Posts                          
                                quarters          abroad       IFS                            
                                                                                              
 1.  Grade I                    3                 18           21                             
                                                                                              
 2.  Grade II                   3                 25           28                             
                                                                                              
 3.  Grade III                 20                 96          116                             
                                                                                              
 4.  Grade IV                  17                 68           85                             
                                                                                              
 5.  Sr. Scale                 52                204          256                             
                                                                                              
 6.  Jr. Scale                  5                 28           33                             
 7.  Training Reserve                                                                         
    (Prob) Jr. Scale           27                              27                             
                                                                                              
 8.  Training Reserve                                                                         
     for all Grades            10                              10                             
                                                                                              
 9.  Leave Reserve             19                              19                             
                                                                                              
 10.  Deputation Reserve       20                              20                             
      IFS  (B)                                                                                
                                                                                              
 1.  Grade I                   62                63           125                             
                                                                                              
 2.  Grade II/III             169               165           334                             
                                                                                              
 3.  Grade IV                 366               524           890                             
                                                                                              
 4.  Grade V/VI               458               198           656                             
                                                                                              
 5.  Grade II of Cypher                                                                       
     Sub-Cadre                 81               121           202                             
                                                                                              
 6.  Selection Grade                                                                          
     of Steno Cadre            18                35            53                             
                                                                                              
 7.  Grade I of                                                                               
     Steno Cadre               32               171           203                             
                                                                                              
 8.  Grade II of                                                                              
     Steno Cadre              210               243           453                             
                                                                                              
 9.  Grade III of                                                                             
     Steno Cadre               42                79           121                             
     Combined Research Cadre   22                 6            28                             
     Interpreters Cadre        15                15            30                             
                                                                                              
     Total                   1651              2059          3710                             
                                                                                              
 A-22                                                                                         
                                                                                              
External website that     External website External website External website External website 
opens in a new window     that opens in a  that opens in a  that opens in a  that opens in a  
                          new window       new window       new window       new window       

    Address : Patiala House, Annexe - BNew Delhi                              
   -110001                                           Page last updated on: 09 
    Telephone: 23389073, 23382694, 23073685;                  December, 2013  
   Fax: 23386340, 23387700;Feedback :            Site designed and maintained 
   dirlibmea.gov.in                                  by: National Informatics 
    Officer In-charge:-                                         Centre (NIC), 
    (c)Content Owned by MEA Library Ministry of   DeitY, MoCIT, Government of 
   External Affairs, Government of India                               India. 
   Terms & Conditions | Privacy Policy |         Visitors:                    
   Copyright Policy | Hyperlinking Policy |      
   Accessibility Statement | Help                

   java script is required for this page
   MEAs App twitter Facebook Google plus YouTube flickr
   loading
