1956-57

Contents
Jan 01, 1956
REPORT
1956-57
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
28 M. of E.A.-f
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART I
Administration(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)

Headquarters
Indian Foreign Service
Missions abroad
Inspectorate
Expenditure
Tribal areas-North East Frontier Agency

1
2
3
4
4
5
PART II

A. States in special treaty relations with India(i) Bhutan
(ii) Sikkim

7
7

B. Foreign possessions in India

8

C. India's neighbours(i)
Afghanistan
(ii) Burma
(iii) Ceylon
(iv) China (see under East Asia)
(v)
Nepal
(vi) Pakistan

9
11
12
13
13
14

D. South-East Asia, Australia and New Zealand

19

E. East Asia
F. West Asia

21
23

G. Africa
H. Europe
I. The Americas

25
30
34

J. External Publicity(i) Information Activities
(ii) Cultural Activities

36
39

K. Miscellaneous(i)
Emigration
(ii)
Haj
(iii)
Distinguished visitors from abroad
(iv)
Consular Division
(v)
Central Passport Organization
(vi)
Conference of Heads of Missions
(vii)
Proclamations
(viii) Diplomatic and Consular Missions in India

40
41
41
42
44
44
45
45

PART III
A United Nations
B. International Conferences

46
53
APPENDICES

(i) Indian Missions Abroad
(ii) Information Posts
(iii) Foreign Missions in India
(iv) Treaties, Conventions, and Agreements concluded or
renewed by India with other countries during 195657
(v) International Organisations of which India is a member

54
57
58
62
65

<pg1>
INDIA
BHUTAN
USA

AFGHANISTAN

BURMA

CHINA

NEPAL

Jan 01, 1956

Administration
PART I
ADMINISTRATION
ORGANISATION OF THE MINISTRY

PAKISTAN

AUSTRALIA

NEW ZEALAND

(i) Headquarters.-A chart showing the Organisation of the
Ministry as on Mar 31, 1957, is given in Appendix VI. There are
88 Sections in the Ministry, of which 39 are Administrative and
the rest Territorial and Technical. These Sections are grouped into
the following 10 Divisions and a Foreign Service Inspectorate:
1. American Division-All countries in North and South
America, and Foreign Aid.
2. Western Division-United Nations, Europe (excluding the
United Kingdom) and foreign possessions in India.
3. Eastern Division-China, Japan, Korea, Mongolia, Sikkim,
Bhutan, Nepal and the North East Frontier Agency.
4. Southern Division-West Asia, North Africa and the Sudan,
Afghanistan, Iran, South-East Asia, Burma, Ceylon,
Australia, New Zealand, Fiji, Passports and Visas.
5. African Division-Africa (other than North Africa and
the Sudan), the United Kingdom and Colonies.
6. Pakistan Division.
7. Protocol Division-Protocol, Consular work and Emigration.
8. Administration Division-Administration relating to
Missions abroad and at Headquarters.
9. External Publicity Division.
10. Historical Div on.
11. Foreign Service Inspectorate.
The staff of the Ministry, including the Branch Secretariat at
Calcutta, consists of 1,282 junior officers (including 75 Section
Officers), one Officer-in-Charge of the Central Cypher Bureau, 37
Under Secretaries, one Deputy Chief of Protocol, 16 Deputy Secretaries, one Chief Passport Officer of Deputy Secretary's rank, one
Deputy Director, Historical Division, one Director Information
Services of India, one Director of Historical Division, one Foreign
Service Inspector, six Joint Secretaries, three Secretaries and one
Secretary General. In addition there are two Officers on Special
Duty of the status of Under Secretaries, one Legal Adviser of the
status of Under Secretary, one Officer on Special Duty (Hindi) of
the status of Under Secretary and three Officers on Special Duty
of the status of Deputy Secretaries.
<pg2>

Four Territorial Divisions and the Administration Division are
in the charge of Joint Secretaries who are designated as Directors,
of Divisions. The Protocol Division is in the charge of a Joint
Secretary designated as Chief of Protocol. The American, Pakistan
and External Publicity Divisions are in the charge of Deputy Secretaries who are also, designated as Directors. The Historical Division,
the Research and Intelligence Section and the Library are in the
charge of the Director of the Historical Division. The Foreign.
Service Inspector is an officer of the rank of Joint Secretary.
The Organisation and Methods Section in the Ministry, set up in
1954, is in the charge of a Deputy Secretary. In collaboration with
the O. & M. Division of the Cabinet Secretariat, this Section guides.
the Ministry in methods of work, and suggests improvements in
procedure and in organizational problems. The same officer is in
charge of the duties of the Vigilance Officer, in which capacity
he ensures the expeditious disposal of all disciplinary matters.
The Foreign Secretary deals with the American, Western and,
Eastern Divisions and the West Asian and North African countries
of the Southern Division, the Protocol Division, the External
Publicity Division, and the Historical Division. He is responsible,
for co-ordination among the various Divisions in the Ministry.
The Commonwealth Secretary deals with all Commonwealth
countries excluding Canada (included in the Americas), the South
Asian countries of the Southern Division, and the African Division.
The Special Secretary is in general charge of administration in
the Ministry. In matters involving policy the Special Secretary works
in close collaboration with the Foreign and Commonwealth Secretaries.
The Secretary General is the principal official adviser to the.
Prime Minister on matters relating to foreign policy and is responsible for the supervision of the Ministry as a whole.
(ii) The Indian Foreign Service.-At present the permanent
strength of the service is 184, In addition 24 permanent supernumerary posts were created during the year under report in,
addition to the 9 permanent supernumerary posts created earlier,,
making a total of 33 supernumerary posts. There are also 57
temporary posts of various grades necessitated by the expansion of
Indian representation abroad.
The Cabinet finally approved the constitution of a new Central
Service, to be called the Indian Foreign Service Branch `B', in September 1955; and the new Service formally came into being with
effect from 1 August 1956. The new Service, patterned on the
Central Secretariat Services, includes all posts in the Ministry of
<pg3>
External Affairs and Indian Missions and Posts abroad which are not

included in the I.F.S. "A", together with some posts in the Ministry
of Commerce and Industry. A major step has thus been taken towards
achieving a long cherished objective, namely, complete control by
the Ministry of External Affairs over all personnel manning Indian
Diplomatic, Commercial and Consular posts abroad. This objective,
when finally reached-and this will take some time as more than
two thousand persons have to be recruited to fill the posts borne
on the Cadre of the new Service-will not only facilitate the task
of the administration in manning Indian Missions abroad, but will
also ensure the building up from the lowest level of a corps of
trained personnel for service abroad.
Rules for the initial constitution of the Service, setting out conditions of eligibility, fixation of seniority etc., were issued at the end
of July 1956 and copies were placed on the tables of both Houses of
Parliament. Printed copies of these Rules, together with application
forms, were forwarded in the first instance to all persons serving.
in Indian Missions and Posts abroad, the Ministry of External,
Affairs and the Ministry of Commerce and Industry. Two Selection.
Boards have been set up for the selection of candidates to the.
higher and lower grades of the Service respectively. 2,435 applications were received; of these 349 were for Grades I and II. Selection.
to these grades of the Service from these candidates has been completed and offers of appointment have been issued to those approved.
The Junior Selection Board, which has to consider 2,186 applications in the first instance, has so far disposed of 1,872 cases. Progress.
by the Senior and Junior Selection Boards in their task has been
sufficient to enable the Ministry to call for applications from persons
serving in other Ministries of the Government of India as, well as
under State Governments. A very large number of applications has
been received and consequently recruitment to the Service is not
likely to be finalized for some time.
Rules for the initial constitution of the Indian Foreign Service
Branch `B' contained a provisional Cadre Schedule of the new
Service. This has now been finalized and it contains approximately
2,100 posts, starting from those of Lower Division Clerks, and including posts of Assistants, Stenographers, Section Officers, Under Secretaries, and a Sub-Cadre of Cypher staff. The proposal to includea Sub-Cadre for Interpreters and Translators is under consideration.
Rules for the future maintenance of the Service are under activeconsideration and it is hoped that they will be shortly finalized.
(iii) Missions abroad.-As in past years, a number of proposals
for the purchase or construction of buildings for Missions abroad
were considered during the year. A plot of land has been acquired
<pg4>
at Tokyo for the construction of the Chancery building. Plans for
construction of the Chancery building at Karachi on the land
acquired earlier have been finalized during the year, and construction work Will begin shortly. The construction of the Chancery
building on the land leased from the local Government at Accra

is also expected to start soon. Construction of buildings for the
Agencies, at Gyantse and Gartok will start as soon as weather
condition permit.
Our Embassy building at the Hague was gutted by fire and was
partly damaged. It has been decided to reconstruct the building.
The purchase of the Embassy building at Brussels has been
finalized. Buildings at Colombo and Shanghai and six houses owned
by the Australian Government and now occupied by the High
Commission staff at Canberra, have also been purchased.
A plot of land has been acquired at Addis Ababa from the
Ethiopian Government in exchange for land at Chanakyapuri (New
Delhi) for the Ethiopian Embassy in India.
(iv) Inspectorate.-During the year, the Foreign Service Inspector accompanied by a representative of the Ministry of Finance,
visited several Indian Missions and Posts in Europe, West Asia,
Africa, East Asia and Ceylon. Missions and Posts located in North
and South America and Afghanistan were also inspected by ad-hoc
Inspecting Teams. On the basis of their reports, decisions have been.
taken on the revision of foreign allowances and on several other
administrative matters.
(v) Expenditure.-The expenditure of this Ministry falls under
four demands, (i) External Affairs, (ii) Tribal Areas, (iii) State of
Pondicherry and (iv) Miscellaneous. According to the final
estimates, expenditure in 1956-57 is expected to be Rs. 16,19.33 lakhs.
Some of the items included therein are either fixed or do not relate
to External Affairs proper:Rs (in lakhs)
1. Tribal Areas including Assam Rifles and provision for economic development (39.73 lakhs) and community projects (5.56 lakhs)
5,47.22
2. Payment to neighouring States and expenditure on Pondicherry
3,01.27
3. Contribution to U.N.O., Delegations thereto and Delegations to the International Armistice Supervisory Commission in Indo-China .
1,06.55
4. Expenditure on demarcation of boundaries between India and Pakistan,
recovery of abducted women and children and implementation of Prime
Ministers' Agreement
15.88
5. Passport and Emigration Establishments
20.37

6. Miscellaneous expenditure, e.g. that on pilgrimage and evacuees, repatria
tion of Indians, Loss by exchange etc
6.80
--------9,98.09
--------<pg5>
The expenditure of External Relations proper amounts to
Rs. 621.24 lakhs. This includes Rs. 60.15 lakhs on the High Commission's Office in London and Rs. 109.72 lakhs on pay and allowances of
officers and staff and other expenses at Headquarters. Expenditure on 81 Missions and Posts abroad totals Rs. 451.37 lakhs.
This gives an average of Rs. 5.57 lakhs per Mission. Of this, an
average of Rs. 1.35 lakhs per Mission is spent on pay and allowances
of officers, Rs. 1.45 lakhs on pay and allowances of staff and Rs. 0.77
lakhs on office and residential accommodation.' The balance consists
of contingent and other miscellaneous expenditure.
In spite of the expansion in the activities of the Ministry, all
possible steps have been taken to keep the expenditure at the
minimum. The original. sanctioned grant under the four demands
mentioned above was Rs. 1719.72 lakhs which was subsequently
increased by two Supplementary Grants of Rs. 79.32 lakhs and
5.51 lakhs under 'External Affairs". The net saving of Rs. 185.22
lakhs is mainly under "Tribal Areas" and "Pondicherry", owing to
a rephasing of the Economic Development Programme and economy
in Administrative charges.
(vi) Tribal areas.-North East Frontier Agency.-The administration of the North East Frontier Agency has made satisfactory
progress during the year in extending effective administration into
the interior and in providing amenities and facilities for the tribal
people living in the Agency. The law and order situation in the
Tuensang Frontier Division improved by the end of the year and
substantial progress has been made in resettling the villagers affected
by the disturbances.
The Indian Frontier Administrative Service was finally constituted during 1956. The selection to the service has been made after
taking into account the difficult and trying conditions of service
and it is hoped that the cadre will now provide the key personnel
for the administration of the Agency. The Administration is now
free to devote its attention to the problem of recruiting other
personnel, especially on the technical side, essential for implementing the programme for the development of the region.
The Second Five Year Plan for the Agency has been revised on

a more scientific and realistic basis. The targets now fixed, on the
basis of the experience of the last few years, take fully into account
the special difficulties of the region and the basic necessity of preserving the unique cultural and social pattern of the tribal people.
28 M. of E.A.-2.
<pg6>
The allocations among the various Sectors in the revised Second
Five Year Plan, as approved by the Planning Commission, are as
follows:Rs.
(n lakhs)
Agricultural production, Minor Irrigation and Land Development
50.00
Animal Husbandry
10.00
Forests
35.00
Co-operation
5.42
Fisheries
1.00
-------TOTAL.--Agricultural Sector
101.42
-------Community Development Projects & National Extension Service
76.27
Power
13.00
-------Village and small industries
18.48
-------Roads
197.43
Approach Roads by Army Engineers
344.00
Airstrips
30.00
--------

TOTAL-Transport
571.43
Education
60.00
Health
90.00
-------TOTAL.-Social Services
150.00
Miscellaneous
1. Publicity
4.50
2. Statistics and Planning
2.00
3. Research
13.40
-------TOTAL.-Miscellaneous
19.90
GRAND TOTAL:
950.50
There are now one Community Development Block and six
National Extension Service Blocks in the Agency. Progress has also
been made in training selected tribal personnel for administration
and development of their areas. Satisfactory progress has been
made regarding education. There are now 7,600 students and 3
High Schools. in the Agency. Steps have also been taken to compile,
and print text books in tribal dialects in the Devnagri script.
INDIA
CHINA JAPAN KOREA MONGOLIA BHUTAN NEPAL SUDAN AFGHANISTAN BURMA IRAN
AUSTRALIA FIJI NEW ZEALAND USA PAKISTAN CANADA GHANA BELGIUM SRI LANKA
ETHIOPIA UNITED KINGDOM LATVIA
Mar 31, 1957

A. States in Special Treaty Relations with India

PART II
A. STATES IN SPECIAL TREATY RELATIONS WITH INDIA
(i) Bhutan.-The relations of friendship and mutual co-operation
with Bhutan were strengthened during the year.
The Government of India, as a token of their keen interest in
the economic progress of Bhutan, made a gift of about 146 tons of
fertilizers, costing approximately Rs. 42,000. In addition, arrangements have been made to present hospital equipment worth approximately Rs. 2 1/2 lakhs and medicines and drugs worth about Rs. one
lakh. 2,000 maunds of cement were also presented to Bhutan as
a flood-relief measure.
The Government of Bhutan continued to extend their full cooperation to Indian authorities in flood control measures. Students
from Bhutan have been given full facilities for training in river
gauge and rain gauge observations. Some of them have also been
given scholarships for education in India.
(ii) Sikkim.-The seven year development plan for Sikkim, formulated and financed by the Government of India, has now completed its third year. Appreciable progress has been made in the
execution of the schemes.
The Sikkim Darbar and the Government of Bhutan took keen
interest in the exhibition of Buddhist art arranged by the Ministry
of Education in November, 1956 as part of the 2500th Buddha
Jayanti celebrations. Valuable exhibits of Buddhist art and culture
were brought from Bhutan and Sikkim, for this exhibition and the
two Royal Families took great personal interest in arranging these
exhibits. The exhibits received widespread appreciation in India.
At the invitation of the organisers, the Maharaja of Sikkim
attended the symposium of Buddhist art and literature organized
by the Buddha Jayanti Celebrations Committee, in co-operation
with the UNESCO, from Nov 26, 1956 to 29 November, 1956. The Maharaja was the guest of the Government of, India and after attending
the symposium visited some of the Buddhist places of pilgrimage
in India.
A daily half-hour broadcast in Tibetan, consisting of a news
bulletin, Indian and Tibetan music etc., was inaugurated on 15
December, 1956, by the All India Radio to cater for listeners in
Sikkim, Bhutan and other frontier regions.
<pg7>
<pg8>
B. FOREIGN POSSESSIONS IN INDIA
The Treaty of Cession of the French Establishments of Pondi-

cherry, Karikal, Mahe and Yanam was signed on 28 May 1956.
The Treaty, however, awaits ratification by the French National
Assembly. A sum of Rs. 70 lakhs has been allotted to the Pondicherry Government to cover expenditure during the year on development schemes in the State under the Second Five Year Plan.
The Government of India have also sanctioned the establishment of
a Medical College at Pondicherry. The scheme for construction of
a new, pier at Pondicherry has also been sanctioned and construction has begun.
There have been no important developments concerning the
Portuguese possessions in India since the last report. The Portuguese authorities have shown no change in their intransigent attitude. Conditions in the Portuguese possessions continue to be very
unsatisfactory and the nationalist movement continues unabated
despite the repressive measures adopted by the Portuguese
authorities. It is reported that several hundred Goans have
been arrested and sentenced to long" terms of imprisonment for
participation in the nationalist movement and defiance of the
administration. Goan political parties in Bombay and other places
have continued their peaceful struggle. Economic conditions in
Goa, Daman and Diu continue to be unsatisfactory, and this has led
to illegal immigration into India. Smuggling still continues; but
the strengthening of anti-smuggling operations has effected a noticeable decrease, particularly in smuggling by land.
There were 42 Indian nationals in jail or in detention in Goa.
Of these, one was released last year due to lack of evidence for
sending him up for trial; and the Portuguese recently granted an
amnesty to and released 34. Seven persons are still in detention;
one has been convicted for offences involving violence and is, there
fore, not covered by the recent amnesty and the other six persons
are stated by the Portuguese authorities to be Goans. The Government of India are taking necessary steps to collect evidence to
prove their Indian nationality.
The First Secretary of the Egyptian Embassy, in New Delhi paid
a second visit to Goa, Daman and Diu for about, ten days in
January 1957 and submitted a detailed report to the Government
of India. A representative of the Brazilian Embassy, which is
looking after Portuguese interests in India, was permitted to visit
Bombay twice in 1956 and once in January 1957.
<pg9>
On the June 1956, Portugal presented a Memorial before the
International Court of Justice seeking right of passage to the liberated
enclaves of Dadra and Nagar Haveli. India was initially given
time till 15 December 1956, to file her Counter-Memorial. The Government of India have decided to enter a Preliminary Objection.
The time given for the purpose was considered inadequate in view
of the extensive research that was involved. An extension of time

was therefore sought and the Court granted an extension of four
months upto 15 April 1957.
The disbursement of pensions to about 900 pensioners in Goa,
Daman and Diu was stopped on 31 December 1955 and could not
be continued because of the refusal of the Portuguese authorities
to give the necessary permission and facilities. After prolonged
correspondence the Portuguese authorities agreed to the opening
of a pension office of the Government of India in Goa. The advance
party of the staff for the pension office left for Goa on 14 March
1957.
There have been several cases of violations of Indian territorial
waters and air space over prohibited areas by Portuguese boats and
aircraft. The Government of India have protested against these
violations.
C. INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS
(i) Afghanistan.--Relations with Afghanistan continued to be
friendly and cordial. To facilitate the transit of goods between
Afghanistan and foreign countries through India, the Government of
Afghanistan requested the Government of India to formulate a definite procedure. The procedure is being finalized in consultation with
the Afghan Government.
As usual this year also the Government of India participated in
the Afghan Jashan celebrations in August 1956. Two teams (hockey
and football) visited Afghanistan at the invitation of the Afghan
Government. In November 1956, an Afghan hockey team also visited
India en route to the Olympic Games at Melbourne.
For the development of community projects in Afghanistan, the
Government of India have, as a gesture of goodwill, presented to the
Government of Afghanistan livestock, fertilizers and equipment.
The Government of Afghanistan have requested the Government
of India to send a mission to investigate the coal resources of
Afghanistan. The proposal is under examination.
<pg10>
At the request of the Afghan Government, the Government of
India have agreed to present and install a fumigation chamber at
Kandahar. The chamber has been purchased and will soon be despatched. This is expected to promote trade between the two countries.
At present there are five Indian. teachers serving in Afghanistan
and two more will be selected. The Government of Afghanistan have
also asked for the services of expert craftsmen in cocoonery and reeling and mosaic floor-laying.

The training of Afghan Air Force personnel in Indian Air Force
establishments is in progress. Some of the trainees have returned
to Afghanistan after completing their training in India.
The Government of India had undertaken to install meteorological
and aeronautical communication equipment at Kabul and Kandahar
and to operate it for two years. The necessary aeronautical equipment had already been sent and installed at Kabul; and meteorologi.
cal equipment was sent during the year. The installation work both
at Kabul and Kandahar is now complete and the operation work is
being looked after by our teams in Afghanistan.
Messrs. Aryana Airlines (an Afghan concern) started a regular
weekly scheduled two-way service on the Kabul-Amritsar-Delhi
route on 13 October 1956.
A 3-member delegation sponsored by the Silk Export Promotion
Council of Bombay visited Afghanistan in October 1956.
Her Majesty the Queen of Afghanistan visited India in March 1956
on her way home from Munich.
An Indian Archaeological Mission visited Afghanistan in MayJuly 1956 to explore the pre-historic sites along the river valleys of
South Afghanistan. The Mission also visited the site near Kandahar,
where excavation is being carried out by the French Archaeological
Mission, and drew up a list of antiquities with Indian affinities in the
Kabul Museum. Lectures on the, cultural affinities between the two
countries were also delivered by the members of the Mission.
There were heavy floods in Afghanistan. The Indian Red Cross
Society donated a sum of Rs. 5,000/- for the relief of flood sufferers
A series of earth tremors caused considerable loss of life and property in Afghanistan in June 1956. The Government of India sent
2,800 blankets and 5,000 shirts for the use of the earthquake victims.
A sum of approximately Rs. 50,000/- was spent.
<pg11>
(ii) Burma.-The cordial relations between India and Burma
were maintained during the year. In the international sphere the
close cooperation between the two Governments continued to the
mutual advantage of both countries.
The maintenance of trade between the two countries at a high
level was recognized as essential by both Governments. A Burmese
purchase mission visited India and concluded agreement for the
purchase of jute, cotton piecegoods, prawns and other, commodities.
The Burmese Minister for Food and Trade Development visited India
twice during the year and had discussions, with the Government of
India. As a result of these discussions, with a view to ensuring twoway trade and stabilising Burma's economy a long-term arrangement was reached for the purchase, by India of two million tons of

Burma rice during the course of five years commenting 1 June 1956.
This agreement was designed to furnish the necessary exchange to
enable Burma to obtain a larger proportion of her requirements from
India, and, on their part, the Government of Burma undertook to
provide adequate facilities for the trade between the two countries
to be developed to the highest practicable level. The Burmese Minister for Food and Trade Development, who visited India a second
time in November 1956, held discussions with the Government of
India regarding the renewal of the old agreement concluded in
October 1955, for a loan of Rs. 20 crores to Burma, as Burma
had not availed herself of the loan under the previous agreement.
This new Agreement was signed on 12 March 1957.
U Ba Swe, the then Prime Minister of Burma, accompanied by
the Foreign Minister and other ministers and senior officials, attended the Colombo Powers Conference held in New Delhi in November
1956, after having participated in the Asian Socialist Conference
earlier in Bombay. Several other Burmese delegations, including a
number of technical missions that came to study various branches of
industry, also visited India during the year. U. Nu, accompanied by
other dignitaries and renowned Buddhist scholars, visited India in
connection with the Buddha Jayanti celebrations. The Indian Parliamentary Delegation, headed by the Speaker of the Lok Sabha,
spent a few days in Burma en route to the Inter-parliamentary
Conference in Bangkok. An Indian Air Force Goodwill mission
visited Burma and a Burma Air Force Goodwill mission visited India
in January 1957. Units of the Indian Navy also paid official visits to
Burma.
As in previous years facilities were given to students and technicians and service, personnel from Burma, to undergo training in the
various educational, technical and military establishments in this
country.
<pg12>
Certain measures taken by the Government of Burma in the
sphere of trade and economy have adversely affected Indian interests
in that country. Indian nationals living in Burma have experienced
difficulties in making remittances to their dependents in India. A
large number of cases involving the claims of Indian ex-employees
of the Burma Government for pension, gratuity, arrears of pay,
leave salary etc., still remain to be settled although as a result of
our Embasay's efforts some relief was secured. The Government
of Burma invited applications during the year for payment of compensation for lands nationalized by the Government. While the
Government of Burma is responsive to our requests in matters concerning Indian nationals, its own economic difficulties have not
permitted a great deal of co-operation in this regard in the past.
This, however, was not allowed to interfere with the cordial relations existing between the two countries.
A new Indian Vice-Consulate was opened in Mandalay in
February 1957.

(iii) Ceylon.- Relations between India and Ceylon continued
to be cordial. Mr. S.W.R.D. Bandaranaike, leader of the Mahajana
Eksath Peramuna (Peoples United Front), became the Prime
Minister of Ceylon. Immediately after his appointment, the new
Prime Minister stated that there was general agreement between
him and the Prime Minister of India on almost all important international problems. India acted in close association with Ceylon
at the London Suez Conference in August 1956 and later, the Prime
Minister of Ceylon participated in the Colombo Powers Conference
in Delhi. The similarity of approach and understanding between
the two countries on vital international issues disclosed, at these
conferences is a matter of great satisfaction to the Government of
India.
As regards the Indo-Ceylon problem, Mr. Bandaranaike said
that a solution satisfactory to the people of India and Ceylon would
certainly be reached. The two Prime Ministers had informal talks
of a preliminary and general nature in London in June 1956 at the
time of the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference. It was
then decided to continue these conversations at a later date. It is
noticed that under the instructions of the new Prime Minister the
Government of Ceylon have taken steps to speed up the disposal
of applications for Ceylon citizenship and it is expected that the
work will be completed by the end of 1957.
The Prime Minister of Ceylon attended the Colombo Powers'
Conference held in New Delhi in November 1956. Various other
ministers and delegations from Ceylon including a number of prominent Buddhists who came for the Buddha Jayanti Celebrations
<pg13>
also visited India during the year. Units of the Indian Navy paid
goodwill visits to Ceylon. Facilities were given to students,
technicians and service personnel from Ceylon, to undergo training
in various educational, technical and naval establishments in this
country.
An agreement on the avoidance of double taxation between India
and Ceylon was signed in September 1956. By another agreement
executed in October 1956, Air Ceylon Limited, was permitted to
operate a weekly service from Colombo to Amsterdam via Bombay
with limited traffic rights at Bombay.
(iv) China.-(See under East Asia).
(v) Nepal.-Relations with Nepal continued to be friendly. The
close cultural bonds between Nepal and India were underlined by
many exchanges of visits by high dignitaries, poets and politicians.
At the Coronation ceremonies of His Majesty King Mahindra Bir

Bikram Shah Deva in April and May, India was represented by a
special delegation headed by the Vice-President and including the
Deputy Minister and the Secretary-General of the Ministry of
External Affairs. In October 1956 the President, accompanied by
the Minister for Planning and Irrigation and the Foreign Secretary,
paid a visit to Nepal-the first ever undertaken by the President
to any foreign country-in response to the invitation extended by
His Majesty the King of Nepal during his visit to India last year.
The Prime Minister of Nepal, Shri Tanka Prasad Acharya, visited
India at the Government of India's invitation and had discussions
Prime Minister on problems of mutual interest. He also
toured important centres in the country for a fortnight and inspected several development projects. Teams of poets and musicians
from India Visited Nepal during the Gandhi Jayanti celebrations,
and parties of students and politicians from Nepal were taken round
India. All these visits helped to strengthen the bonds of goodwill
and friendship between the two countries and led to better appreciation of each other's problems.
During the year, the Nepal Government formulated a Five Year
Plan for economic development. The Government of India have
indicated their willingness to help Nepal in implementing this
Plan and to extend financial aid upto ten crores of rupees. Included in this offer, was aid for the Trisuli Hydroelectric project already
undertaken by the Government of India. The construction of the
Tribhuvan Raj Path has been completed and the construction of a
terminal building at the Gaucher aerodrome made satisfactory progress during the year. More students and technicians were given
training in various educational institutions in India under the
Colombo Plan.
28 M. of E.A-3.
<pg14>
(vi) Pakistan.-Efforts to settle outstanding disputes by negotiations continued throughout the year.
(a) Canal Waters.-The negotiations through the good offices of
the World Bank between the Governments of India and Pakistan
on the Canal Waters dispute were resumed in Washington on 6
December 1954. As a result of these negotiations, three ad hoc
Transitional Agreements for Kharif 1955, Rabi 1955-56 and for the
period from 1 April 1956 to 31 March 1957, were signed on 21 June
1955, 31 October 1955 and 24 September 1956, respectively. In pursuance of these Agreements, Pakistan has been receiving supplies of
water released by, India from the eastern rivers for irrigation requirements in Pakistan.
On 21 May 1956, the World Bank handed to the representatives
of India and Pakistan an aide-memoire proposing that the two
Governments agree to extend the co-operative work, through the
good offices of the World Bank, upto 31 March 1957. This proposal

was accepted and negotiations continued till the end of March 1957.
(b) Flood Control.-Following a suggestion made by the Government of India in December 1954, the Prime Minister of Pakistan
proposed in August 1955 that the Government of India and Pakistan should co-operate in a common endeavour for the control of
floods in the eastern regions of India and Pakistan, This proposal
was welcomed by the Government of India and a team of four
senior engineers visited Karachi in September 1955 for preliminarydiscussions. This was followed by a meeting at New Delhi on 24
August 1956, between the Indian Minister of Irrigation, and Power
and Planning and the Pakistan Minister of Industries and Commerce. The conference finalized arrangements for the exchange
of flood warnings, rainfall and hydrological data and other infor-mation relating to flood control in the eastern. region. It also,
authorized the Chairman of the Brahmaputra River Commission
(India) and the Chairman of the East Pakistan Flood Commission,
to correspond directly on technical matters.
(c) Border Incidents.-There were two major border incidents,
during the year. One arose from, Pakistan's attempt in February
1956 to occupy forcibly the Indian territory of Chhad Bet in the
Rann of Kutch. The second arose from. the attempt on the part
of the Pakistani Border Police in March 1956 to advance their
positions in certain sectors of the border between Punjab (India)
and West Pakistan in the vicinity of the Ferozepore Headworks.
Timely action to prevent violation of Indian territory was taken
in both cases.
<pg15>
Following these incidents there was an exchange of correspondence between the Prime Ministers of India and Pakistan. The
two Prime Ministers agreed to issue instructions to the authorities
concerned to avoid any kind of clash or conflict on the border and
to make it clear to them that the Governments viewed such conflicts with extreme disfavour. There was no incident on the
border between Punjab (India) and West Pakistan during the
rest of the year.
The Government of India continued to pursue with the Government of Pakistan their claim for compensation in respect of the
Nekowal incident. The Government of Pakistan eventually agreed
to make an ex gratia contribution of Rupees one lakh for the rehabilitation of the families of the victims. The contribution received from the Government of Pakistan has been disbursed to the
dependants of the persons concerned.
(d) Demarcation of Boundary.-Another result of the correspondence between the two Prime Ministers was the decision to take
immediate steps to start demarcation of the Western boundary. It
was agreed that a beginning should be made with the boundary
between Punjab (India) and West Pakistan. In pursuance of this

agreement the Surveyors General of India and Pakistan met at New
Delhi on 11 April 1956, discussed the programme of demarcation and
settled other details. The demarcation operations commenced or,
1 October 1956 and are continuing.
(e) `No War' Declaration.-The correspondence in March 1956
between the Prime Ministers of India and Pakistan dwelt also on
the question of the "no war" Declaration by the two countries.
The Prime Minister of India repeated his offer of an unconditional
"no war" declaration.
(f) Kashmir.-The Government of Pakistan in their letters dated
16 November and 26th November 1956 and 2 January 1957, to the
President of the Security Council, proposed further consideration
of the Kashmir question by the Security Council. The discussion
in the Security Council started on 16 January 1957. The Government of India were represented in the discussions by the Minister
Without Portfolio, Shri V. K. Krishna Menon.
The Security Council in a resolution adopted on 24 January 1957
declared that the decisions of the Kashmir Constituent Assembly
did not constitute a disposition of the state. India made it quite
clear that this resolution was not acceptable to her. Another resolution providing inter alia for consideration of a proposal to send a
United Nations force to Kashmir was vetoed by the Soviet Union
Finally on 21 February 1957 the Security Council adopted a resolution requesting the representative of Sweden, Mr. Gunnar Jarring,
who was the President of the Council for the month, to examine with
<pg16>
the Governments of India and Pakistan any proposals which were
likely to contribute towards the settlement of the Kashmir dispute
and to report back not later than 15 April 1957.
The Government of India received Mr. Jarring who arrived
in Delhi on 22 March. Mr. Jarring had consultations on the Kashmir
question with the Prime Minister, the Minister Without Portfolio
and officials of the Government of India.
(g) Passport and Visa Scheme.-The revised Indo-Pakistan Passport and Visa Scheme, based on the decisions reached at the meeting between the Indian Minister of Rehabilitation and the Pakistani
Minister for the Interior in March 1955, which was referred to the
Pakistan Government in May, 1955, continued to be the subject
of reminders to that Government. No reply had been received
from the Pakistan Government by the end of 1956.
(h) Minorities in East Pakistan.-Migration of Hindus from East
Pakistan to India assumed alarming proportions during the year.
In February and March 1956 there was an exodus of 50,393 and
55,381 respectively. The total exodus in 1955 was 239,031, whereas
the figure for 1956 was 319,726.

The question was discussed at an Indo-Pakistan Conference at
Ministerial level held at Dacca on 5 and 6 May 1956. It was agreed
that the minorities were the responsibility of the Government of the
country to which they belonged and that they should look to their
own Government for the redress of their grievances. The problem
of the minority communities in East Pakistan was accordingly one
to be solved by the East Pakistan Government but the Government
of India would be happy to extend all possible co-operation to the
Government of Pakistan in solving it. On behalf of the Government of
Pakistan their representatives reiterated their determination to
safeguard fully and effectively the rights of the minorities, to enable
them to live honourably as full citizens of Pakistan as guaranteed
by the Pakistan Constitution. They were, however, of the view
that the problem would partly be solved if the procedure for the
issue of migration certificates by the Indian Deputy High Commissioner's Office in Dacca were tightened up. The Indian representatives stated that certificates were issued only in deserving cases
after proper scrutiny. A Chief Migration Officer has been appointed
in the office of the Deputy High Commissioner of India in Dacca and
procedure for issue of Migration Certificates has been rationalized
to reduce the possibility of any abuse of this facility.
A number of serious cases of crimes against, and harassment of,
members of the minority community in East Pakistan came to the
notice of the Government of India. In accordance with the Prime
<pg17>
Ministers' Agreement of 8 April 1950, by which the two Governments guaranteed the safety, security etc., of their respective
minorities, these incidents were taken up by the Government of
India with the Government of Pakistan for redress.
(i) Shrines and Holy Places.-In accordance with the Agreement
reached between the Indian Minister of Home Affairs and the
Pakistan Minister for the Interior in May 1955, a Join, Committee
consisting of representatives of the Governments of India and Pakistan has been setup to work out the details of implementation of the
Agreement. The Committee's functions include the preparation of
a list of important shrines in West Pakistan and certain selected
areas in India, the protection and preservation of which should be
the special responsibility of the Government concerned, and the
consideration of the question of properties attached to these shrines
and the income derived from them. The first meeting of the
committee is proposed to be held in the near future.
During the twelve months of 1956, eleven parties of Muslim
pilgrims from West Pakistan visited shrines in India and four
parties of Hindus and Sikhs visited the shrines in Pakistan.
(j) Evacuee Property.-The Implementation Committee, set up
under the Indo-Pakistan Agreement on Movable Evacuee Property,
had its second meeting at Karachi, on 4 and 5 February 1957, to

expedite the transfer from one country to the other of postal savings
bank accounts, lockers and other items of movable property. According to the Agreement, the release and restoration of movables of
evacuees was to follow the exchange of lists/statements. At the
meeting all outstanding lists relating to movable property of
evacuees such as personal and household effects, lockers and safe
deposits, sale proceeds and court deposits were exchanged. Bank
drafts in respect of sale proceeds of movable property were also
exchanged. To mitigate substantially the hardship of displaced
persons, the Committee agreed that physical restoration of movable
property, included in the lists which had already been exchanged,
would be expedited; that lists of claims regarding movable property
lying with Railway authorities would be exchanged between the
two countries by 31 March 1957; that fire-arms covered by the lists
exchanged upto the end of February 1956 would be exchanged by
15 March 1957; that necessary steps should be taken for speedy
verification of claims of contractors, pensions, etc.; and that the
Joint Committee set up under the Movable Property Agreement
would start functioning from 25 February 1957.
(k) Financial Matters.-An Indo-Pakistan Financial Conference
was held in May 1956. Overall partition settlement between the
two countries, overall financial settlement between the two Punjabs,
<pg18>
remittances from India to Pakistan and vice versa on private account
for current and capital transactions and settlement of pre-partition
claims of Pakistan nationals for supplies and services rendered to the
undivided Government of India, were some of the outstanding
financial issues-totalling more than thirty-discussed at the
Conference. The decisions reached at the Conference have been
ratified by the two Governments and steps have been taken to
implement them.
(l) Trade.-The Indo-Pakistan Trade Agreement concluded. in
September 1955 was extended upto 31 January 19 57. Instances of
violation of the Agreement by the authorities in Pakistan came to
notice from time to time and were taken up with the Government
of Pakistan. Talks for the conclusion of a new Trade Agreement
were held in New Delhi between the representatives of the
Governments of India and Pakistan in January 1957 and a new Trade
Agreement was signed on 22 January 1957.
(m) Communications.-The Railway authorities of India and
Pakistan have agreed, in principle, to start through booking of
passengers between India and Pakistan. The operational details
were discussed at a conference of the railway authorities of the
two Governments in New Delhi in October 1956. The decisions
reached at this conference were ratified by the Government of
India in December 1956. Ratification by the Government of
Pakistan is awaited.

The question of running a through train service from Calcutta
through East Pakistan to Haldibari in Cooch Behar is under examination.
(n) Steering Committees.-The Indo-Pakistan Steering Committees, which met last in New Delhi in March 1955, have not met
again and no date has yet been fixed for the next meeting. However, the Ministries of the two Governments have been dealing with
the various outstanding matters in accordance with the classifications
decided upon by the Committees.
(o) Gift of Rice to Pakistan.-Heavy floods during the year resulted in acute food shortage in East Pakistan. The Government of
India made a gift to the Government of Pakistan of 5,000 tons of
rice to relieve distress in the flood-stricken areas in East Pakistan.
The value of the gift amounted to over Rs. 27 lakhs.
(p) Recovery of Abducted Women and Children.-The Abducted
Persons (Recovery and Restoration) Act 1949, as amended from time
to time, has been extended to the end of November 1957. It has
also been decided that the Recovery Organisation should be made
progressively smaller with a view to terminating it at the end of
the extended period of the validity of the Act.
<pg19>
An Indo-Pakistan Conference on Recovery of Abducted Persons
was held at Karachi on 28 July 1956, at which inter alia the following decisions were taken:
(1) The principle and desirability of a joint fact-finding commission to ascertain the extent of outstanding work of
recovery was re-emphasised and two senior officers
were asked to submit their report in this connection
as early as possible.
(2) The need for associating the district administration with
the recovery work was recognized and it was agreed
that local officials should be encouraged to give clues
for tracing abducted persons. The identity of the
informants would be kept secret. Officials and nonofficials who did commendable work would be suitably
rewarded.
(3) It was decided that the responsibility of the village
lambardar to supply information regarding the whereabouts of abducted persons should be re-emphasized.
Political organizations in the two countries would be
requested to lend their support to this humanitarian
work. Relatives and guides would be given full facilities to visit the other country for tracing abducted
persons.
D. SOUTH-EAST ASIA, AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND

India's relations with her neighbours in South-East Asia continued
to be friendly. An official cultural delegation of dancers and musicians headed by Shri Prithviraj Kapur visited Burma, Thailand,
Indo-China, Philippines, Indonesia, Singapore and Malaya in AprilJune 1956.
(i) Indonesia.-The Vice-President of India visited Indonesia
and Japan during September-October 1956 on a goodwill tour.
An agreement between India and Indonesia, providing for cooperation between the air forces of the two countries, was concluded
on 28 February 1956.
(ii) Malaya.-The Government of India are glad to note the progress made during the year in the negotiations regarding constitutional advance in Malaya and Singapore. Mr. Tengku Abdul
Rahman, Chief Minister of the Federation of Malaya, passed
through Calcutta and Bombay on his way to the United Kingdom
for talks with the British Government on economic, financial and
defence problems. Mr. Lim Yew Hock, Chief Minister of the
Colony of Singapore, passed through Bombay on his way to the
United Kingdom to arrange the dates and the agenda with the
<pg20>
British Government for a full scale Anglo-Singapore conference
scheduled to begin in London on 11 March 1957. The Government
of India look forward to the emergence of these close, neighbours as
independent self-governing states in the near future.
Inche Abdul Aziz bin Ishak, Minister for Agriculture, Federation
of Malaya, visited India in January 1957, to study cooperative
marketing, community development projects and other aspects of
agricultural interest. Towards the end of January 1957, the Federa-tion of Malaya opened their office in New Delhi under the charge
of an officer styled the Commissioner for Malaya.
(iii) Thailand.-An air agreement between India and Thailand
was concluded on 12 June 1956 for the operation of air services,
between and beyond their respective territories.
(iv) Indo-China.-The International Commissions for Supervision
and Control in the states of Indo-China continued to function
during the year. The work of the Commission in Cambodia was
considerably reduced as the major portion of its, tasks had been
completed. The Commission in Laos helped to bring the two parties
together to negotiate the terms of a political settlement in Laos.
The Prime Minister of the Royal Laotian Government and the
Leader of the Pathet Lao issued a joint communique in December
1956. Further progress in the negotiations since December 1956 has
however, been extremely slow.
In Vietnam, a political settlement has not been reached and the

Commission is faced with many problems. In South Vietnam, the
authorities agreed to assist the Commission in its task even though
they claimed that legally they were not bound by the Geneva
Agreements. The Co-Chairmen have requested the Commission in
Vietnam to persevere in its efforts to maintain peace with a view to,
the unification of the country.
The authorities in North and South Vietnam opened ConsulatesGeneral in New Delhi during the year and de facto Consuls-General
for the Democratic Republic of Vietnam and the Republic of Vietnam,
have set up their offices in New Delhi.
The Technical Survey team from India which had visited
Cambodia last year presented its report. This report and its recommendations are being studied by the Government of Cambodia.
A trade delegation from South Vietnam, headed by Mr. Nguyen
Huu Chau, Minister for the Interior, visited India in August 1956.
Prince Sihanouk of Cambodia visited Delhi in November 1956.
Distinguished Buddhist personalities came to India from the
states of Indo-China for the Buddha Jayanti celebrations.
<pg21>
(v) Australia and New Zealand.-Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, Union
Health Minister, went to Australia and New Zealand in October
1956 on a goodwill visit.
At a conference held in New Delhi from 12 to 19 February 1957,
the Indian and Australian delegations discussed the operation of
the Indo-Australian Air Agreement of 1949. A Government-sponsored trade mission from Australia arrived in India on 23 March 1957
to explore the possibilities of developing trade between Australia
and India.
(vi) Philippines.-Relations with the Philippines remained
cordial. The Government of India heard with deep regret of the
death of President Magsaysay in an air crash.
E. EAST ASIA
(i) China.-Relations with China were further strengthened
during the year. A number of goodwill, cultural and technical
missions were exchanged between the two countries.
Prime Minister Chou En-lai paid three separate visits to, India
at the end of 1956 and spent nearly three weeks touring the country
and visiting some of the important development and industrial projects. This visit, which coincided with the Buddha Jayanti celebrations, enabled the Chinese Prime Minister to participate in some of
the, functions. During these visits, he had important discussions
with our Prime Minister on Sino-Indian relations and other international problems affecting world peace.
Their Holinesses, the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama visited

India to attend the 2500th Buddha Jayanti Celebrations. During
their stay in India for two months, the Dalai Lama and the Panchen
Lama, visited almost all the sacred places associated with the
Buddha and also some of the important cities and development
centres in India. They were received throughout India by people of
all faiths with marked warmth and enthusiasm.
At the invitation of the Chairman of the Standing Committee of
the People's Congress, India sent a Parliamentary Delegation to
China in September/October, 1956. The Delegation consisting of 29
members representing, both Houses of, Parliament and led by the
Speaker, Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar, was accorded a warm
welcome by the Government and the people of China and toured
different parts of the country. Similarly, at the invitation of the
Chinese Government, a Defence Services delegation of nine members
representing the three Armed Services, under the leadership of Lt.
General J. N. Chowdhury, visited military institutions and installations in different parts of China.
28 M. of E.A.-4.
<pg22>
The Government of India also sent three technical Delegations
to China to study the Chinese economy and agricultural planning
and techniques. A Planning Commission Delegation of three
members led by Shri Pitamber Pant, Private Secretary to
the Chairman, Planning Commission, studied the Chinese
economy in June and July 1956. A Planning Commission
Delegation of seven members including experts in co-operative
organisations and led by Shri R. K. Patil, studied Chinese
agrarian co-operatives from July 1956 for two months. An agricultural delegation of six members including agricultural experts, led
by the Deputy Minister, Shri M. V. Krishnappa, studied Chinese
agricultural planning and techniques in July 1956.
The Government of India's efforts to secure for the People's
Republic of China her rightful place in the United Nations continued.
India's representative at the Eleventh Session of the General
Assembly proposed the inclusion of an additional item on the agenda
of the United Nations, entitled "Representation of China in the
United Nations".
(ii) Japan.-With India's active support, Japan was admitted to
the United Nations at the Eleventh Session of the General
Assembly. A cultural agreement with Japan to foster greater exchanges in the cultural field was signed on 29 October 1956.
The Hon'ble Mr. Justice Kataro Tanaka, Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court of Japan, and Mrs. Tanaka, visited India on a goodwill mission in January/February 1956.
A Mission of leading Japanese industrialists and bankers, consisting of thirteen members and led by Mr. S. Takasugi, visited India

during September/October 1956 to explore the possibility of extending economic relations and technical co-operation between the two
countries.
Some Japanese members of Parliament also visited India in
September 1956 to study economic, political and social conditions
and development activities in India.
For strengthening the friendship between Japan and India,
another Japanese delegation headed by the ex-Minister Mr.
Matsumura in his capacity as the Personal Representative of the
new Japanese Prime Minister, Mr. Isbibashi, visited Delhi and
Bombay early in January 1957 and met the Prime Minister.
The Vice-President of India during his goodwill mission to the
countries in East Asia paid a short visit to Japan in October 1956.
<pg23>
The Planning Commission Delegation led by Shri Pitamber Pant
visited Japan in the summer of 1956 to study the Japanese economy.
Negotiations continued during the year for mutual and amicable
settlement of the claims of compensation arising from the loss of
properties of the nationals of the two countries during the war.
It is proposed, pending negotiations of a formal Trade Agreement, to extend for six months the relevant clauses of the Peace
Treaty in order to facilitate the trade between the two countries.
Committee to Investigate into the death of Netaji Subhas
Chandra Bose.-The Government of India appointed a committee of
three members, under the Chairmanship of Shri Shah Nawaz Khan,
to enquire into the circumstances connected with the alleged death
of Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose. The report of the Committee was
placed. before both Houses of Parliament on 11 September 1956.
According to the report, Netaji met his death in a plane crash at
Taihoku in 1945. Shri S. C. Bose, the third member of the Committee submitted a dissenting report. This report was also place
before the Parliament on 12 December 1956.
(iii) Mongolia.-The Government of Mongolia nominated a new
Ambassador to India resident at Delhi. The Ambassador presented
his credentials on 29 December 1956.
(iv) Korea.-The efforts of the Government of India to promote a
peaceful solution of the Korean problem continued during the year.
The Government of India have been able to send nine ex-prisoners
of the Korean war to Argentina and one to North Korea, leaving
sixteen prisoners who have yet to be settled. Of these, five exprisoners have opted to remain in India and the Government of
Argentina have indicated their willingness to accept five more.

F. WEST ASIA
India's relations with the countries of West Asia continued to
be friendly during the year. Several measures were, taken to
strengthen the goodwill and friendship existing between India and
these countries.
Under the programme of cultural activities, various steps were
taken, or are under consideration, to foster better understanding
between the peoples of India and these countries. A cultural agree
ment was signed with Iran. Grants-in-aid have been given to the
Indo-Egyptian, Indo-Iranian and Indo-Arab Societies. The IndoIranian Cultural Association at Tehran continued to do useful work.
<pg24>
The Government of India have acceded to the request of the
Iranian Embassy that necessary facilities be provided to them for
establishing cultural institutes in Delhi and Bombay. One such
institute has been established in Bombay. Professor Indu Shekher
was appointed Professor of Sanskrit at the University of Tehran.
The expenses are to be borne by the Indian Council for Cultural
Relations. The Government of India have decided to subsidise the
translation of some of Shri Jawaharlal Nehru's books into Persian
A sum of Rs. 5,000/- has been sanctioned in connection with the
translation of his "Autobiography"; the book has since been printed.
The translation of "Glimpses of World History" and the "Discovery
of India" is being taken up. The Government of India have also
subsidized the Arabic translations of "Gitanjali" and "Fruit Gathering". A cultural tour of West Asia by Shrimati Kamaladevi Chattopadhyaya, President of the Indo-Arab Society, was sponsored by the
Government of India. It is proposed to present books to National or
other leading libraries in West Asian. and North African countries;
and proposals for sending a student delegation from India and
inviting a women's delegation and prominent educationists from
West Asian countries are being examined. Under the Cultural
Scholarships Scheme of the Government of India, nine scholarships
were offered to students from West Asian countries for studies in
India. The Government of Iraq have offered two scholarships to
Indian scholars for studies in Iraq. Arrangements are being made
in collaboration with the Ministry of Education to secure admission
for Iranian students who wish to receive training in various technical
institutions in India. An exhibition of Indian photographs was held
in Turkey.
A commercial show room was opened in Tehran in September
1956 to exhibit Indian industries and handicrafts. An Indian Air
Force football team visited Iran to participate in the football competitions held in October 1956. Necessary facilities were afforded by
the Government of India to the officials deputed by the Government
of Iran to study the organization of Indian railways and the technical aspects of road construction it India. The Iranian Social Reform and Village Development Society are sending some officials to
India to study community development projects and the national

extension service. Arrangements are being made to provide for them
the necessary facilities.
The President of Syria visited India at the invitation of the
Government of India. A Syrian Parliamentary delegation halted in
India on its way to China and visited Parliament.
Dr. Ahmad Samman, Dean of the Faculty of Law, University of
Damascus, undertook a goodwill and cultural tour of India at the
invitation of the Government.
<pg25>
Consequent on the severance of diplomatic relations between
Syria and the United Kingdom, the Government of India agreed,
at the request of the Government of Syria, to look after the interests
of Syria in the United Kingdom.
An Air Transport Agreement between India and Lebanon was
initialled at New Delhi on 22 March 1957.
The Ruler of Qatar, Sheikh Ali Bin Abdullah al Thani, visited
India at the invitation of the Government of India,
A Treaty of Friendship is being negotiated with Saudi Arabia,
Dr. Syed Mahmud, Minister in the Ministry of External Affairs
visited Syria and the Lebanon on a goodwill tour. The Prime
Minister halted at Damascus and Beirut on his way to London to
attend the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference and had
talks with the leaders of these countries. At the invitation of His
Majesty the King of Saudi Arabia, the Prime Minister accompanied
by Dr. Syed Mahmud, Minister in the Ministry of External Affairs,
the Foreign Secretary, and three Members of Parliament visited
Saudi Arabia. The communique issued at the end of the visit
declared, inter alia, adherence to the Bandung principles, the
necessity for settling the Suez Canal dispute by peaceful means and
the resolve of India and Saudi Arabia to work together in the
common interests of the two countries and for peace, progress and
freedom in the world.
As a gesture of sympathy, the Government of India despatched
blankets, tents, medicines and textiles, worth Rs. 50,000/- for the
relief of the earthquake victims in Lebanon. A Medical Mission
equipped with medicines has been sent to Jordan under the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine, to afford relief
to the Arab refugees. To combat an out-break of small-pox in
Syria and Iraq, the Government of India have sent one lakh and two
lakh doses of small-pox vaccine respectively, as a gift to these
countries. There were heavy floods in Iran in July 1956. The
Indian Red Cross Society donated a sum of Rs. 5,000 for relief.
G. AFRICA

(i) Egypt.-The year witnessed the further strengthening of
relations between India and Egypt. Dr. Syed Mahmud, Minister
in the Ministry of External Affairs visited Egypt on a goodwill
mission. Shrimati Kamaladevi Chattopadhyaya, President of the
Indo-Arab Society, visited Egypt on a cultural tour sponsored by
the Government of India. Shri Sadath Ali Khan, M.P. Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister, visited Egypt at the invitation
of the Egyptian Government. The Prime Minister halted at Cairo
<pg26>
en route to London to attend the Commonwealth Prime Ministers'
Conference and had talks with Egyptian leaders. The Prime
Minister of India, the President of Egypt and the President of
Yugoslavia met at Brioni; the joint communique issued at the end
of the talks emphasized inter alia that the freedom and goodwill of
the peoples of West Asia were essential not only for peace but also
to safeguard legitimate economic interests, and called for a peaceful
and just solution of the Algerian question.
The instruments of ratification of the Treaty of Friendship
between India and Egypt, which was signed at Cairo on 6 April
1955, were exchanged at New Delhi on 3 April 1956. The Treaty
has come into force from that date.
Under the cultural scholarships scheme of the Government of
India, two scholarships, have been given to students from Egypt.
Three scholars are being sent to Egypt under the Government of
India scholarships scheme for studying Arabic. The Government
of Egypt have offered three scholarships to Indian students for
studies in Egypt.
The Government of India have sent tea, coffee, blankets,
medicines and textiles worth Rs. 1,35,000, to Egypt, as a gift for
the relief of the Egyptian people.
Consequent on Egypt's severance of diplomatic relations with the
United Kingdom and France, the Government of India have agreed,
at the request of the Government of Egypt, to look after Egyptian
interests in the United Kingdom and France.
An Egyptian Trade Delegation, headed by the Permanent Under
Secretary of the Egyptian Ministry of Commerce, visited India in.
March 1957 in order to promote trade between India and Egypt.
(ii) Sudan.-Dr. Syed Mahmud, Minister in the Ministry of
External Affairs, visited the Sudan on a goodwill tour. Shrimati
Kamaladevi Chattopadhyaya, President of the Indo-Arab Society,
also visited the Sudan in the course of her tour.
At the invitation of the Government of India, Mr. Mirghani
Hamza, Deputy Prime Minister of the Sudan', attended the inauguration of the atomic reactor in Trombay by the Prime Minister.

More technical personnel from India have left for the Sudan for
service under the Government of Sudan. Under the cultural
scholarships scheme of the Government of India, two scholarships
have been given to students from the Sudan.
India, along with other countries, sponsored the admission of the
Sudan to the United Nations Organisation.
<pg27>
(iii) Tunisia and Morocco.-The year witnessed important
developments in these two countries culminating in the attainment
of their independence. The Government of India had steadfastly
supported the right of these two countries to full independence and
India was among the first countries to recognize their independence
and sovereignty after agreements had been reached between the
French Government and the Tunisian and Moroccan leaders. India
was, among the countries which sponsored the admission of Tunisia
and Morocco to the United Nations Organisation.
The Government of India have decided to open an Embassy in
Morocco.
Under the cultural scholarships scheme of the Government of
India, one scholarship each has been offered to students from
Tunisia and Morocco.
(iv) British East Africa.-The Vice-President, Dr. S. Radhakrishnan, visited Kenya in July 1956 to perform the opening
ceremony of the Gandhi Memorial Academy incorporated in the
Royal Technical College at Nairobi. He also visited the adjoining.
territories of Uganda, Tanganyika and Zanzibar.
The state of emergency proclaimed in Kenya in October 1952
continued during the year. However, there was a marked decline
in the incidence of crime and the restoration of normalcy in the
near future seemed possible.
Another event of importance in Kenya was the publication by
the Government of a Sessional Paper embodying their new immigration policy. According to the Paper, "the future immigration policy
of the Government will be largely based on economic considerations,
the main criterion for suitability as a permanent immigrant being
the contribution which the immigrant can make to the economy of
the country". The Paper further states that "the Government
wishes to make it clear that it regards Great Britain not only as the
exemplar of a Way of life but also the primary source of immigrants
of the kind the Colony needs". While the Government of India
welcomed the new immigration policy of the Government of Kenya
insofar as it proposed to secure more effective participation of
Africans in the economic, social, political and cultural life of the
country, they viewed with concern the implied discrimination against
Asian immigration contained in the statement that the Government
of Kenya regarded Great Britain as the principal source of immi-

grants for the Colony.
The Government of India have been watching with keen interest
the progressive evolution of Uganda into a self-governing African
state. A goodwill delegation consisting of six prominent Africans
from Uganda visited India in March-April 1956 at the invitation of
<pg28>
the Indian Council for Culutral Relations. Mr. Y. K. Lule, Minister
for Rural Development, toured India in November-December 1956.
The main purpose of his visit was to study activities in the fields
of community development, co-operation, social welfare and cottage
industries. Mr. Lule is the first African Minister from Uganda to,
visit India.
In 1956, three Buganda Government scholars came to India for
higher studies. They were admitted to appropriate institutions in
India. Three more scholars applied for vocational training and their
admission is being arranged.
Three African leaders to visit India from Tanganyika were
Messrs. Stephen Mhando, Ali Mogne Haloua and Lawie Sijona. Mr.
Mhando is the Organizing Secretary-General of the Tanganyika
African National Union, the most influential African Organisation
in Tanganyika. The main purpose of their visit was to attend the
Asian Socialist Conference at Bombay in November 1956, but they
also visited Delhi and other places in India.
(v) Central Africa.-The Vice-President, Dr. Radhakrishnan;
during his African tour in July 1956, also visited the Federation of
Rhodesia and Nyasaland. He took the opportunity to present 73
books on India to the University at Salisbury.
(vi) West Africa.-The services of Shri S. Ratnam, Financial
Adviser (Defence), were loaned to the Government of the Gold
Coast for short periods in February and April 1956 to assist that
Government in their negotiations with the United Kingdom Government in connection with the Volta River Project.
The Gold Coast became an independent self-governing country
under the new name of GHANA on 6 March 1957. She was admitted
as the first African member of the Commonwealth from the same
date and to the United Nations from 8 March 1957. Another significant event in regard to the Gold Coast was the approval by the
General Assembly of the United Nations of the union of the Trust.
Territory of Tongoland under British administration with independent Gold Coast.
The Government of India raised the status of their Mission at
Accra from that of a Commission to that of a High Commission with
effect from 6 March 1957.
The Ghana Independence celebrations were held at Accra between
3 and 10 March 1957. India was represented at these celebration."

by Shri M. J. Desai, Commonwealth Secretary, and Shri R. Venkateswaran, Director of International Trade and Development in
the Planning Commission.
<pg29>
An exhibition of Indian industries was held in Accra in AprilMay 1956 and in Lagos in May-June 1956. Shrimati Kamaladevi
Chattopadhyaya, Chairman, All India Handicrafts Board, was
present both at Accra and Lagos for opening the exhibitions.
Admission was arranged in the Civil Engineering Class at the
University of Roorkee of two scholars nominated by the Gold Coast
Cocoa Marketing Board for the Engineering course in India at the
Board's expense.
(vii) South Africa.-The South African Government continued
its policy of apartheid and other oppressive measures. New
measures affecting `non-whites' were brought on to, the Statute Book.
The South African Government continued the implementation of
the Group Areas Act, 1950, which has been proclaimed in Johannesburg city. In terms of this proclamation, gazetted in August
1956, more than 9,000 Indians have been served with notices to
vacate western areas of Johannesburg within two years. Of these
9,000 Indians, 750 are traders who face economic ruin. According
to an estimate, ultimately more than 22,000 Indians owning property in Johannesburg worth about (pound)10,000,000 will be uprooted.
The Government of India have brought these developments to the
notice of the United Nations General Assembly.
(viii) Ethiopia.-Relations with Ethiopia continued to be friendly. The State visit of the Emperor of Ethiopia to India in OctoberNovember 1956 brought the two countries closer to each other. In
a Joint Statement, the Emperor and the Prime Minister of India
reaffirmed their faith in the principles of the "Panch Sheel" and
their opposition to colonialism and racialism. The Joint Statement
also expressed the resolve of the two parties to strengthen the friend.
ship between India and Ethiopia in the cultural, economic and social
spheres.
During his visit to India, the Emperor of Ethiopia made several
donations to various funds and institutions including a sum of
rupees two lakhs to the Prime Minister's Flood Relief Fund.
In August 1956, preliminary to the Emperor's visit, a three-man
delegation led by the Ethiopian Minister of Commerce, visited
India. They held discussions with officials of the Government of
India on matters of common interest. They also visited centres of
developmental activities and industrial centres in India. An official
Indian delegation consisting of Shri M. J. Desai, Commonwealth
Secretary, Shri Tarlok Singh, Joint Secretary, Planning Commission
and Shri R. Venkateswaran, Director of International Trade and

Development in the Planning Commission, visited Ethiopia in March
1957. Matters of mutual interest and particularly the Ethiopian
28 M. of E.A.-5.
<pg30>
Government's requirements of Indian technical personnel were
discussed.
At the request of the Government of Ethiopia, the Government
of India have agreed to send a party of senior military instructors
and civilian teachers to Ethiopia to organize a Military Academy at
Harar. The Commandant of the proposed academy will be an
Indian Military Officer.
Six Ethiopian police officers are now receiving training in India.
One Ethiopian naval cadet is also receiving training at the National
Defence Academy, Khadakvasla, for the Special Entry Naval Course.
In response to a request from the Government of Ethiopia one
doctor and two nurses were sent to Ethiopia to serve in the Gandhi
Memorial Hospital at Addis Ababa.
A private Indian firm signed a contract with the Ethiopian Government to set up a textile mill in Ethiopia. The Ethiopian Government will own 51 per cent. of the shares and of the remainder, some
shares will be available to private Ethiopian citizens.
The Indian naval ships, `Kistna' and `Tir' called at the Ethiopian
port of Massawa in October 1956 on their way to Perim and Aden
in the course of an operational training visit.
The French Government have agreed to the Indian Embassy at
Addis Ababa looking after Indian consular and commercial interests
in French Somaliland, and the Second Secretary visited Djibouti in
December 1956 and called on the Governor to discuss matters concerning the Indian community there. The agreement of the French
Government to the accreditation of the Second Secretary as India's
Consul in French Somaliland is awaited.
(ix) Madagascar.-The Government of Madagascar have agreed
to issue entry permits to wives and children of Indian nationals
domiciled in Madagascar with regard to all the fourteen persons
whose cases were represented to them by the Consul-General. The
Government of Madagascar also agreed to issue permits to four
Indian male nationals who had previously been refused permission
to enter Madagascar.
H. EUROPE
(i) United Kingdom.-Frequent and detailed exchange of views
on various matters of mutual interest continued throughout the
year between the Government of India and the Government of the

United Kingdom. Mr. Selwyn Lloyd, Foreign Minister of the
United Kingdom, visited New Delhi in March, 1956, and had discus
sions with the Prime Minister of India on various matters of
common interest. The Prime Minister attended the Commonwealth
<pg31>
Prime Ministers' Meeting in June-July 1956 where the Commonwealth Prime Ministers exchanged views on the current state of
international affairs and on various economic and other matters of
mutual interest to members of the Commonwealth.
The Prime Minister made a brief halt in the United Kingdom,
both on his way to and on his way back from the United States,
in December 1956, and had talks with the Prime Minister of the
United Kingdom.
(ii) U.S.S.R.-A number of official and unofficial delegations from
India visited the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and many
delegations from the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics came to
India. The most important were the visits to the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics of the Vice-President, the Minister of Production
Shri K. C. Reddy, the Minister for Agriculture Dr. P. S. Deshmukh,
the Minister for Information and Broadcasting Dr. B. V. Keskar and
the Indian Cultural Delegation of 36 members, led by Shri
A. K. Chanda, Deputy Minister in the Ministry of External Affairs.
The Indian Cultural Delegation was warmly welcomed wherever it
went, and its performances were appreciated by both the people
and the press.
Important visits from the Soviet Union were those of
Mr. Mikoyan, a member of the Soviet Presidium, Marshal Zhukov,
Soviet Defence Minister, and the Soviet Delegation to the UNESCO
Conference, the Soviet Circus and the Film Delegation.
Tourist traffic and shipping service were developed between the
two countries. Exchange of books, scholars and experts also
featured prominently during the year. The Russian People paid
their homage to the famous Indian dramatist Kalidasa by celebrating his birthday.
On a request from the Soviet Government, the Government of
India assisted them in recruiting suitable Indians as translators and
announcers in Indian languages for the Soviet Ministry of Culture.
(iii) Czechoslovakia.-Our relations with Czechoslovakia were
further strengthened during the year. The Indian Cultural Delegation led by the Deputy Minister visited that country. The VicePresident of India also paid an official visit. On that occasion the
Czechoslovak Government expressed their goodwill to India by
presenting him with a mobile dental clinic. Czechoslovakia sent a
Cultural Delegation of 12 members, led by Dr. Karol Bedrna, First

Deputy Minister for Education and Culture. The Czechoslovak
Minister for Education and Culture, Dr. Kahuda, led his country's
delegation to the UNESCO General Conference at Delhi.
<pg32>
Trade between the two countries was strengthened and books
and scholars were exchanged. The Czechoslovak people celebrated
Kalidasa Day.
(iv) Hungary.-The Indian Cultural Delegation visited Hungary.
Books and publications were exchanged between various institutions
in the two countries.
The year witnessed serious disturbances in Hungary. The
Government of India sent tea, coffee, shirts, blankets and other
relief supplies to the Hungarian people as a token of goodwill.
(v) Poland.-The Polish Prime Minister, Mr. Josef Cyrankiewicz,
visited India in March-April 1957. The Indo-Polish Trade Agreement was renewed for the year 1956. It was decided to establish
an Indian Mission at Warsaw.
(vi) Bulgaria and Rumania.-The Vice-President of India paid
goodwill visit to Bulgaria and Rumania. This contributed
greatly to the strengthening of understanding and friendship with
those countries.
The Indian Cultural Delegation also visited these two countries.
The trade agreement with Rumania was further renewed for one
year. Mr. Nehru's "Discovery of India" was translated into the
Rumanian language. Rumania has been co-operating with India in
the development of oil resources.
(vii) Albania.-Diplomatic relations with Albania were established in March, 1956.
(viii) Yugoslavia.-Relations between the two countries, which
have been extremely cordial, were further strengthened by the
visits of various delegations. The Prime Minister visited Yugoslavia
in July 1956 and had talks with Marshal Tito and the President
of Egypt at Brioni. A Yugoslav women's delegation visited India in
October, 1956. An Indian Cultural Delegation visited Yugoslavia.
Dr. Vladimir Bakaric, President of the National Assembly of
Croatia, visited India.
(ix) Federal Republic of Germany.-The cordial relations
between India and the Federal Republic of Germany were further
strengthened.
In response to the invitation extended by Dr. Franz Bluecher,
Deputy Primer Minister of the Federal Republic of Germany,
during his visit to India in January 1956, the Prime Minister accompanied by Shrimati Indira Gandhi and Shri N. R. Pillai, SecretaryGeneral in the Ministry of External Affairs, paid an official visit to

the Federal Republic of Germany from 13 to 17 July 1956. During
his stay in the German Federal Republic the Prime Minister was
received by the Federal President and had talks with the
<pg33>
Federal Chancellor and other Ministers. A joint communique
issued on the occasion affirmed the faith of the two Govvernments in democracy and the similarity in basic aims which
were directed to the preservation and strengthening of peace. On
the question of the re-establishment of German unity, the communique said that the Prime Minister of India expressed his understanding of, and sympathy with, the desire of the German people
for the peaceful achievement of their national unity, which would
be facilitated by a lessening of tensions and would itself contribute
materially to an improvement in the European and the general
international situation. The Federal Government, having implicit
faith in the economic future of India, were ready to place German
technical experience at the disposal of India for the achievement
of its economic plans and would, if so desired by India, further
increase co-operation.
Following the Prime Minister's visit a large number of scholarships were offered by the Government and private institutions of
the Federal Republic of Germany for training Indian students in
German technical institutions. A team of German scientists visited
India in October, 1956 to advise the Government of India regarding
the establishment of a technical institute on the lines of the
Kharagpur Institute.
The Prime Minister met the Federal German Chancellor again at
Dusseldorf airport in December 1956, on his way back from the
United States. Discussions were held between them on various
important developments in West Asia, Central Europe and other
parts of the world.
The Foreign Minister of the Federal Republic of Germany visited
New Delhi in March 1957 at the invitation of the Government of
India. He was received by the President and the Vice-President
and had talks with the Prime Minister and other Ministers.
The issues of the European atomic energy community and the
European common market as also the question of Germany's reunification were discussed. Dr. Von Brentano confirmed that his Government sought a peaceful solution of this problem; and the Prime
Minister expressed once again his sympathy with the German
people's desire for national unity and the hope that this unity would
be achieved in accordance with their wishes and with due regard to
the security requirements of Germany and of other European
countries.
The Foreign Minister expressed his Government's readiness to
intensity commercial and industrial co-operation between the two
countries; and to assist in the establishment of a "prototype training

<pg34>
workshop" for the training of the technical staff necessary for
small and medium scale industries in India.
A delegation of two economists visited the German Federal
Republic in June 1956 to study the recent progress and economic
development in that country.
(x) Scandinavian Countries.-Various measures were taken to
strengthen relations with the Scandinavian countries.
At the invitation of the Swedish Export Association and the Governments of Finland and Denmark, an industrial-cum-commercial
goodwill mission visited Sweden, Finland and Denmark in MayJune 1956 to , study the progress made by different sectors of
Scandinavian industry and to explore the possibilities of industrial
and commercial co-operation. Similar missions from Denmark,
Sweden and Finland visited India in the first quarter of 1957.
The Prime Minister of Denmark, Mr. H. C. Hansen, paid a short
visit to India in March, 1957.
1. THE AMERICAS
(i) The United States of America.-At the invitation of President Eisenhower the Prime Minister visited the United States in
December, 1956. He received a most friendly welcome from the
President with whom he had useful talks both at Washington and
Gettysburg. He also visited New York where he addressed the U.N.
General Assembly. Whatver he want he was cordially received.
In 1955, India undertook to assist in the repatriation of those
Chinese nationals in the United States who were desirous of returning to China. A number of Chinese nationals have so far been
repatriated to the Chinese mainland with the assistance of our
missions in the United States.
To enable the United States Government to carry out the Fulbright programme for 1957, the Government of India made a further
"on account" payment to them of As. 24.5 lakhs in November 1956,
under the terms of the Indo-U.S. Agreement of 1.6 May 1946 regarding the disposal of United States war surplus stores in India. This
brings the total paid to Rs. 2,08.50 lakhs.
On 29 August 1956 an Agricultural Commodities Agreement was
signed between the United States of America and the Government
of India under Title I of the Agricultural Trade Development and
Assistance Act. The United States undertake to finance, during
the period ending 30 June, 1959, the sale to the Government of India
in rupees of specified quantities of surplus wheat, cotton, rice,
tobacco and dairy products. The major portion of $ 360:1 million

<pg35>
involved in the Agreement is placed at the disposal of the Government of India as a long-term loan to promote economic development and, of the remainder, a part as a grant.
Cultural relations between India and the, United States continued to be maintained through a series of "exchange" schemes and
programmes, chiefly of the academic kind.
Chief Justice Warren of the Supreme Court of the United States
with Mrs. Warren-visited India during the year. He was warmly
received in all circles.
On the anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi's birthday, the Indian
Ambassador in Washington presented Dr. D. G. Tendulkar's eightvolume biography of Mahatma Gandhi to Chief Justice Warren of
the United States for the Library of the Supreme Court.
(ii) Canada.-At the invitation of. Prime Minister St. Laurent of
Canada the Prime Minister visited Ottawa in December 1956. He
received a very warm welcome there and had useful talks with
Mr. St. Laurent and his colleagues.
On 28 April, 1956, an Agreement between India and Canada for
the establishment of an Atomic Research and Experimental Reactor
in Trombay by the Government of Canada under the Colombo Plan,
was signed at New Delhi.
On 29 December 1956, another inter-governmental agreement
between India and Canada was signed at New Delhi on Canadian
assistance of $20 million to India for the Kundah Hydro-electric
project in Madras.
Mr. Paul Martin, Minister for National Health and Welfare of
Canada, and Mrs. Martin, arrived in Delhi on 24 December 1956,
after attending the Colombo Plan meetings in New Zealand. During
his visit, Mr. Martin presented to India the 120th Canadian locomotive, under the Colombo Plan, and signed the Kundah Agreement jointly with the Indian Finance Minister.
(iii) Latin America.-The President of India sent a message of
greetings to the new President of Brazil, His Excellency Sr. Juseolino
Kubitschek, and the Indian Ambassador in Rio de Janeiro was
deputed to represent India at the inaugural ceremonies beginning
on 29 January, 1956.
The Indian Ambassador in Rio de Janerio was deputed to represent
India in August 1956, at the installation, at La Paz, of Dr. Hernan
Siles Zuazo as President of the Republic of Bolivia.
<pg36>

The Indian Ambassador in Buenos Aires was deputed to represent
India at Quito on the occasion of the transfer of executive powerto the President and the Vice-President of the Republic of Ecuador,
on 31 August 1956.
The Indian Minister in Washington was deputed, with special
rank of Ambassador, to represent India in Panama during the
installation of the new Panamanian President, Senor Ernestito De
La Guardia, on 1 October 1956.
The Indian Red Cross Society sent bed-sheets and bandages of
the value of Rs. 3,000 to the Argentine Red Cross as help in the
treatment of victims of the polio epidemic in Argentina.
At the invitation of the Government of India, Mr. David Alfaro,
Siqueiros, Mexican artist, accompanied by his wife, visited India
in November 1956.
A Trade Agreement between the Government of India and Chile
was signed in New Delhi on 16 October 1956 with a. view to promoting closer economic relations between the two countries.
J. EXTERNAL PUBLICITY
(i) INFORMATION ACTIVITIES
The external publicity of the Government of India continued to
receive the special attention of Government and the activities of the
Information Service of India (External) Were further improved and
expanded during the year.
Organization and Staff.-Two new Information posts, at Belgrade
and Damascus respectively, were opened during the year, raising the
total number of such posts from 38 to 40. Their regional distribution
will be seen in Appendix II. In addition, a skeleton information staff
is maintained in Mauritius, Fiji, Saudi Arabia and the British West
Indies.
The staff employed in the External Publicity Division of the Ministry of External Affairs and in the Information Posts abroad consists of 90 Officers-1, Director, 6 Public Relations Officers, 1 Assistant
Public Relations Attache, 35 Press Attaches or Information Officers,
1 Publicity-cum-Cultural Attache, 23 Assistant Press Attaches or
Assistant Information Officers, 23 Information Assistants and 476
subordinate officials-India-based as well as local recruits.
Total expenditure.-The total expenditure on the external publicity during the year 1956-57 is estimated to be approximately
Rs. 96,69,000-Rs. 21,31,700 at headquarters and Rs. 75,37,300 on the
publicity posts abroad.
<pg37>

Dissemination of News.-The supply of authentic news and information about India to the Information Posts abroad was, as hitherto,
continued by means of wireless morsecasts. There are five transmissions every day; the first two are intended specially for SouthEast Asia and West Asia respectively; the third is devoted to a
review of the Indian press and is intended for all posts; and transmissions IV and V cover general news for the use of all posts abroad.
Arrangements for receiving Morsecasts from headquarters exist,
at present, in 36 posts only. Proposals to extend the wireless service
to some of the other posts are under active consideration.
Most of the Information Posts abroad publish daily bulletins based
on the morse transmissions. This serves a useful purpose as news
items about India supplied by foreign news agencies are often inadequate.
The Information Service of India Posts also prepare special handouts on the more important questions such as Goa, Kashmir etc.,
which serve as background material for editorial writers and other
students of international affairs.
A number of the Posts publish printed news-sheets as miniature
weekly or fortnightly newspapers. These have proved popular among
readers interested in India.
Special mention must be made of the quarterly cultural review
published by the Government of India's Information Post in Rome.
The review is published in five Europe an languages, namely English,
French, Italian, Russian and Serbo-Croat. It has a very wide distribution. Many information posts also publish annual reviews.
The one published in London is widely distributed.
It is as important for the Government of India to have information about political developments in other countries as reported in
the local press as it is for missions abroad to have authentic information a out India. Accordingly, information posts abroad are required
to send to the External Publicity Division daily press cables. These
provide material for the World Press Review which is published
daily by the Division and distributed to various departments of the
Government of India. It is also made available to Delhi representatives of newspapers in India.
Supply of Publicity Material.(a) Books and Publications.-In addition to supplying news by
daily morse transmissions and cable service, the External Publicity
Division also supplies to Information Posts abroad an increasing
amount of printed material, e.g. feature stories, special articles,
reports from various State Governments and Ministries, pamphlets,
posters, charts and other miscellaneous publications.
<pg38>

The External Publicity Division, as well as the Publications Division of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, publish a large
number of books, and pamphlets. All these are sent to the Information Posts for free distribution within their respective areas. In,
selecting the material for these publications, special stress is naturally laid on India's development plans, Community Projects and measures taken to ensure social and economic progress. The year sail
considerable material produced on such special topics as the Kashmir
problem, Goa, Suez Canal, etc.
The External Publicity Division supplied 134 special feature articles to the Information Posts abroad. These posts were also required
to publish pamphlets, journals and periodicals to meet the special
needs of each region. A number of separate publications were thus
issued in important regional languages including Arabic, Dutch,
French, German, Gorkhali, Indonesian and Italian. During the Haj
pilgrimage, a special pamphlet, "Tohfat-ul-Hajjaj", was published in
Urdu and distributed among the pilgrims.
Information Posts issued special publications on the occasion of
Republic Day 1957.
There is an increasing demand in every country for more information about various aspects of Indian life, its history, art, religion
and culture. To meet these demands, most of our Information Posts
have reading rooms and libraries. These libraries were continuously
expanded during the year under report and in addition to Indian
newspapers and periodicals, books worth approximately Rs. one lakh
were supplied to them.
In a number of countries, mobile libraries have been established,
Library-cum-cinema vans were supplied to our publicity posts at
Accra, Bangkok, Colombo, Dacca, Djakarta, Karachi, Lahore, Nairobi
and Sikkim. Additional vans have been sanctioned for our posts at
Kathmandu, Phnom penh, Rangoon and Suva.
(b) Films.-The Government of India's Documentary Films have
proved to be popular in all the countries and there is a growing
demand for them. During the year 1956-57, about 1,300 prints of 24
new documentaries were supplied to our Posts abroad, apart from
overseas editions of Indian News Reviews. The External Publicity
Division also assisted in India's participation in 17 film festivals at
Montevideo, Berlin, Dublin, Damascus, Karlovy-Vary, Toronto, Sydney, Vienna, Tokyo, Venice, Edinburgh, Rome, Helsinki, Moscow,
Brussels, Manila and Ottawa.
Twenty-six new 16mm. projectors were sanctioned, for various
publicity posts abroad, while two 35 mm. projectors were provided
to our post in Karachi.
<pg39>

(c) Gramophone Records.-The library of gramophone records in
each of the missions was augmented during the year by a number of
new selected records of music of India. The External Publicity Division also met demands for records and musical scores of the National
Anthem. These demands came from our Missions abroad as well as.
from foreign missions in India.
(d) Photographs and Ebonoids.-Some 80,400 copies of photo.,
graphs of various subjects were distributed to our publicity posts
abroad during the year under report. These included an extensive
photographic coverage of the Buddha Jayanti celebrations and the
visits to India of various international dignitaries.
In addition, over two thousand ebonoids and blocks were distributed to various posts for use in their news bulletins and pamphlets
and for supply to local newspapers.
(ii) CULTURAL ACTIVITIES
Exhibitions etc.-The External Publicity Division as such is not
directly responsible for the promotion of cultural exchanges with
foreign countries. However, the Division as well as the publicity
posts abroad are called upon to render assistance in organizing a
number of cultural activities such as exchange of goodwill missions,
participation in art exhibitions, music and dance performances, international fairs and festivals, etc.
During the year 1956-57, India participated in the following fairs.
and exhibitions: (1) Fifth International Philatelic Exhibition held in Now
York;
(2) Indian Photographic and Art Exhibitions organized in Fiji,
(3) Exhibition of Indian children's paintings in Finland;
(4) Nutrition Exhibition held in Tokyo;
(5) Festival organized to celebrate the 500th Anniversary of
the Urbanization of the City of Tokyo;
(6) Exhibition of Dolls organized by, the United Nations Association of Thailand, Bangkok;
(7) Annual Royal Show organized in Nairobi;
(8) Exhibition organized by Indonesian United Nations Association, Djakarta;
(9) International Exhibition on Education organized by the
Association for International Affairs, Dublin University;
(10) Exhibition organized in Dacca at the time of the Second

Pakistan Conference on Social work.
<pg40>
Press Delegations.-A Press Delegation of three journalists from
Yugoslavia and another Delegation of six well-known editors from
West Germany, visited the country as guests of the Government of
India.
In addition to these formal Delegations, individual journalists
from Egypt, Australia West Germany and the United States also
toured India at the invitation of the Government of India.
Buddha Jayanti Celebrations.-Special coverage of the 2500th
Buddha Jayanti celebrations was organized through special feature
articles, pamphlets, photographs and films.
K. MISCELLANEOUS
(i) Emigration.-There was no change during the year in the
administration of the provisions of the Indian Emigration Act (VII
of 1922). Emigration of unskilled workers continued to be prohibited. As in the previous year, Indian labourers already settled in
Malaya, Burma and Ceylon were, however, permitted to return to
those countries after short visits to India. Permission was also
granted, on the merits of each case, to the dependents of labourers
already settled in Malaya, Burma and Ceylon to proceed to those
countries.
Emigration for the purpose of `skilled work', as defined in the
Act, continued to be permitted by the Protectors of Emigrants at
the ports of embarkation in compliance with the formalities prescribed under the Act which inter alia includes execution of an
agreement between the employer and the employees stipulating
the terms and conditions of employment. The agreements were
executed in standard forms approved by the Government and
revised from time to time in the light of experience gained in the
disposal of complaints dealt with by Emigration authorities.
Emigration took place, notably to the Persian Gulf Areas for
employment in the Oil Companies and to Burma for employment
under various Government and quasi-Government bodies.
The decline in passenger traffic to Malaya, which was noticed
during the years 1954 and 1955, continued during 1956-57. No
difficulties were experienced in obtaining sea passages and the
malpractices of passage brokers were kept under check.
Efforts to prevent illicit emigration to Ceylon were intensified
and the strength of the Special Police Staff deployed for the purpose
was augmented. Two conferences of officers of the Emigration and
Police Departments were held at Tanjore and Courtallam in March
and June respectively where important decisions to adopt effective
preventive measures were taken. The close collaboration amongst
<pg41>

the Emigration and Police officials was maintained. Care was also
taken by the Protectors of Emigrants concerned to ensure that
Indian labourers coming from Ceylon on valid travel documents
were not subjected to any hardships while returning to Ceylon.
The question of amending the Indian Emigration Act to bring it
in line with present day requirements (e.g., extension of the provisions of the Act to cover departure by air) is still under consideration.
The procedure introduced during 1955 in the case of West Africa
and Hong Kong, whereby prospective employers in those countries
wishing to take out skilled workers from India for employment
were required to obtain "no objection" certificates from the Indian
Commissioners in those territories after signing the standard form
of agreement prescribed for the purpose, was also made applicable
to Fiji during the latter half of the year under review. On production of such "no objection" certificates permission for emigration is
granted to the employees by the Protector of Emigrants at the port
of embarkation from India.
(ii) Haj.-The number of pilgrims who went to the Hejaz was
13,454, as compared to about 9,200 in 1955 which was Haj-i-Akbar.
As the shipping company was not in a position to provide passages
for all passengers, special exemption I was given to them to carry
passengers in excess of the carrying capacity of the ships. The
Haj pilgrims were given the, usual facilities, such as exemption from
income-tax certificates, and permission to take Indian currency,
food rations and cloth. Medical assistance was provided at Jedda,
Mecca and Medina. The Government of India sent a special
medical mission consisting of three doctors and two compounders
for rendering medical aid to the Hejaz pilgrims. The work of the
mission was greatly appreciated.
(iii) Distinguished visitors from Abroad.-Among the distinguished visitors to India during the year were Sir Leslie Munro,
New Zealand Ambassador to the United States and Lady Munro;
Admiral the Earl and Countess Mountbatten of Burma; H. E. Mr. A. I.
Mikoyan, First Deputy Premier of the U. S. S. R.; Sir Earle Page;
Mr. Walter P. Reuther, Vice-President of the American Federation
of Labour & Congress of Industrial Organisation; The Earl of
Scarborough, accompanied by Viscount de L'Isle; Prince Norodom
Sihanouk Varman of Cambodia, accompanied by his daughter
Princess Soriya, the Hon'ble M. A. Raschid, Minister for Food and
Trade, Burma; the Hon'ble David Marshall, Chief Minister of
Singapore; H. E. Sir Alexander Grantham, Governor of Hong Kong;
IT. E. the Rev. Benjamin Nunez, Ambassador of Costa Rica to the
United Nations; Mr. Earnest A. Gross, a former Deputy United,
<pg42>
States Representative to the United Nations; An Ethiopian delegation of experts led by His Excellency Ato Abebe Retta, Minister for

Commerce; the Hon'ble the Chief Justice of the U.S.A. and
Mrs. Warren; H. E. Dr. Jose Maza, President of the Tenth Session of
the General Assembly of the United Nations; Earl and Countess
Attlee; His Imperial Majesty the Emperor of Ethiopia; a Yugoslav
Women's delegation; the Prime Ministers of Burma, Ceylon and
Indonesia; the Hon'ble Mr. Y. K. Lule, Minister for Rural Development of Uganda; the Hon'ble U Nu; His Highness the Maharaja of
Sikkim; Their Holinesses the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama;
H. E. Mr. Chou En-lai, Prime Minister of the State Council of the
People's Republic of China, accompanied by H. E. Marshal Ho Lung,
Vice Premier of the State Council; H.E. Mr. Tanka Prasad Acharya,
Prime Minister of Nepal and Shrimati Acharya; the Hon'ble Paul
Martin, Minister for National Health and Welfare of Canada and
Mrs. Martin; H. E. Mr. Amir Ghassam Eshraqi, Minister of Posts
land Telegraph of Iran, and Madam Eshraqi; H. E. Mr. Shukri
Al-Kuwatly, President of Syria and Madame Kuwatly; H. E.
Marshal Zhukov, Defence Minister of U.S.S.R.; H. E. Mr. Syed Mir
Gani Hamza, Deputy Prime Minister of the Sudan; the Hon'ble
Mr. Abdul Ahad Khan, Deputy Minister for Mines, Government of
Afghanistan; the Hon'ble Mr. Kenzo Matsumura, Member of the
House of Representatives, Japan; the Hon'ble Mr. John B. Hollister,
Director, International Co-operation Administration, U.S.A., and
Mrs. Hollister; His Highness Shaikh Ali Bin Abdulla Al sani, the
Ruler of Qatar; H.E. Mr. H. C. Hansen, Prime Minister of Denmark;
His Majesty the King of Nepal; H. E. Dr. Gunnar Jarring; H. E.
Mr. Jozef Cyrankiewicz, Prime Minister of Poland and
Mrs. Cyrankiewicz; and H. E. Dr. Heinrich Von Brentano, Foreign
Minister of the Federal Republic of Germany.
(iv) Consular Division.-There was no change in the type of
work but it continued to grow in complexity and volume during the
year under review. Some of the important items handled during
the year are mentioned below.
Four chapters of Foreign Service Instructions on "Exchange
Control" "Fees", "Taking Evidence abroad", and "Shipping" were
revised and finally approved for issue. The reprints of the first
chapter were sent to all our Missions and Posts abroad while the
other three are still under print. The preparation of several of the
remaining chapters has been taken up.
The question of the transmission of judicial documents was
examined and it was decided that with the exception of letters of
request these documents should be addressed by the issuing authorities on a reciprocal basis with their counterparts in the other
<pg43>
countries. To this end all our Missions and Posts abroad and the
State Governments have been approached. In the case of Singapore
and the Federation of Malaya it was decided that such documents
would be sent through the High Courts.
Sixty-eight judicial documents e.g., letters of request, commis-

sions, and other processes etc., as against the thirty-seven dealt
with last year, received through various State Governments for
service in Africa, the Arab world, Europe, South-East Asia and the
U.S.A., were, after proper scrutiny, either forwarded to the authorities concerned through our Missions abroad or returned to the
State Governments for completion of some formalities. Fifty one
cases of letters of request, commissions, and other processes, received from abroad for service in India were also handled.
One hundred and ten judicial documents, such as powers of
attorney, affidavits, certificates, etc., intended for use in foreign
countries were attested during the year.
Forty-eight requests for remittance facilities from Indians abroad
were received during the year; remittance facilities have been
provided to eleven parties and the requests of remaining parties are
under consideration of the respective foreign Governments.
An Extradition Bill has been drafted and is being considered by
the Cabinet.
During the year there were 132 cases of relief and repatriation
of destitute Indian citizens from countries like Afghanistan, British
Guiana, Damascus, Dubai, Fiji, France, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Iraq,
Italy, Malaya, Muscat, Singapore, Switzerland, Syria, Thailand,
United States, etc., at a cost of Rs. 30,952/11/- as against ninety-seven
cases at a cost of about Rs. 8,000/ last year. The recoveries effected
from the repatriates after their arrival in India have as usual been
negligible, for the policy of the Government of India is not to
subject the repatriates to undue hardship.
The position regarding the maintenance of evacuee orphans by
the State Governments has been encouraging. This number is
gradually decreasing due to such factors as their attainment of
majority, marriage, employment, etc. The expenditure incured in
this respect is shared equally by the State Governments concerned
and the Government of India.
The recoveries of advances made to the evacuees from war zones
has, on the other hand, not been encouraging. The work is entrusted
abroad to our Missions in Burma, Malaya and Singapore and in
India to the State Governments who, in agreement with the Government of India, receive half the amount collected, with the
<pg44>
exception of the State of Madras who receive 80 per cent. of the
amount recovered, in order to pay for the cost of maintenance of
staff. As West Bengal has refused to handle this work, the Branch
Secretariat in Calcutta has been entrusted with it and the Government of India retains whatever is recovered.
The three major difficulties in the way of effective recovery are:

(1) Some individuals who received advances died and their
heirs are not in a position to pay.
(2) Some individuals are too poor to make any payment and
it is not the Government's policy to put them to undue
hardship; and
(3) Some individuals cannot be traced despite the best efforts
of the State Governments and the police.
(v) Central Passport Organization.-The five Regional Passport
Offices which started functioning in 1955 completed taking over
passport work from all the State Governments by the end of
February 1956. The Commissioner, Pondicherry, however, still
continues to be the Passport Issuing Authority for the areas under
his jurisdiction.
Owing to re-organization of the States it was necessary to
readjust the territorial jurisdiction of the five Regional Passport
Offices. The Regional Passport Office located at Nagpur was shifted
to Lucknow with effect from 1 December, 1956. At present the
following, are the territorial jurisdiction of the Regional Passport
Offices.
1. Regional Passport Office, Delhi

Jammu and Kashmir, Punjab, Rajasthan.

Delhi and Himachal Pradesh.
2. Regional Passport Office, Madras

Madras, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Mysor

Laccadive, Minicoy and Amidiv
Islands and Andaman & Nicobar Islands
3. Regional Passport Office. Bombay

Bombay.

4. Regional Passport Office, Calcutta Assam, Bihar, Orissa, West Bengal, Mani
pur
Tripura and Andaman & Nicobar
Islands.
5. Regional Passport Office, Lucknow

Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh.

(vi) Conference of Heads of Missions.-A conference of Heads
of Indian Missions in Asian and African countries was convened from
24 March to 2 April 1956 in Delhi. The Prime Minister presided
over the conference. The Conference was one of the periodical
meetings of Heads of Mission held with a view to discussing international problems in general and of certain areas in particular. The
Heads of Mission also had discussions with the Ministries of Finance,
Commerce and Defence, the Planning Commission and the Community Projects Administration.
<pg45>

(vii) Proclamations.-A Proclamation by the President that the
territorial waters of India extend into the sea to a distance of six
nautical miles was issued. Proclamations have also been issued
concerning (i) the full and exclusive sovereign right of India over
the sea-bed and sub-soil of the Continental shelf adjoining its
territory and beyond its territorial waters, (ii) the establishment of
conservation zones in areas of the high sea. adjacent to the territorial
waters of India to protect fisheries, etc., and (iii) exercise of control
by India upto a distance of twelve nautical miles to prevent and
punish the infringement of certain of its regulations.
(viii) Diplomatic and Consular Missions in India.-At the end of
the year 1956-57, there were 34 Embassies, 5 High Commissions and
10 Legations in India in addition to the Apostolic Internunciature.
During the year, diplomatic relations were established at Embassy
level with the Sudan and Spain and at Legation level with Laos.
The status of the Swedish, Norwegian, Cambodian, Chilean, Syrian
and Saudi Arabian Legations was raised to Embassy level. Agreements were concluded with the Governments of Greece and Cuba
for exchange of diplomatic relations at Embassy and Legation level
respectively.
The total number of foreign Consular Posts in India at the end
of the year was 93. Three new foreign Consular Posts at Bombay,
one at Calcutta, and two de facto Consulates-General at New Delhi,
were established.
INDIA
BHUTAN USA EGYPT BRAZIL PORTUGAL AFGHANISTAN GERMANY CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC BURMA SRI LANKA UNITED KINGDOM THE NETHERLANDS CHINA NEPAL LATVIA
ITALY PAKISTAN SWEDEN AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND THAILAND INDONESIA PHILIPPINES
REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE JAPAN CAMBODIA LAOS VIETNAM SWITZERLAND MONGOLIA
KOREA ARGENTINA NORTH KOREA IRAN IRAQ TURKEY SYRIA JORDAN LEBANON QATAR
SAUDI ARABIA YUGOSLAVIA ALGERIA FRANCE SUDAN MOROCCO TUNISIA KENYA UGANDA
GHANA SOUTH AFRICA ETHIOPIA DJIBOUTI MALI MADAGASCAR MALDIVES RUSSIA
NORWAY SLOVAKIA HUNGARY POLAND BULGARIA ALBANIA CROATIA DENMARK FINLAND
CANADA BOLIVIA ECUADOR PANAMA CHILE FIJI MAURITIUS IRELAND URUGUAY AUSTRIA
BELGIUM HONG KONG COSTA!!OMAN SPAIN CUBA GREECE
Nov 26, 1956

A. United Nations
PART III

A. UNITED NATIONS
To the United Nations 1956 was a year of challenge and of great
decisions affecting the peace of the world. At one stage when the
world was literally on the brink of a world war, the United Nations
was able to exert its full weight and moral authority and thereby
saved the world from a major catastrophe.
Consequent to a resolution adopted by the Security Council on,
Oct 31, 1956, the first emergency special session of the General
Assembly was summoned on 1 November 1956, to consider the grave
situation created by the invasion of Egypt by British, French and
Israeli forces. The session lasted from 1 to 10 November 1956, during
which period a number of resolutions were adopted to remedy the
situation in West Asia.
The second emergency special session of the General Assembly
was also convened at the request of the Security Council to consider
the serious situation in Hungary. This session lasted from 4 to 10
November 1956. Both these emergency special sessions were called.
under the `uniting for peace' resolution of the General Assembly
dated 3 November 1950.
Later these two questions were placed on the provisional agenda
of the eleventh regular session of the United Nations General
Assembly, which opened in New York on 12 November 1956. The
Indian delegation took an active part in the debates of these two
items.
At the first plenary meeting of the eleventh session of the GeneralAssembly held on 12 November 1956, the Sudan, Morocco and
Tunisia whose admission had been recommended earlier by the
Security Council were admitted to the United Nations. Later, on 18
December 1956, Japan, and on 8 March 1957 Ghana, were also
admitted thereby bringing the total membership of the United
Nations to eighty-one. India was one of the sponsors of the resolutions relating to the admission of these new members.
On 10 November 1956, the Government of India proposed the,
inclusion of an item entitled 'Representation of China in the United
Nations' in the, agenda of the 11th session of the General Assembly.
In the General Committee, the United States proposed a resolution
by which the General Assembly was asked to decide not to include.
<pg46>
<pg47>
this item in the agenda of its 11th session and further not to
consider at this session any proposals to exclude the representatives of the Government of the Republic of China or to seat representatives of the Central People's Government of the People's Republic of China. This resolution was accepted by the General Committee and later adopted by the General Assembly on 16 Novem-

ber 1956, by a vote of 47 to, 24 with 8 abstentions. The Chairman of
the Indian Delegation, Shri V. K. Krishna Menon, stated that the
time had come when this matter should receive less impassioned
consideration. He also pointed out that the 24 countries which supported the inscription of the item represented 1036 million people
as against the 585 million people represented by the 47 countries
which opposed it.
The resolution adopted by the tenth session of the General
Assembly on disarmament urged the States concerned, particularly
those on the Disarmament Sub-Committee, to take account, among
others, of the proposals of the Government of India regarding the
suspension of experimental explosions of nuclear weapons and an
"armament truce". At the invitation of the Commission, Shri V. K.
Krishna Menon, Minister Without Portfolio, addressed it on 12 July
1956. He made a powerful plea for the immediate suspension of
experimental explosions of weapons of mass destruction and elaborated the reasons which made a ban on these explosions imperative
and urgent. He stated that no nation has the right to contaminate
the earth, the air and the seas of the world which do not belong to
any particular nation. He pointed out that it was easy to enforce a
ban on these explosions as no elaborate control machinery was
required for this purpose. He further suggested that certain initial
steps in nuclear disarmament, like (a) the prohibition of the further
use of fissionable material for military purposes (b) the prohibition
of the transfer of fissionable material from civilian to military
stocks and (c) dismantling in public a limited number of atomic
or hydrogen bombs and to make available for peaceful purposes the
fissionable material contained in those weapons, should be taken.
He also submitted a number of proposals which were designed to
halt competitive armament.
He further suggested the desirability of reconstituting and
enlarging the Disarmament Commission and its Sub-Committee to
make them more representative of the world both geographically
and politically. Another suggestion made by him was that the work
of the Commission would be facilitated if the two principal nuclear
powers were to enter into direct talks without prejudice to the functions of the Disarmament Commission or its Sub-Committee.
<pg48>
The proposals made by the Government of India and others at
the meetings of the Disarmament Commission in July 1956 were
referred to its Sub-Committee, for further examination and report.
However, the Sub-Committe did not meet during the latter half of
1956.
Subsequently the General Assembly adopted unanimously a
resolution (of which India, United States and the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics were among the sponsors) on 14 February 1957
requesting the Disarmament Commission to reconvene its SubCommittee at an early date. It further recommended that these two

bodies give prompt attention to the various proposals (including
those of India) which have been submitted during the last two and
a half years. The Disarmament Sub-Committee commenced its
meetings in London on 18 March 1957.
In accordance with the General Assembly resolution No. 912(X)
of 3 December 1956, a Working Level Meeting of twelve nations
including India was convened in Washington in February 1956, to
prepare a draft statute of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
The Indian Delegation to this Meeting led by Dr. Homi J. Bhabha,
Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy, participated actively in
its deliberations. The revised draft statute was unanimously
approved by the Working Level Meeting on 18 April 1956: A conference of 82 nations, the largest ever held at the headquarters of
the United Nations, met from 20 September to 26 October 1956, to
consider this draft Statute. The draft Statute with certain modifications was approved as a whole by a unanimous vote. It was signed
by 70 countries (including India) on 26 October 1956. Under this
statute, India is one of the 18 members of the Preparatory Commission which will remain in existence until a Board of Governors
has been selected in accordance with Article VI of the Statute.
India is also a member of the seven-member Advisory Committee which has been authorized by the General Assembly to negotiate an agreement concerning the nature of the relationship that
should exist between the United Nations and the International
Atomic Energy Agency.
India is a member of the Scientific Committee on the Effects of
Atomic Radiation established by the General Assembly under its
resolution No. 918(X) of 3 December 1955.
On the question of the treatment of people of Indian origin in
the Union of South Africa, the General Assembly adopted a resolution urging the parties concerned to enter into negotiations to
facilitate a settlement of the problem. The General Assembly also
<pg49>
appealed to the Government of the Union of South Africa to cooperate to this end. It further invited the parties to report as appropriate, jointly or separately, to the General Assembly at its next
session.
On 30 January 1957, the General Assembly adopted by 56 votes,
to 5, with 12 abstentions, a resolution on the question of race conflict in the Union of South Africa by which it called upon the
Government of the Union of South Africa to re-consider their
position and revise their policies in the light of their obligations
and responsibilities under the United Nations Charter and it also,
invited, the Government of the Union of South Africa to co-operate
in a constructive approach to this question, more particularly by
their presence in the United Nations. It also requested the Secretary-General to communicate with the Government of the Union

of South Africa to carry forward the purposes of this resolution.
On the Korean. question, the General Assembly adopted a resolution which took note of the report of the Government of India on
the problem of the ex-prisoners of the Korean War and expressed
its gratitude to the Governments of India, Argentina and Brazil for
their, co-operation in the settlement of the problem, and its hope
that the remaining ex-prisoners still in India would be re-settled
in the near future through the co-operation of the member-states.
On 26 February 1957 the General Assembly adopted an Indian
draft resolution on the question of Cyprus by , 55 votes in favour
and none against with one abstention. By this resolution, the
General Assembly expressed its earnest desire that a peaceful,
democratic and just solution should be found in accord with the
principles and the purposes of the Charter of the United Nations,
and its hope that negotiations would be resumed and continued to,
this end.
A joint draft resolution on the question of West Irian sponsored
by thirteen countries including India was adopted in the first Committee of the General Assembly by a vote of 39 to 25 with 9 abstentions. It requested the President of the General Assembly to appoint
a three-member Good Offices Commission "with the view to assisting in negotiations between the Governments of Indonesia and the
Netherlands in order that a just and peaceful solution of the question may be achieved, in conformity with the principles and the
pruposes of the Charter". This resolution was, however not adopted
in the Plenary session as it failed to receive the requisite twothirds majority vote.
Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territores.-India continued to
be a member of the Trusteeship Council during the year under
review.
<pg50>
One of the outstanding events of the year was the attainment of the
trusteeship objective of independence for the Trust Territory of
British Togoland. In accordance with the decision taken by the
General Assembly at its tenth session, a plebiscite was held by the
Administering Authority in the Territory under United Nations supervision in May 1956, in which a majority of Togolanders voted in
favour of union with an independent Gold Coast. Subsequently the
Trusteeship Council at its eighteenth session adopted a resolution
sponsored by India which recommended to the General Assembly
that appropriate steps be taken in consultation with the Administering Authority, for the termination of the Trusteeship Agreement for
the Territory to become effective upon the attainment of independence
by the Gold Coast. On 13 December 1956, exactly ten years after the
Trusteeship Agreement for the Trust Territory was concluded, the
General Assembly adopted a resolution, of which India was one of
the sponsors, wherein it expressed its approval of the union of the

Territory with an independent Gold Coast and resolved that on the
date on which the Gold Coast became independent and the union
with British Togoland took place, the Trusteeship Agreement would
cease to be in force, the objective of trusteeship having been attained.
Accordingly the Trust Territory of (British) Togoland has attained
its independence in union with the Gold Coast when the latter
became independent on 6 March 1957.
Administrative and Budgetary.-As a result of the admission of
new members to the United Nations, India's contribution to the
annual budget of the United Nations for the year 1957 has been
reduced from 3.25 per cent to 2.97 per cent. India now pays
$1,106,152. The Indian Delegation to, the General Assembly reiterated
its plea for a more balanced geographical distribution of the staff
in the U.N. Secretariat, so that the Secretariat would represent the
cultural and intellectual qualities of all the member-states. It pointed
out that this was necessary especially for the higher echelons and
policy-making levels of the United Nations Secretariat.
Prime Minister's visit to the United Nations Headquarters.-In
the course of his visit to the United States, the Prime Minister
visited the headquarters of the United Nations on 20 December 1956.
and addressed an informal gathering of delegates to the eleventh
session of the United Nations General Assembly.
Elections to United Nations bodies.-India was elected one of the
Vice-Presidents of the eleventh session of the General Assembly.
Shri T. J. Natarajan, Secretary-General of the Indian Delegation
to the eleventh session of the General Assembly, was re-elected to
the United Nations Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary questions.
<pg51>
India has been re-elected to the Trusteeship Council for a term
of three years beginning from 1 January 1957.
India has been re-elected as a member of the Peace Observation
Commission for 1957 and 1958.
Dr. Radha Binod Pal was re-elected a member of the International
Law Commission for a term of five years beginning from 1 January 1957.
India was also represented on the United Nations Visiting Mission
which visited the Trust Territories in the Pacific during FebruaryMarch 1956.
Economic and Social Council of the United Nations. - After having
served on the Council ever since its inception, except for two brief
spells in 1948 and 1952, India decided in 1956 not to seek re-election;
but continued its membership on 7 out of 8 functional, commissions

of the Council.
In January 1956, a Committee of 10 countries including India was
convened to consider a Convention on the abolition of Slavery, etc.
This was followed by a Conference Of Plenipotentiaries. The Convention was signed by India on 7 September 1956.
Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE).-On
the invitation of the Indian Delegation, the twelfth session of the
Commission was held in India (Bangalore) in February 1956. The
opening session was addressed by the Prime Minister and the Secretary-General of the United Nations. The fifth session of the SubCommittee on-Electric Power and the fourth session of the Railway
Sub-Committee, in addition to meetings of numerous other Committees and Sub-Committees of the Commission, were also held in India
during 1956.
Shri C. V. Narasimhan was appointed as the Executive Secretary
of the Commission in the place of Dr. P.S Lokanathan, who had completed his term.
The thirteenth session of the Economic Commission for Asia and
the Far East and the ninth session of the ECAFE Committee on
Industry and Trade were convened at Bangkok (Thailand) in March
1957. The leader of the Indian Delegation was Shri D. P. Karmarkar.
Minister in the Ministry of Commerce and Consumer Industries.
Food and Agriculture Organization (F.A.O.).-Shri B. R., Sen,
lately Indian Ambassador in Japan, was elected to the post of the
Director-General of the Organisation, previously held by Dr. Cordon
of the United States, and assumed charge in November 1956.
The fifth session of the International Rice Commission and, its ad
hoc Working Group on the Storage and processing of Rice was held
in Calcutta in November 1956.
<pg52>
The IX Congress of the International Society of Sugarcane Technologists took place in New Delhi in January-February 1956.
International Labour Organisation (I.L.O.).-India continued to be
a member of the Governing Body of the International Labour Organization by virtue of her being a country of "chief industrial importance".
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO).- The Ninth Session of the UNESCO General Conference
took place in New Delhi from 5 November to 5 December 1956, in the
Vigyan Bhawan Building Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, Education
Minister, was elected its President. The General Conference elected
Dr. Zakir Hussain, Member of Parliament, as a member of the
UNESCO Executive Board.

India continued to take an active interest in the activities of the
UNESCO, particularly its scholarship and fellowship programmes.
Nationals of many foreign countries visited India under this
programme.
Asian Legal Consultative Committee.-A standing legal committee know as the Asian Legal Consultative Committee consisting of
experts nominated by the Governments of Burma, Ceylon, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Japan and Syria has been established with effect
from 15 November 1956. The Committee is expected to function for
an initial period of five years and its purposes as set out in the statutes are:(i) examination of questions that are under consideration by
the International Law Commission and arrangements for
the views of the Committee to be placed before the said
Commission;
(ii) consideration of legal problems that may be referred to
the Committee by any of the participating countries and
the making of such recommendations to Governments as
may be thought fit;
(iii) exchange of views and information on legal matters of
common concern.
India will be represented on this Committee by Shri M. C.
Setalvad, Attorney-General of India (Member) and Shri Sachin
Choudhury, Bar-at-Law, Calcutta (Alternate Member).
United Nations Day Celebrations.-As in previous years the
United Nations Day was celebrated throughout India in a most befitting manner under the supervision of a non-official United Nations
Day Central Committee established under the patronage of the Ministry of External Affairs in collaboration with the Ministries of Education and Information and Broadcasting.
<pg53>
B. INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES
(i) Colombo Powers Conference.-At the suggestion of the
Prime Minister of Indonesia, a meeting of the Prime Ministers of
the Colombo countries was convened at New Delhi on 12, 13 and 14
November 1956. This was attended by the Prime Ministers of Burma,
Ceylon, Indonesia and India. The Prime Minister of Pakistan could
not participate.
The Prime Ministers considered the situation arising from the
Israeli attack and the military operations by the United Kingdom
and France against Egypt. They also considered the developments
that had occurred in Hungary and the increasingly grave international

situation which threatened world peace.
At the end of their meeting the Prime Ministers issued a joint
statement in which they welcomed the resolutions of the United
Nations General Assembly calling for a cessation of hostilities and
the withdrawal of the forces of Israel, United Kingdom and France
from Egypt, and stressed that the recommendations of the General
Assembly should be implemented in their entirety and that all
foreign forces should be completely withdrawn from Egyptian territory. They said that they felt deeply distressed at the tragic events
1n Hungary, and suggested that the Soviet forces should be withdrawn from Hungary, the Hungarian people being left free to decide
their own future.
The Prime Ministers commended the resolution of the United
Nations for the immediate grant of aid to Hungary for the relief of
distress, pointed out that the need for such relief for Egypt was
equally urgent, and recommended that the countries of the world
should help liberally in this humanitarian cause.
The Prime Ministers hoped that the co-operative spirit of Bandung
and the Five Principles of Peaceful Co-existence would spread and
help in removing fears and tensions in the world.
They said that world peace could only be secured on the basis of
freedom and disarmament and trusted that the policy of military
pacts and of stationing troops in the territory of other countries
would be abandoned. They reaffirmed their adherence to the Bandung principles embodying the Five Principles of Panch Sheel.
(ii) Atomic Energy Conference at Bombay.-At the invention of
the Government of India, representatives of the Governments of
Burma, Ceylon, Indonesia and Egypt attended a four-day conference
held in Bombay in July 1956 to discuss methods of co-operation in
the peaceful uses of atomic energy and the training of technical
personnel.
EGYPT
ISRAEL HUNGARY USA INDIA MOROCCO SUDAN TUNISIA GHANA JAPAN CHINA UNITED
KINGDOM SOUTH AFRICA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC KOREA ARGENTINA BRAZIL CYPRUS
INDONESIA THAILAND BURMA IRAQ SYRIA SRI LANKA PAKISTAN FRANCE
Oct 31, 1956

Appendix I INDIAN MISSIONS ABROAD

Jan 01, 1956
APPENDIX I
INDIAN MISSIONS ABROAD
Embassies
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30

Afghanistan
Argentina
Belgium
Brazil
Burma
Cambodia
Chile
China
Czechoslovakia
Egypt
Ethiopia
France
Germany
Greece
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Mexico
Mongolia
Nepal
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Saudi Arabia
Sweden
Switzerland
Sudan

31
32
33
34

Syria
Thailand
Turkey
Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics
United States of America
Yugoslavia

35
36

(Ambassador resident in Buenos Aires)

(Ambassador resident in Rome)

(Ambassador resident in London)
(Ambassador resident in Washington)
(Ambassador resident in Peking)

(Ambassador resident in Moscow)

(Ambassador resident in Cairo)

High Commissions
1 Australia
2 Canada
<pg55>
<pg56>
3
4
5
6

Ceylon
Ghana
New Zealand
Pakistan

(High Commissioner resident in Canberra)
(Deputy High Commissioners at Dacca and Lahore

and Assistant High Commissioners at Hyderabad

7

United Kingdom

(West
tan).

Pakistan) and Rajshahi (East

Legations
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

Albania
Austria
Bulgaria
Cuba
Denmark
Finland
Hungary
Jordan
Laos
Luxemburg
Lebanon
Libya
Philippines
Rumania
Vatican

Special
1 Bhutan
2 Sikkim
3 United

Minister
Minister
Minister
Minister
Minister
Minister
Minister
Minister

resident
resident
resident
resident
resident
resident
resident
resident

in
in
in
in
in
in
in
in

Rome.
Berne.
Belgrade.
Washington.
Stockholm.
Stockholm.
Moscow.
Baghdad.

Minister resident in Brussels.
Minister resident in Cairo.
Minister resident in Cairo.
Minister resident in Belgrade.
Minister resident in Berne.

Missions

Nations

Commissions
1 Aden
2 British East Africa
3 Central African Federation Commissioner resident in Nairobi.
4 British West Indies
(including British Guiana)
5 Fiji
6 Hongkong
7 Kuala Lumpur
Assistant Commissioner.
8 Malaya
Commissioner resident in Singapore.
9 Mauritius
10 Nigeria
Commissioner resident in Accra.
11 Singapore
Consulates-General and Consulates
1
2
3
4
5

Basra
Belgian Congo
Berlin
Cairo
Copenhagen

Consul General resident in Nairobi.

<pg57>
6
7
8
9

Geneva
Hamburg
Hanoi
Helsinki

Pakis-

10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22

Khorramshahr
Kobe
Lhasa
Medan
Muscat
New York
Ruanda, Urundi
Saigon
San Francisco
Shanghai
Sourabaya
Surinam
Tananarive

Consul General resident in Nairobi.

Consul General resident in Port of Spain.

Vice-Consulates
1
2
3
4

Jalalabad (Afghanistan)
Kandahar (Afghanistan)
Mandalay (Burma)
Zahidan (Iran)

Agencies
1 Gartok
2 Gyantse
3 Yatung
INDIA
AFGHANISTAN ARGENTINA BELGIUM BRAZIL BURMA CAMBODIA CHILE CHINA
NORWAY SLOVAKIA EGYPT ETHIOPIA FRANCE GERMANY GREECE ITALY INDONESIA
IRAN IRAQ IRELAND UNITED KINGDOM JAPAN MEXICO MONGOLIA NEPAL RUSSIA
POLAND SAUDI ARABIA SWEDEN SWITZERLAND SUDAN SYRIA THAILAND TURKEY USA
YUGOSLAVIA AUSTRALIA CANADA GHANA NEW ZEALAND PAKISTAN BANGLADESH
ALBANIA AUSTRIA BULGARIA CUBA DENMARK FINLAND HUNGARY JORDAN LAOS
LEBANON LIBYA PHILIPPINES BHUTAN KENYA FIJI MALAYSIA REPUBLIC OF
SINGAPORE MAURITIUS NIGER NIGERIA CONGO VIETNAM OMAN SPAIN
Jan 01, 1956

Appendix II INDIAN INFORMATION POSTS ABROAD

Jan 01, 1956
APPENDIX II
INDIAN INFORMATION POSTS ABROAD
1
2
3
4
5

Accra
Ankara
Baghdad
Bangkok
Beirut

21
22
23
24
25

Lahore
London
Nairobi
New York (UN)
New York (Consulate General)

6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Belgrade
Berne
Bonn
Brussels
Buenos Aires
Cairo
Colombo
Dacca
Damascus
Djakarta
Gangtok
The Hague
Kabul
Karachi
Kathmandu

26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40

Ottawa
Paris
Peking
Phnom Penh
Rangoon
Rio de Janeiro
Rome
Salisbury
San Francisco
Singapore
Stockholm
Sydney
Tehran
Tokyo
Washington

<pg58>
INDIA
GHANA TURKEY UNITED KINGDOM IRAQ KENYA USA LEBANON CANADA YUGOSLAVIA
FRANCE SWITZERLAND GERMANY BELGIUM CAMBODIA EGYPT ITALY SRI LANKA
SYRIA INDONESIA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE SWEDEN AUSTRALIA AFGHANISTAN IRAN
JAPAN PAKISTAN NEPAL
Jan 01, 1956

Appendix III FOREIGN MISSIONS IN INDIA

Jan 01, 1956
APPENDIX III
FOREIGN MISSIONS IN INDIA
(i) Embassies
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

Afghanistan
Argentina
Belgium
Brazil
Burma
Cambodia
Chile
China
Czechoslovakia
Egypt
Ethiopia
France
Federal Republic of Germany
Indonesia
Iran

18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32

Japan
Mongolia
Mexico
Nepal
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Saudi Arabia
Spain
Sudan
Sweden
Syria
Thailand
Turkey
United States of America

16 Iraq
Rep
ublics
17. Italy

33

Union of Soviet Socialist

34 Yugoslavia

(ii) High Commissions
1 Australia
2 Canada
3 Ceylon
(iii)
1
2
3
4
5
6

4
5

Pakistan
United Kingdom

Legations

Apostolic Internunciature
Austria
Bulgaria
Denmark
Finland
Hungary

7 Jordan
8 Laos
9 Philippines
10 Rumania
11 Switzerland

(iv) Foreign Consular Offices in India
--------------------------------------------------------------------------Country
Location
Status
--------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Afghanistan
Austria
Austria
Austria
Belgium
Belgium
Belgium

Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras

Consulate General
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate
<pg59>
<pg60>

--------------------------------------------------------------------------Country
Location
Status
--------------------------------------------------------------------------8 Bolivia
Gen
eral
9 Brazil
(Va
cant)
10 Brazil
11 Burma
Gen
eral
12 Burma
Vice-Consulat
e
13 China
Gen
eral

Calcutta

Consulate

Bombay

Consulate

Calcutta
Calcutta

Consulate
Consulate

Madras
Bombay

Consulate

14 China
Gen
eral
15 Colombia
(Va
cant)
16 Colombia
17 Costa Rica
Gen
eral
18 Costa Rica
Gen
eral
19 Cuba
Agen
cy
20 Czechoslovakia
Gen
eral
21 Denmark
22 Denmark
23 Denmark
24 Denmark
25 Dominican Republic
Gen
eral
26 Dominican Republic
27 Ecuador
28 Egypt
Gen
eral
29 Egypt
Gen
eral
30 El Salvador
31 Ethiopia
32 Finland
33 Finland
34 France
Gen
eral
35 France
Gen
eral
36 France
Agen
cy
37 France
38 Germany
Gen
eral
39 Germany
Gen
eral
40 Germany
41 Greece
Gen
eral
42 Greece
Gen

Calcutta

Consulate

Calcutta

Consulate

Madras
Bombay

Consulate
Consulate

Madras

Consulate

Calcutta

Consular

Bombay

Consulate

Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Bombay

Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate

Calcutta
Calcutta
Bombay

Consulate
Consulate
Consulate

Calcutta

Consulate

Calcutta
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay

Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate

Calcutta

Consulate

Cochin

Consular

Madras
Bombay

Consulate
Consulate

Calcutta

Consulate

Madras
Bombay

Consulate
Consulate

Calcutta

Consulate

eral
43 Haiti
44 Haiti
45 Indonesia
46 Indonesia
47 Iran
Gen
eral
48 Iran
Gen
eral
49 Iraq
Gen
eral
50 Israel
51 Italy

Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay

Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate

Calcutta

Consulate

Bombay

Consulate

Bombay
Bombay

Consulate
Consulate
<pg61>

--------------------------------------------------------------------------Country
Location
Status
--------------------------------------------------------------------------52
Italy
G
eneral
53
Japan
Ge
neral
54
Japan
Ge
neral
15
Liberia
56
Luxemburg
Vice-Consula
te
57
Monaco
Ge
neral
58
Monaco
(V
acant)
59
Nepal
Ge
neral
60
Netherlands
Ge
neral
61
Netherlands

Calcutta

Consulate

62
63
64
65
66
Ge
neral
67

Netherlands
Netherlands
Nicaragua
Nicaragua
Norway

Cochin
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay

Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate

Norway

Calcutta

Consulate

Bombay

Consulate

Calcutta

Consulate

Calcutta
Bombay

Consulate

New Delhi

Consulate

Bombay

Consulate

Calcutta

Consulate

Bombay

Consulate

Calcutta

Consulate

Ge
neral
68
Norway
Vice-Consula
te
69
Norway
70
Panama
Ge
neral
71
Peru
Ge
neral
72
Spain
73
Spain
Vice-Consula
te
74
Spain
Vice-Consula
te
75
Sweden
Ge
neral
76
Sweden
77
Sweden
78
Switzerland
Ge
neral
79
Switzerland
80
Switzerland
Age
ncy
81
Switzerland
Age
ncy
82
Syria
Ge
neral
83
Thailand
Ge
neral
84
Turkey
Ge
neral
85
Turkey
86
U.S.A.
Ge
neral
87
U.S.A.
Ge
neral
88
U.S.A.
Ge
neral
89
U.S.S.R.
Ge
neral
90
Venezuela
Ge
neral
91
Yugoslavia

Cochin
Madras
Bombay

Consulate
Consulate

Calcutta

Consulate

Bombay
Calcutta

Consulate

Madras
Bombay

Consulate

Calcutta
Madras
Bombay

Consulate
Consulate
Consulate

Calcutta
Cochin

Consulate
Consular

Madras

Consular

Bombay

Consulate

Calcutta

Consulate

Bombay

Consulate

Calcutta
Bombay

Consulate
Consulate

Calcutta

Consulate

Madras

Consulate

Bombay

Consulate

Calcutta

Consulate

Bombay

Consulate

Ge
neral
92
Democratic Republic of
Ge
neral
Vietnam
facto
)
93
Republic of Vietnam
Ge
neral

New Delhi

Consulate
(de

New Delhi

Consulate
(de

facto
)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg62>
(v) New Foreign Consular Missions opened in India during the year 1956-57.
1

Consulate for Ethiopia at Bombay

2

Consulate for Haiti at Bombay

3

Consulate General for Iran at Calcutta

4

Consulate General for the U.S.S.R. at Bombay

5

Consulate General for the Democratic Republic of Vietnam at New Delhi
(de facto).

6

Consulate General for the Republic of Vietnam (de facto).

(vi) Foreign Consular Missions re-opened in India during the year 1956-57.
Consular Agency for Cuba at Calcutta.
(viii) Foreign Consular Missions whose status was changed during the year
1956-57.
The status of the Consulates for Costa Rica, France and Turkey at Bombay
a
nd the
Consulate for Italy at Calcutta was raised to that of a Consulate General.
INDIA
AFGHANISTAN JAPAN ARGENTINA MONGOLIA BELGIUM MEXICO BRAZIL NEPAL
BURMA CAMBODIA NORWAY CHILE POLAND CHINA SAUDI ARABIA SLOVAKIA SPAIN
EGYPT SUDAN ETHIOPIA SWEDEN FRANCE SYRIA GERMANY THAILAND INDONESIA
TURKEY IRAN USA IRAQ ITALY YUGOSLAVIA AUSTRALIA PAKISTAN CANADA
JORDAN AUSTRIA LAOS BULGARIA PHILIPPINES DENMARK FINLAND SWITZERLAND
HUNGARY BOLIVIA COLOMBIA COSTA!!CUBA DOMINICA ECUADOR EL SALVADOR
GREECE HAITI ISRAEL LIBERIA MONACO CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC NICARAGUA
PANAMA PERU VENEZUELA VIETNAM
Jan 01, 1956

Appendix IV TREATIES, CONVENTIONS AND AGREEMENTS

APPENDIX IV
TREATIES, CONVENTIONS AND AGREEMENTS CONCLUDED OR
RENEWED BY INDIA WITH OTHER COUNTRIES DURING 1956-57
1

Trade Agreement with Austria signed on Sep 06, 1956 at Vienna.

2

Trade Agreement with Bulgaria signed on 18 April 1956 at New Delhi.

3

Trade Agreement with Burma signed on 5 September 1956 at New Delhi.

4

Trade Agreement with Chile signed on 16 October 1956 at New Delhi.

5
Delhi
.

Trade Agreement with Czechoslovakia signed on January 1957 at New

6 Trade Agreement with Democratic Republic of Vietnam signed on 22
Septem
ber
1956 at New Delhi.
7 Trade Agreement with Federal Republic of Germany signed on 22 September
1959
at Bonn.
8 Trade Agreement with Finland signed on 21March 1957 at New Delhi.
9 Trade Agreement with German Democratic Republic signed on a October
1956
at
New Delhi.
10 Trade Agreement with Indonesia signed on (a) 17 July 1956 and (b) 9
Feb
ruary
1957 at Djakarta (Exchange of letters).
11 Trade Agreement with Iraq signed on 5 March 1957 at Baghdad.
(Exchange
of
letters).
12 Trade Agreement with Italy signed on 11 February 1957 at New Delhi
(Exc
hange of
letters).
Del
hi

13

Trade Agreement with the Netherlands signed on 3 April 1956 at New

14

Trade Agreement with Norway signed on 4 June 1956 at New Delhi.

15

Trade Agreement with Pakistan signed on 22 January 1957 at New Delhi.

16

Trade Agreement with Rumania signed on 17 January 1957 at New Delhi.

17

Trade Agreement with Sweden signed on 9 May 1956 at New Delhi.

18

Trade Agreement with Yugoslavia signed on 31 March 1956 at New Delhi.

19 Financial Agreement with Burma for grant of a loan signed on 12 March
1957 at
New Delhi.
20
New
Delhi.

Agreement for purchase of Rice from Burma signed on 29 May 1956 at

21 Agreement with Canada for the establishment of an Atomic Research and
Experimental Reactor signed On 28 April 1956 at New Delhi.
22 Agreement with Canada on Assistance to the Kundah Project in Madras
si
gned on
29 December 1956 at New Delhi.
23 Convention with Canada regarding priority of patents of inventions
sign
ed on
30 August 1956 at Ottawa.
24 Agreement With Ceylon for avoidance of double taxation signed on 10
Sep
tember
1956 at Colombo.
25 Agreement with Ceylon regarding air traffic rights at Bombay signed on
1 October
1956 at New Delhi.
26 Instruments of Ratification of the Treaty of Friendship between Egypt
a
nd India
signed on 6 April 1955, exchanged On 3 April 1956 at New Delhi.
27 International Convention regarding Traffic of Motor vehicles, revived
b
etween
the Governments of India and the Federal Republic of Germany extended to
Berlin
(Deutsche Mark West) by an exchange of notes.
28 Treaty of Cession of the French Establishments of Pondicherry,
Karaikal
, Mahe
and Yanam with France on 28 May 1956 at New Delhi.

29 Agreement with Indonesia for cooperation between the air forces Signed
On 28
February 1956 at Djakarta.
<pg63>
<pg64>
30 Cultural Agreement with Iran signed on 1 December 1956 at New Delhi.
31 Cultural Agreement with Japan signed on 29 October 1956 at Tokyo.
Del
hi.

32 Air Transport Agreement with Lebanon signed on 22 March 1957 at New

33 Agreement on certain outstanding financial matters with Pakistan
signed
on 10 May
1956 at New Delhi.
34 Agreement relating to Air Services with Thailand signed on 12 June
1956
at]
Bangkok.
35 Agricultural Commodities Agreement with the United States signed on 29
August
1956 at New Delhi.
INDIA
AUSTRIA USA BULGARIA BURMA CHILE NORWAY SLOVAKIA VIETNAM GERMANY
FINLAND INDONESIA IRAQ ITALY THE NETHERLANDS PAKISTAN SWEDEN YUGOSLAVIA
CANADA SRI LANKA EGYPT FRANCE IRAN JAPAN LEBANON THAILAND
Sep 06, 1956

Appendix V INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS OF WHICH INDIA IS A MEMBER

Jan 01, 1956
APPENDIX V
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS OF WHICH INDIA IS A MEMBER
1

United Nations General Assembly.

2

Interim Committee of the General Assembly.

3

Trusteeship Council.

4

United Nations Commissions and Committees :-

(a)

Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions.

(b)

Advisory Committee on Peaceful uses of Atomic Energy.

(c)

Committee on Contributions.

(d)
Committee to consider the question of convening a General
Conference
to
review the U. N. Charter.
(e)

Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories.
General Committee.

(g)

International Law Commission.

(h)

Peace Observation Commission.

(i)

Scientific Committee on the effects of atomic radiation.'

(j)
(k)

United Nations Administrative Tribunal.
United Nations Salary Review Committee.

5 Functional Commissions of the Economic and Social Council
(a)
Commission on Human Rights.
(b)
Commission on International Commodity Trade.
(c)
Commission on Narcotic Drugs.
(d)
Population Commission.
(e)
Social Commission.
(f)
Statistical Commission.
(g)
Transport and Communications Commission.
6 United Nations Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East (E.
F.E.)
,
its committees and sub-committees.

C. A.

7 Specialised Agencies of the United Nations

(U.
N.

(a)

Food and Agriculture Organization (F.A.O.)

(b)

General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (G.A.T.T.)

(c)

International Bank for Re-construction and Development (I.B.R.D.)

(d)

International Civil Aviation Organisation (I.C.A.O.)

(e)

International Labour Organization (I.L.O.)

(f)

International Monetary Fund (I.M.F.)

(g)

international Tele-Communication Union (I.T.U.)

(h)

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization

(i)

E.S.C.O.)
Universal Postal Union (U.P.U.)

8

(j)

World Health Organization (W.H.O.)

(k)

World Meteorological Organization (W.M.O.)

International Association for Bridges and Structural Engineering, Zurich.
<pg65>
<pg66>

9

International Astrnomical Union, Brussels.

10

International Cargo Handling Co-ordination Association, London.

11

International commission on Irrigation and Drainage, Paris.

12

International Commission on Large Dams, Paris.

13

International Committee of the Red Cross, Geneva.

14

International Committee of Military Medicine and Pharmacy, Brussels.

15

International Conference of Social Works, Paris.

16

International Cotton Advisory Committee, Washington.

17

International Council of Archives, Paris.

18 International Council of Building Research Studies and Documentation,
Paris
.
19

International Council of Scientific Unions, London.

20

International Criminal Police Commission, Paris.

21

International Custom Tariffs Bureau, Brussels.

22

International Electro--Technical Commission, Geneva.

23

International Federation for Documentation, The Hague.

24

International Federation for Housing and Town Planning, The Hague.

25

International Federation of University Women, London.

26

International Hydrographic Bureau, Monte Carlo.

27

International Hospital Federation, London.

28 International Institute of Administrative Sciences, Brussels.
29 International Institute of Scientific Travel Research of the International
Union of
Official Travel Organizations, Geneva.
30

International Institute for the Unification of Private Law, Rome.

31

International Materials Conference, Washington.

32

International Organization of Legal Meteorology, Paris.

33

International Organisation for Standardization, Geneva.

34

International Railway Congress Association, Brussels.

35

International Scientific Radio Union, Brussels.

36

International Tea Committee, London.

37

International Tin Study Group, The Hague.

38

International Union of Aviation Insurers, London.

39

International Union of Biological Sciences, Paris.

40

International Union of Crystallography, Cambridge.

41

International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics, Paris.

42

International Union of Geography, New York.

43

International Union of History of Sciences, Paris.

44

International Union of Official Travel Organizations, Geneva.

45

International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry, Paris.

46

International Union of Pure and Applied Physics, Paris.

47

International Union for the Protection of Nature, Brussels.

48
49

International Union of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics, Delft, Netherlands.
Permanent International Association of Navigation Congress, Brussels.

50

Permanent International Association of Road Congress, Paris.

51

Union International Contre le Cancer, Paris.

52

Would Union of Free Thinkers, Lourain Belgium

GIPND-LS-28 E. A. 30-5-57-2,500

INDIA
USA SWITZERLAND BELGIUM CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC UNITED KINGDOM FRANCE
LATVIA ITALY
Jan 01, 1956


