1968-69

Contents
REPORT
1968-69
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
NEW DELHI
CHAPTER
I.
II.
III.
IV.
V.
VI.
VII.
VIII.
IX.
X.
XI.
XII
XIII.

CONTENTS

India's Neighbours.
States in Special Treaty Relations with India
South-East Asia
East Asia
West Asia and North Africa
Africa, South of the Sahara
Eastern and Western Europe
The Americas
United Nations and International Conferences
External Publicity
Technical and Economic Co-operation
Passport and Consular Services
Organisation and Administration

PAGES
1-14
15-17
18-26
27-30
31-33
34-36
37-44
45-50
51-59
60-65
66-70
71-77
78-83

APPENDICES
NUMBER
I.
II.

International Conferences, Congresses, Seminars etc.,
in which India participated in 1968-69
International Organizations of which India was a
member in 1968-69

PAGES
84-93
94-97

III.

Foreign Diplomatic Missions in India

IV.

Foreign Consular Offices in India

100-104

V.

Distinguished Visitors from abroad

105-107

VI.

Visits of Indian Dignitaries to foreign countries and
other Deputations/Delegations sponsored by the
Ministry of External Affairs.

108-112

Indian Missions/Posts abroad

113-122

VII.

VIII. Treaties, Conventions and Agreements concluded or
renewed by India with other countries during 1968-

98-99

123-125

69
IX.

Statement showing statistical data regarding Consular
Activities of Indian Missions/Posts Abroad
(ii)

INDIA

Apr 28, 1967

India's Neighbours
CHAPTER I
INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS
AFGHANISTAN
At the invitation of His Majesty the King of Afghanistan,
the President of India made a brief halt at Kabul on Jul 18, 1968,
while returning to Delhi, after his State visit to the Soviet
Union.
In June 1968, Dr. K. L. Rao, Minister for Irrigation and
Power, paid an official visit to Afghanistan. In August 1968,
the then Minister of Commerce, Shri Dinesh Singh, went to
Afghanistan at the invitation of the Afghan Minister of Commerce.
An Indian Cultural Delegation consisting of a hockey team,
veil-known musicians and a Kathak dancer took part in the
annual Jashan celebrations by Afghanistan in August 1968.
BURMA
Relations between India and Burma during the year were
marked by cordiality and cooperation.
A significant development was the progress registered with
regard to the demarcation of the India-Burma boundary.
The Joint India-Burma Boundary Commission constituted
pursuant to the India-Burma Boundary Agreement of 10 March,
1967, held its first session in India (New Delhi and Dehra Dun)
from 6 to 10 April, 1968. The Commission formulated
certain tentative plans for actual demarcation work during the

126

current field season extending from November 1968 to April
1969. Preparatory work was subsequently undertaken by both
<pg1>
<pg2>
sides. In September 1968, meetings of the Survey officials
of the two countries were held in Rangoon to discuss further
details and settle various technical questions. The second round
of meetings of the Joint Boundary Commission was held in
Rangoon between 20 and 26 October, 1968. During this second
round of talks, various details were settled between the two
sides concerning the physical demarcation of about 240 miles,
of the India-Burma boundary commencing from the southern
end, which was to be taken up for demarcation during the.
current season.
The survey parties of the two sides commenced field work
in the last week of November, 1968. The actual work on the
physical demarcation of the boundary commenced on 1 December, 1968. Considering the many difficulties faced, the work is,
proceeding at a rapid pace.
On her way back from Kuala Lumpur to Calcutta, thePrime Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi, stopped over in
Rangoon on 1 June, 1968 and was accorded a warn reception
at the airport.
The Minister of Foreign Affairs and National Planning, U
Thi Han, arrived in India on 6 August, 1968 to attend
the CASTASIA Conference. He stayed in Delhi for about10 days. During the course of his stay he met the PrimeMinister as well as other Ministers and Government officials.
and made a short tour of the country,
An eight-member Purchase Study Mission visited India,
from 21 September to 10 October, 1968, to negotiate arrangements for credit and purchase under the Industrial DevelopmentBank of India Refining Scheme on a Government to Government basis. During the cource of their stay in India the
Burmese Delegation also went on a twelve-day tour of
important places of industrial and commercial interest.
<pg3>
CEYLON
In response to an invitation from the Prime Minister of
India, the Ceylon Prime Minister, Mr. Dudley Senanayake,
visited India from 27 November to 4 December, 1968.
The two Prime Ministers renewed and extended the con-

tacts established during the visit of the Prime Minister of India
to Ceylon last year. They reviewed the progress made in matters of mutual interest and exchanged, in particular, views on
recent developments in the Asian region. Among the subjects
discussed were bilateral relations between the two countries
including the progress made in the implementation of the IndoCeylon Agreement of 1964 and matters of common interest
in the Palk Bay and the Gulf of Mannar. The Ceylon Prime
Minister announced that his Government had decided to exempt
the repatriates under the 1964 Indo-Ceylon Agreement from
the purview of the Foreign Exchange Entitlement Certificate
Scheme, which would have acted as a dis-incentive to repatriates
coming away to India. The two Prime Ministers expressed
their common resolve to consider bilateral issues in a spirit of
friendly co-operation. They also expressed their satisfaction
over the increased collaboration between the two countries in
trade, agriculture, the tea industry and technical co-operation
in industrial development.
In their general survey of the international situation, the
Prime Ministers reiterated their conviction in the principles of
non-alignment and were of the view that the proposed Third
Conference of Non-aligned States, held at an appropriate time
with adequate preparation would contribute to the maintenance
of world peace and stability. The Prime Ministers reiterated their
belief in the principles embodied in the Charter of the United
Nations and also emphasized the importance of complete and
universal disarmament. They, agreed that all international problems should be settled by the countries concerned through
peaceful negotations and in this connection, expressed the hope
that the Colombo Proposals and the Tashkent Declaration would
<pg4>
be implemented in principle and in practice. On the economic
side, the two Prime Ministers expressed their regret that the
last UNCTAD Conference had failed to arrive at practical
measures to assist the developing countries in promoting their
exports. The co-operation of the developed countries was
needed to resolve the problems.
The Union Minister for Industrial Development visited
Ceylon from 12 to 16 October, in connection with the
1400th Anniversary Celebrations of the Revelation of the Holy
Quran. During his visit, he also had discussions with the Ceylon
Minister of Industries on industrial collaboration between the
two countries. The discussions covered, in particular, the scope
for joint ventures between the two countries. The progress in
regard to the establishment of such ventures in the automobile,
machine tools and construction machinery industries in respect
of which there had been discussions earlier, was reviewed. It
was decided that, in regard to these and other projects, experts
from both countries should meet periodically with a view, to

facilitating expeditious implementation of projects. Among the
other subjects discussed during Shri Ahmed's visit to Ceylon
were technical assistance, consultancy services, provision of
training facilities particularly in the fields of fertilizer and textile
technology. He also discussed the question of supply and utilization of industrial raw materials available in either country for
manufacturing products, with mutual assistance in equipment
and technology, for internal consumption as well as export to
third countries.
The Ceylon Government sent out a batch of 'Govirajas'
(farmers with the highest yields in their districts) to India-in
December to study. agricultural methods. They also made a
pilgrimage to Sanchi.
NEPAL
Indo-Nepal relations continued to be friendly. and cordial
throughout the year under review. At the invitation of His
<pg5>
Majesty King Mahendra of Nepal, President Dr. Zakir Husain
paid a State visit to Nepal from 12 to 16 October, 1968.
The King described the visit as a symbol of growing traditional
friendship between Nepal and India and. expressed his thanks
for the keen interest shown by the Government of India in
extending economic and technical assistance and co-operation to
Nepal in different fields of national development. His Majesty
King Mahendra of Nepal, accompanied by the Queen, made
a brief visit to Delhi from 1 to 3 November, 1968. On his
may back to Nepal from abroad the King paid private visits
to Bombay and Calcutta between 24 November and 4 December. The Crown Prince of Nepal, His Royal Highness Birendra
Bir Bikram Shah Deva, visited India as the guest of Government of India from 27 September to 6 October, 1968. During this visit the Crown Prince undertook a tour of Kashmir
and some other parts of India. Among other prominent visitors from Nepal were Shri Kirtinidhi Vista, Deputy Prime
Minister of Nepal, Shri Gehendra Bahadur Rajbhandary, the
Foreign and Education Minister of Nepal, Shri Bhupendra Lal
Nepali, a member of the Rashtriya Panchayat and leading a
delegation of the Nepalese Labour Organization, the AuditorGeneral of Nepal, and the Director, Radio Nepal.
A delegation from India led by Shri B. R. Bhagat visited
Kathmandu from 15 to 19 November, 1968 and held talks
on matters of mutual interest. particularly on trade and industrial co-operation between the two countries.
The Inter-Governmental Joint Committee of the representatives of. His Majesty's Government of Nepal and the Government of India, which was constituted under the "Memorandum

of Understanding on matters arising out of the Treaty of Trade
and Transit (1960)" signed in Kathmandu on 27 December,
1966, held its second meeting in Kathmandu from 10 to 15
September.
The Minister of Tourism and Civil Aviation, Dr. Karan
Singh, visited Nepal from 25 to 27 February, 1968 and discussed
<pg6>
with officials of His Hajesty's Government of Nepal the
possibility of further co-operation in the fields of civil aviation.
and tourism. The Minister for Works, Housing and Supply,
Shri Jagannath Rao and the Comptroller and Auditor General
of India, Shri S. Ranganathan, visited Nepal at the invitation ofHis Majesty's Government of Nepal.
Indo-Nepalese co-operation in the field of economic development continued to grow in size and scope. The cooperation
which started in 1951 with the construction of an airstrip at
Gaucher airport, Kathmandu, now covers a wide range of
programmes in the fields of roads and air communication, irrigation and power, telecommunication, water supply, horticulture,
rural reconstruction, education, health, forestry, geological and
mineral surveys.
During 1968-69, a sum of Rs.12 crores was allocated for
co-operation programmes between the two countries. The following projects constructed under the Indo-Nepalese pro
gramme of economic co-operation were inaugurated/handed overto the Government of Nepal:
(i) Hangar at Tribhuvan Airport.
(ii) Bagmati Bridge.
(iii) Tubular structures (University).
(iv) Foreign Post Office building.
(v) Biratnagar Airport.
(vi) Pokhara Hydel Project-first phase.
(vii) Calcutta-Kathmandu Teleprinter Link
Some of the important Agreements entered into between the
Government of India and His Majesty's Government of Nepal
during 1968 related to the establishment of a 5-K.W radio telephone link between New Delhi and Kathmandu, horticulturedevelopment and expansion of the Tribhuvan University. The
<pg7>
major projects now in progress, under the Indo-Nepalese
economic co-operation programme, are the East-West Highway,
Sonauli-Pokhara Road, Trunk Telephone Line between Kathmandu and Raxaul, Chatra Canals and the Trisuli Hydel
Project.

The progress and implementation of the Indo-Nepalese programme of economic co-operation were reviewed in the talks
held between the representatives of the two Governments in
the last week of December 1968. The Joint Communique issued at the end of the talks expressed full satisfaction with the
general progress of these programmes.
PAKISTAN
During the year India continued her efforts to start a dialogue with Pakistan on the outstanding issues so as to restore
the status quo prior to August 1965, as a first step in the improvement of relations between the two countries. The response from Pakistan to all these efforts was disappointing.
India took the initiative on several occasions for restoring
trade and communications, opening of all border check-posts,
return of seized properties, ensuring freedom of movement and
exchange of visits and resuming civil air flights between the two,
countries,. No progress could be made on any of these because
of lack of adequate response from Pakistan.
On 15 August, 1968 the Prime Minister appealed to
Pakistan to sign a no-war pact with India. Again on 1
January, 1969 the Prime Minister suggested at a Press conference that along with a no-war pact some king of a bilateral
machinery could be evolved to normalize Indo-Pak relations
and settle all outstanding differences. This suggestion was further explained to the Pakistan High Commission in India on,
10 January, 1969. India is still awaiting a positive response
from Pakistan to this suggestion.
The Kutch Tribunal gave its award on 19 February, 1968
at Geneva. The award determined the boundry, as it stood
<pg8>
in 1947 between the former State of Kutch and the erstwhile
province of Sind. The representatives of India and Pakistan
met in New Delhi early in March 1968 to draw up the
arrangements to implement the Kutch Tribunal's Award. This
was followed by another meeting of the representatives of the
two countries in Islamabad in September 1968. At this meeting
the programme of work from the ensuing field season was
discussed. It was agreed that both representatives would
endeavour to complete the entire demarcation work by the end
of May 1969.
The demarcation of the West Bengal-East Pakistan boundary did not make much progress because the Pakistan Survey
authorities had been insisting that the division of Berubari, in
accordance with the Nehru-Noon Agreement, must also be
taken up at the same time. An appeal against the judgement
of the Calcutta High Court in this matter is pending before

the Supreme Court.
The Lushai Hills district boundary with East Pakistan has
not yet been taken up for demarcation. The major portion of
the boundary between Assam and East Pakistan has been demarcated by erection of boundary pillars. Concerning the
Lathitalla-Dumabari villages the Pakistan Government have
agreed to the resumption of discussions between the SurveyorsGeneral of India and Pakistan.
The demarcation of the Tripura-East Pakistan boundary is
proceeding. There has been no progress in the settlement of
the territorial disputes in this sector.
In accordance with the provisions of Indus Waters Treaty,
1960 three meetings between Indus Waters Commissioners for
India and Pakistan were held during the period 1 April, 1968
to 31 December, 1968.
Pakistan has been complaining that the Farakka Barrage,
constructed to save the port of Calcutta from being choked by
<pg9>
rising silt, would cause great harm to East Pakistan. She
contested India's overwhelming rights over the Ganga Waters
with the object of interfering with the successful completion
of the Farakka Barrage. The facts are that the offshoot of the
Ganga flows through Pakistan for only 88 miles as against a
flow of about 1300 miles in India and taken along with its
tributaries in India, a flow of over 4000 miles. About two
hundred million people in India depend on the Ganga basin.
The contribution of water to the Ganga by India is overwhelmingly superior to that of Pakistan. Also whereas India has no
alternate resources for irrigation of this area, East Pakistan,
in addition to a more abundant rainfall, has the mighty Brahmaputra which has enough water all through the year. Considering the technical facts regarding the actual diversion of the
Ganga water at Farakka in comparison with its flow, there
cannot be any question of harm being caused to East Pakistan.
India suggested a meeting at the technical level to determine
the reasonable requirement of Pakistan and the actual flow at
the border taking into account gains below Farakka which
will assist in the solution of this question. After an interval of
6 years, the water experts of India and Pakistan held their
5th meeting in New Delhi during May 1968. The purpose of
this meeting was to exchange the relevant technical data.
In December 1968, a further meeting was held between
the Governments of India and Pakistan at the level of Secretaries, in order to review the progress already made in respect
of the technical discussions and to establish procedures for the

intensification and speeding up of technical level talks on the
question of the Eastern Rivers. It was agreed by the two
sides that the next technical meeting at the level of Secretaries
would be held in Islamabad during March 1969.
During the year there was no evidence of Pakistan giving
up its hostile activities of interfering and inciting trouble in the
Indian State of Jammu and Kashmir. The specious argument of
self-determination being involved in Kashmir was continued.
<pg10>
Attempts to secure foreign support for its claim were continued
although, excepting the Peoples Republic of China, this was
not forthcoming from any other country. On the contrary more
countries declared, themselves in favour of a bilateral and peaceful solution of all Indo-Pakistani problems. The Foreign
Minister of Pakistan referred to Kashmir in his statement in the
UN in October 1968. The Minister of State for External
Affairs put forward India's viewpoint before the UN General
Assembly in exercise of his right of reply. On behalf of India
it was stated :
(i) Pakistan had twice attempted to occupy by force of
arms the Indian State of Jammu and Kashmir and
twice Pakistan's designs had been thwarted by India
with the active co-operation and assistance of the
people of Jammu and Kashmir. The people of the
State had manifested their unalterable determination
to remain with India.
(ii) The State of Jammu and Kashmir was an integral
part of India by due constitutional process and by the
will of the people and will remain so. We cannot
agree to any plea or demand which would question
our sovereignty.
(iii) The UNCIP Resolutions of 1948-49 were moribund
and obsolete. They could not be implemented because Pakistan chose not to fulfil her obligations in
accordance with those resolutions, primarily that of
withdrawing her forces.
(iv) Pakistan, while in illegal occupation of a part of the
State, continues to incite people and thus create an
explosive situation. If an explosive situation was
created, the entire responsibility for it would lie at
the door of Pakistan.
The Government of India lodged a protest with the Governments of Pakistan and China against an agreement signed by
them in October 1967 on the opening of an overland trade

<pg11>
route between Gilgit in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir and Sinkiang
in China, Speaking in the Rajya Sabha on 13 May, 1968, the
Minister of State for External Affairs stated :
"The agreement is in line with the collusive, Sino-Pak
postures directed against India. I need hardly add
that Government are fully aware of the threat to our
security posed by this road and everything possible
has been done to safeguard our defence and security."
Pakistan's efforts to consolidate Chinese support in the political
and military fields also continued during the year.
In violation of Article 3 of the Tashkent Declaration, interference by the Pakistan Government in the internal affairs of
India continued during the year.
Pakistan continued to actively assist, train and arm Naga
and Miza rebels in its territory; documentary evidence to this
was captured from Naga and Mizo rebels and this revealed that arms, funds, training as well as travel facilities to
third countries and opportunities for contacting the latter were
provided to Nagas and Mizos by Pakistan. Infiltration from
East Pakistan into India also continued. on a small scale;
effective security measures taken by the Government of India
have considerably reduced the size of this problem.
Pakistan also continued its propaganda against India with
the evident motive of creating disaffection among the various
communities of India, particularly among the Muslims and the
Sikhs.
The campaign on which Pakistan embarked immediately
after the 1965 conflict to reinforce and strengthen its military
capacity continued at a brisk pace during the year under review.
Pakistan persisted in her effort to get surplus NATO weapons
of US origin from the various European countries directly or
indirectly. For this purpose, approaches were made to Italy,
Belgium and Turkey for the supply of M-47 tanks. India
<pg12>
represented strongly to the USA and the NATO countries
concerned. None of these deals is reported to have gone through.
However, as mentioned above, Pakistan's military collaboration
with China continued during the year.
Pakistan also obtained a commitment from the Soviet Union
for the supply of arms. The Prime Minister informed Parliament
in this context that "Pakistan had no reasonable justification to
seek the augmentation of its armed strength ....... Pakistan had

received, by way of gifts, vast quantities of arms and equipment
between the years 1954-65 as member of military alliances,
and as we had apprehended, Pakistan had eventually used these
against us." The Prime Minister also stated that Pakistan does,
not face any external threat and had already committed
aggression against us on three occasions and that any increase
in strength would have the effect of encouraging Pakistan in its,
intransigence and aggressive attitude towards India.
The Government of India have been reminding the Government of Pakistan that all Indian assets and properties seized by
the Government of Pakistan since the 1965 conflict are in the
nature of a continuing trust and arty attempt on the part of
Pakistan to dispose of them unilaterally would be a flagrant
violation of the Tashkent Declaration and will not be.
recognized.
During the period from 1 April to 31 December, 1968,
12 pilgrim parties comprising 659 persons visited India from
Pakistan. During the same period, 4 pilgrim parties comprising.
3,818 individuals visited Pakistan from India.
It is India's hope, that Pakistan will soon revert to the path,
of peaceful and good neighbourly relations with India, normalise
relations through a step by step approach and agree to adopt
a co-operative and bilateral approach in all matters affecting the
mutual interests of the two countries.
PEOPLE's REPUBLIC OF CHINA
Our relations with China registered no significant improvement during the year. The Government of India have stated
<pg13>
on several occasions that they are willing to talk with China on
a basis consistent with India's territorial integrity, sovereignty
and national honour. The Government of the People's Republic
of China have, however, shown no constructive inclination to
seek improvement in the relations between the two countries.
The Chinese military build-up across the northern borders
of India remains undiminished. There was, however, no armed
clash during 1968.
The Chinese authorities continued to disregard the principles
of peaceful co--existence and norms of international behaviour.
Radio Peking and other Chinese propaganda media persist in
interfering in India's internal and external affairs. Chinese official
agencies have repeatedly condemned the political institutions
of India. What is more, they continue to interfere in India's
internal affairs. The Government of India have evidence of
Chinese Government's complicity in stirring, and abetting some
misguided Naga elements and giving them military training and

arms.
While the Government of India have made it abundantly
clear that the door for peaceful negotiations with China remains
open if they respect the principles of peaceful co-existence,
we are determined to guard India's territorial integrity and
sovereignty and will not tolerate interference in India's internal
affairs. We shall remain patient but firm in the hope that the
Chinese Government will one day revert to the path of reason,
good neighbourliness and peaceful co-existence when it may be
possible to improve our relations with that country.
THE DALAI LAMA AND TIBETAN REFUGEES
The work relating to Tibetan refugees of the Tibetan Refugee
Unit of the Ministry of External Affairs was split up with effect
from 23 September, 1968 with the work pertaining to "Relief
and Rehabilitation of the Tibetan Refugees" being transferred
to the Department of Rehabilitation of the Ministry of Labour,
27 M of E.A.-2.
<pg14>
Employment and Rehabilitation. The Ministry of External
Affairs continues to handle work connected with His Holiness
the Dalai Lama.
His Holiness the Dalai Lama with his party of 10 persons
muted Bombay to attend the All India Buddhist Conference
held there on 23 and 24 November, 1968. On his way back
to Dharamsala, His Holiness the Dalai Lama visited Delhi and
stayed at Delhi as a guest of the Government of India from
26 to 28 November, 1968.
INDIA
AFGHANISTAN LATVIA USA BURMA MALAYSIA UZBEKISTAN SRI LANKA RUSSIA NEPAL
PAKISTAN MALI SWITZERLAND FRANCE CHINA ITALY BELGIUM TURKEY
Jul 18, 1968

States in Special Treaty Relations with India Bhutan
CHAPTER II
STATES IN SPECIAL TREATY RELATIONS WITH
INDIA BHUTAN

At the invitation of His Majesty the King of Bhutan, the
Prime Minister of India visited Bhutan from May 03, 1968 - 5 May, 1968.
The Prime Minister stressed the abiding interest India took in
the welfare of the people of Bhutan and said that India wanted
Bhutan to develop her own system based on her rich culture
and heritage. His Majesty the Druk Gyalpo welcoming her,
described the bonds of friendship between India and Bhutan as
being such "that nothing can ever shake or destroy". During
this visit the Prime Minister inaugurated the 127 mile Phuntsholing-Thimpu Highway, a major Indo-Bhutanese co-operation project, which links Thimpu, the capital of Bhutan, with
Phuntsholing, Bhutan's principal trade and commercial centre
near the Indo-Bhutan border. She also laid the foundation
stone of "Bharat Bhavan" (India House) which will accommodate the office and residence of the Special Officer of India
in Bhutan.
His Royal Highness Namgyal Wangchuk, Tengye Lonpo,
Bhutan's Minister for Trade, Commerce, Industry and Forests,
visited New Delhi from 8-24 August, to dscuss various proposals connected with the setting up of industries in Bhutan.
A delegation of the Bhutanese National Assembly
(Tsongdu) paid a goodwill visit to India from 24 to 29 January,
1969 and witnessed the Republic Day parade in the capital.
A Bhutanese cultural troupe also visited New Delhi in
January 1969 and took part in the Folk Dance Festival.
A Bhutanese delegation led by Dasho Dawa Tsering
Secretary-General, Development Wing, Government, of Bhutan
visited Delhi, in November 1968, for the annual review of the
<pg15>
<pg16>
Indian aid programme in Bhutan. The delegation expressed
satisfaction with the progress of the various projects.
Tsilon Chogyal, Bhutan's Finance Minister, visited NewDelhi in January 1969 to discuss Bhutan's request for budgetary assistance particularly in the context of the damage caused
by the October 1968 floods. On behalf of the Government of
India he was generally assured of all possible assistance.
With the agreement of the Government of Bhutan, it has
been decided to compile a gazetter of Bhutan containing basic
information about the country and its people. A joint committee of Bhutanese and Indian officials under the chairmanship,
of the Minister of State for Education, was formed to advise on
the compilation.

With India's sponsorship and support, Bhutan has already
secured the requisite number of votes for admission to the
Universal Postal Union. The formal announcement regarding
its admission is expected to be made soon.
A weekly air service between Hashimara in India and Paro
in Bhutan started functioning from 26 December, 1968. The
service, is operated by M/s. Jamair Company Private Limited,
Calcutta.
An Indian dance troupe, led by Shrimati Amala Shankar,
visited Bhutan from 21-26 March, 1968 and gave performances at Phuntsholing, Honka and Thimpu.
SIKKIM
The Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi visited Sikkim.
from 5-6 May, 1968. The Prime Minister paid tributes to the
leadership of the Chogyal and the Gyalmo and said that IndoSikkimese friendship was based on a spirit of understanding,
co-operation and mutual benefit. In his introductory speech,
the Chogyal hailed the "indissoluble bonds of friendship and
<pg17>
understanding" between Sikkim and India and referred to the
"generous assistance and sympathy received from India".
At the invitation of the Government of India, the Chogyal
and the Gyalmo, of Sikkim visited Delhi in September-October
1968. They also paid visits to Srinagar and Leh. The Chogyal
paid another visit to Delhi in December. He discussed, inter
alia, Sikkim's request for Indian assistance for speedy repair of
the damage caused by the October 1968 floods in Sikkim. The
Chogyal was assured of all possible assistance in this regard.
The State Bank of Sikkim, Gangtok, established in collaboration with the United Commercial Bank Limited of India,
was inaugurated on 9 September, 1968.
During the year, 24 Sikkimese students were granted Government of India scholarships for studies in schools and educational institutions in India.
A cultural troupe from the National School of Drama, New
Delhi, visited Gangtok in August 1968, in connection with
the Indian Independence Day celebrations, and gave many
performances.
BHUTAN
INDIA UNITED KINGDOM USA

May 03, 1968

South-East Asia
CHAPTER III
SOUTH-EAST ASIA
INDONESIA
India's relations with Indonesia continued to develop satisfactorily during 1968. An Indian Trade Delegation visited
Indonesia in January 1968 for talks on co-operation between
the two countries with regard to marketing of pepper. Indonesia has been invited to send a delegation to India to continue
discussions on the subject.
Under me command of Rear Admiral Kohli, Flag Officer
Commanding the Indian Fleet, three ships of the Indian Navy
paid a three-day visit, in March to the Indonesian Naval base at
Surabaya.
An Air Agreement was signed between India and Indonesia
in September 1968. The Minister of Tourism and Civil Aviation
signed the agreement on behalf of India. In terms of this
Agreement, the services of Air-India through Djakarta and those
of Garuda Indonesian Airways through Bombay, which were
hitherto operated on the basis of temporary authorizations issued
by the respective Governments, were placed on a permanent
footing.
The Shipping Corporation of India inaugurated its WestCoast India-Australia services via Djakarta in October.
The Indonesian Foreign Minister, Mr. Adam Malik, with a
party of four officers visited India between Feb 20, 1969 24 February,
1969. During his stay in India, he paid a visit to the Bhakra
Nangal Dam. The Joint Communique signed by the Indian and
<pg18>
<pg19>
the Indonesian Foreign Ministers reflected the desire of the two
countries for increased co-operation in the future. Steps to
pursue this further are under consideration.

MALAYSIA
Relations, between Malaysia and India grew closer and more
friendly during 1968.
The Indian Technical Delegation which visited Malaysia in
January, concluded an Agreement with MARA (Majlis Amanah
Ra'ayat) trust for the advancement of the sons of the soil.
Under this Agreement, India agreed to provide training to a
substantial number of Malaysians in various trades and professions, and to send experts to advise MARA in the matter of
vocational training, setting up of medical colleges and other
programmes. Substance was given to this Agreement with the
arrival in India of 109 MARA trainees.
The Indian Prime Minister's visit to Malaysia in April-May
was one, of the most successful visits of a foreign dignitary to
that country. The Joint Communique issued by the Prime
Ministers of India and Malaysia testified to the growing cordial
relations and economic co-operation between the two countries.
A Malaysian delegation came to India in July with proposals
for, increased co-operation in the economic, trading and technological spheres. India made an offer of technical assistance in the
form of training facilities to Malaysians as well as secondment
of experts to Malaysia.
Tunku Abdul Rahman, Prime Minister of Malaysia paid a
brief visit to Delhi in July 1968.
An Indian Industrialists' Delegation spent a week in Kuala
Lumpur in October-November 1968. The aim of this Delegation
was to explore avenues for collaboration in industry and trade.
The Delegation received good publicity.
<pg20>
The Malaysian Labour Minister, Mr. Manickavasagam, was
in New Delhi in, January 1969, to represent Malaysia at the
Asian Labour Ministers' Conference.
SINGAPORE
India and Singapore signed an Air Agreement in January.
The Indian Prime Minister's visit to Singapore in April-May
was a resounding success and the Joint Communique issued by
the two Prime Ministers at the end of the visit reflected the need
for closer co-operation between the two countries.
An Indian Education Trust was established in Singapore with
the aim of setting up a fund of one million dollars to provide
scholarships and other forms of financial assistance to needy
children.

The Indian Naval Ship, INS "MYSORE" escorted by INS
"RAJPUT" and "RANJIT" paid a formal goodwill visit to
Singapore in March 1968.
The late Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu, Shri Annadurai,
passed through Singapore in May 1968 on his return from his
tour of United States and Japan.
The Congress President, Shri S. Nijalingappa, visited
Singapore in August.
Three Singapore Foreign Service probationers completed a
ten-week training course, in October 1968, at the Ministry of
External Affairs and the Indian School of International Studies.
The Singapore Government has asked for similar facilities for
their 1969 batch of probationers also.
A seven-member Delegation, sponsored by the Gandhi
Smarak Nidhi, New Delhi, visited Singapore in October 1968.
The Prime Minister, Mr. Lee Kuan Yew, agreed to be the
patron of the Gandhi Centenary Celebrations Committee.
<pg21>
A team of three experts from Hindustan Steel visited Singapore in October to carry out a pre-investment feasibility survey
for the setting up of a steel mill in Singapore. The survey was
conducted under the auspices of the ECAFE.
Shri C. P. Srivastava, Chairman and Managing Director of
the Shipping Corporation of India, visited Singapore in. early
November. Shri Srivastava stated at a Press conference that
there was a possibility of the Shipping Corporation of India using
the dry docking and repairing facilities available in Singapore
for some of its bigger vessels until such time as India developed
such facilities of her own.
There was a small increase in the number of Indians leaving.
Singapore for India for permanent settlement. Retrenchment
at the British base, difficulties regarding work permits, unemployment and a probable sense of insecurity about their future, could
be ascribed as the reasons for this increasing outflow. The
Singapore Government have, however, assured us that there will
be no discrimination against people of Indian origin.
H.E. Mr. S. Rajaratnam, Singapore Foreign and Labour
Minister, was in India for three days in January 1969 to attend
the Asian Labour Ministers' Conference.
Three Indian Naval Ships, INS "KAMORTA" and "KADMATT" and "DEEPAK" paid a visit to Singapore in January
1969.

THAILAND
The year witnessed growing cordiality in Indo-Thai relations,
especially in the economic sphere.
An Air Agreement between India and Thailand was signed
in April 1968. India has bought 120 thousand tonnes of rice
from Thailand on a Government to Government basis. The
Asian Coconut Community was established pursuant to am
Agreement signed in Bangkok, between the two countries in
<pg22>
December 1968. The object of the Agreement is to promote
the coconut industry in all its aspects. The then Commerce.
Minister Shri Dinesh Singh signed the Agreement on, behalf of
India.
In August, Hindustan Gas and Industry of Calcutta applied
to the Thai Board of Investment for promotional privileges to set
up a 500 spindle plant, to be named India-Thai Synthesis Ltd.,
for production of synthetic fabric yarn. These promotional
privileges were granted in December. This is an Indo-Thai
joint venture with equal shares for the two parties.
There has been an increase in Indian exports to Thailand
of steel and allied products and petroleum products. For the
period of January-December 1967, Thai imports from India
amounted to Bahts 267,783 as against Bahts, 109,000 in 1965
and Bahts 91,675,000 in 1966.
In October a contract for the purchase of Thai Kenaf was
undertaken by the Indian Jute Goods Buffer Stock Association.
The Foreign Secretary paid a two-day visit to Thailand in
January 1969 and called on the Deputy Prime Minister,
Foreign Minister and Minister for National Economy of Thailand
A Thai Trade delegation visited India in the same month.
INDO-CHINA COMMISSIONS
In order to study various problems concerning the IndoChina Commissions, an Inter-Ministerial team visited the headquarters of the three International Commissions in Vietnam,
Cambodia and Laos between 22 July and 11 August, 1968.
This team confirmed the necessity for a reduction in the Indianpersonnel of the Commissions. The Government of India
accepted the recommendations for a reduction in the strength
of the Commissions and have implemented them so far as
Indian personnel were concerned. The views of the Polish and
<pg23>

Canadian Delegations, on the necessity of maintaining the
Commissions at a certain minimum level of capability, were,
however, duly taken into account.
LAOS
The Government of India reviewed the existence of theIndian Medical Team in the light of new medical facilities provided by other countries. It was decided to withdraw the
Indian Medical Team and to extend alternative assistance to
Laos. Consequently, the fourth Indian Medical Team was recalled. Under instructions from the Government of India, the
medical stores and most of the equipment belonging to the
Indian Medical Team were donated to the Royal Lao Government by India's Charge d' Affairs on 26 December, 1968. The
value of goods donated is estimated at Rs. 2 lakhs.
The Government of India sent articles worth Rs. 5,000 to
the Indian Embassy for sale at the Red Cross Week organised
by the Red Cross Society of Laos. The entire proceeds of
these goods will be donated to the Laotian Red Cross Society.
VIETNAM
The Government of India renewed the Trade Agreement
with the DRVN Government for another period of three years.
This Agreement, which was due for renewal on 21 September,
1968, had originally been signed by the two Governments in
1956.
President Johnson ordered the complete stoppage of bombing of North Vietnam with effect from 1 November, 1968, and
this was welcomed by the Government of India. The Government of India have constantly kept in touch with the
concerned Governments and also with the UN Secretary-General
with a view to assisting progress towards substantive discussions for a peaceful settlement of the Vietnam problem in
Accordance with the Geneva Agreement of 1954
<pg24>
CAMBODIA
There was further strengthening of the very friendly relations between the two countries.
The Government of India sanctioned a sum of Rs. 20,000
for the purchase and despatch of medicines to Cambodia.
The Government of India have recognised the frontiers of
Cambodia and have assisted in the Mekong development Prek
Thnot Project.

AUSTRALIA
The visit of the Prime Minister of India to Australia during
May 1968, strengthened the cordial relations existing between
India and Australia. The Prime Minister's visit was greatly
appreciated and warmly welcomed by the Government and
people of Australia. Regular contacts have already been established between the officials of the foreign ministries of India
and Australia and the second round of Indo-Australian consultations is expected to take place in New Delhi during March
1969.
The Government of Australia made a gift of 70,000 metric
tons of wheat as a part of Australia's contribution for 1968-69
under the Food Aid Convention of the International Food
Grains Arrangement.
Two Australian Naval Ships paid a goodwill visit to Madras
from 17 to 19 January, 1969.
NEW ZEALAND
The Prime Minister of New Zealand, the Rt. Hon'ble Keith
Holyoake, and Mrs. Holyoake, paid an official visit to India
from 28 to 31 January, 1969. The New Zealand Prime
Minister had been invited to visit India when the Prime
Minister of India Visited New Zealand in May 1968. This
<pg25>
visit provided a further Opportunity for personal contacts
between the Prime Ministers of India and New Zealand. Thetwo Prime Ministers discussed international and bilateral issues,
with particular reference to India's and New Zealand's role in
Asia and the development of trade between the two countries.
As a result of the New Zealand Prime Minister's visit, a factfinding Trade Mission from India is expected to visit NewZealand during March 1969.
The Prime Minister of India sent a gift of 1,100 pounds
of tea for the victims of an earthquake in New Zealand during.
1968.
Fiji
Shri Jaisukhlal Hathi, the Minister of Labour, Employment
and Rehabilitation, accompanied by Shri Manjit Singh, Director
(East Asia), Ministry of External Affairs, paid a goodwill visit
to Fiji from 30 November to 2 December, 1968. The visit was
at the invitation of the Government of Fiji. While highlighting India's great interest in Fiji's development, the visit was

most useful for exchange of views on the internal situation in
Fiji and the development of understanding between the various
groups of Fijians. The visit proved particularly helpful in
establishing a cordial dialogue between the two political partiesin Fiji.
Sir Derek Jakeway who relinquished charge of the Office of
the Governor of Fiji in December 1968, visited India and was
treated as a State guest during his three days' stay in New Delhi
iron 25 to 27 January, 1969.
THE PHILIPPINES
The relations between India and the Philippines continued
to be cordial. The Prime Minister of India has extended an
invitation to the President of the Philippines to visit India.
The Prime Minister has also accepted an invitation from the
<pg26>
Philippines, President to visit, the Philippines. No dates have,
however, been fixed for these visits so far. The Deputy prime
Minister of India, paid a visit to Manila from 3 to 7 April,
1968, to attend the annual, meeting of the Asian Development
Bank.
The Government of India donated blankets and medicines
to the Government of the Philippines for the relief of the victims
of an earthquake in that country during 1968.
CONFERENCE OF THE HEADS OF INDIAN MISSIONS IN
SOUTH-EAST ASIA
A Conference was held from 13 to 17 December of the
Heads of Indian Missions accredited to all Asian countries
except West Asia, but including the Chairmen of the three
International Control and Supervisory Commissions in IndoChina. In. all, 26 Heads of Missions participated. They were
addressed by the Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister, Commerce Minister, and the Minister of State for External Affairs.
Representatives of the Ministries of Finance. Commerce,
Defence, Education, Information and Broadcasting and their
attached offices also were present as appropriate. A meeting
was held with the representatives of the Federation of Export
Promotion Council. A complete survey of India's relations in.
all aspects, political, economic and cultural was made. Many
concrete recommendations emerged for improving India's relations both on a bilateral and multilateral basis.
INDONESIA
INDIA USA AUSTRALIA MALI MALAYSIA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE JAPAN CENTRAL
AFRICAN REPUBLIC THAILAND CHINA VIETNAM CAMBODIA LAOS SWITZERLAND NEW

ZEALAND FIJI UNITED KINGDOM PHILIPPINES
Feb 20, 1969

East Asia
CHAPTER IV
EAST ASIA
JAPAN
The relations between India and Japan continued to grow on
the basis of mutual understanding and accommodation. There
was considerable exchange of visits. both at Governmental and
non-Governmental levels. The annual consultations between
the Indian and Japanese Foreign Offices have been continued
on a regular basis and the Fourth Annual Consultative Meeting
was held in Tokyo in February 1969. These discussions have
resulted in further understanding of each other's views. These
discussions, as well as those held by Ministers and other dignitaries who visited Japan during the year, have been of great
help towards promoting closer ties between the two countries.
The promotion of economic relations between India
and Japan received considerable impetus during the year. The
Second Round Table Conference of the India and Japan Committees. and the meeting of the India-Japan Business Co-operation Committee were held in New Delhi in November 1968.
These Conferences helped in promoting understanding on various issues, particularly in regard to. the state of the Indian
economy. As a result of the discussions held, particularly in
connection with India's participation in Expo-1970 to be held
at Osaka, a fact-finding trade and economic mission from Japan
visited India in January 1969, to identify the items which can
be exported to Japan.
A large number of important persons from India visited
Japan during the year. The visitors included Dr. N. Sanjiva
Reddy, Speaker of The Lok Sabha, Shri A. P. Shinde, Minister
<pg27>
<pg28>
of State, Ministry of Food and Agriculture, Community Development and Co-operation, Dr. D. Ering, Deputy Minister, Ministry of Food and Agriculture,. Community Development and

Co-operation, Dr. D. R. Gadgil, Deputy Chairman of the planning Commission, Dr. Karan Singh, Minister of Tourism and
Civil Aviation, Shri L. K. Jha, Governor, Reserve Bank of
India, and Shri K. C. Pant, Minister of State in the Ministry of
Finance. Late Shri C. N. Annadurai, Chief Minister of Madras,
also visited Japan in May 1968. Among the non-officials
mention may be made of the visit of Shri S. Nijalingappa, the
Congress President, who was accompanied by the General
Secretary of the All India Congress Committee.
Important visitors from Japan to India were Mr. Koichiro
Asaki, Special Envoy of the Minister of International Trade
and Industry and Minister Incharge of Expo-1970, and
Dr. Shiroshi Nasu, former Ambassador of Japan, in India.
Three Japanese Parliamentary Delegations visited India in
October 1968.
The status of the Consulate of India, Kobe, was raised to
that of Consulate-General during 1968. A telex link between
New Delhi and Tokyo was established in December 1968.
THE DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE's REPUBLIC OF KOREA AND THE
REPUBLIC OF KOREA
In keeping with its policy, India while looking forward to,
a peaceful re-unification of Korea, maintains friendly relations
with both the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the
Republic of Korea. In order not to prejudice the prospects of
a future re-unification of this land, full diplomatic recognition
has not been accorded to either the Democratic Republic of
Korea or the Republic of Korea, but consular relations are
maintained with both. For some years now both the Democratic Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea have maintained Consulates-General in New Delhi but because of financial stringency, it had not been possible earlier for India to
<pg29>
open Consulates-General in either of these areas though the
decision. in principle to that effect had been taken. In
October-November 1968, Consulates-General were established
both in Pyongyang and Seoul.
Energetic steps are being taken to promote trade with both
Democratic Republic of Korea and Republic of Korea and high
level delegations from both visited India in 1968. The Republic of Korea Delegation was led by Mr. Ho Eul Wang, Deputy
Vice-Minister, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, who visited India
from Aug 04, 1968 to 9 August, 1968 and had talk with the Ministry of
Commerce on matters relating to the expansion of trade and
economic co-operation between the two countries. In November, an official trade, Delegation led by Mr. Kim Suk Jin,
Director-General, Ministry of Foreign Trade, of the Democratic

Republic of Korea visited India and negotiated a new trade
arrangement under which it is expected that there, will a flow
of Rs. 35 million worth of trade either way.
MONGOLIAN PEOPLE's REPUBLIC
During the year under review, friendly relations between
India and the Mongolian People's Republic were further
strengthened.
A trade and payments Agreement was concluded between
the two countries on 13 February, 1968 in New Delhi.
D (Mrs.) D. Tumendelger, First Deputy Minister of
Public Health, Mongolian People's Republic, and Dr. P. Dolger,
Direct r, Department of International Affairs, Ministry of
Public Health, Mongolia, visited India in September 1968, to
attend the 21st Session of the WHO Regional Committee held
in New Delhi from 17 to 23 September, 1968. Apart from
meeting with the Union Minister for Health, Family Planning
and Urban Development, they visited hospitals and medical
institutions in New Delhi.
27 M of EA-3.
<pg30>
Under the Indo-Mongolian Cultural Exchange Programme
for 1967-69, a dance and music ensemble visited Mongolia in
October 1968. Their performances were highly appreciated.
A musicologist, Dr. K. C. D. Brahaspati and the writer Dr. G. K.
Brahma visited Mongolia in the summer of 1968. Two Indian
youth leaders participated in seminars organised in Ulan Bator
in May 1968 by the World Federation of Democratic Youth.
A two-man Delegation of All India Trade Union Congress visited
Mongolia for a period of two weeks in September-October 1968
in response to an invitation from the Presidium of the Mongolian
Trade Unions Central Council.
JAPAN
INDIA USA KOREA NORTH KOREA UNITED KINGDOM MONGOLIA
Aug 04, 1968

West Asia and North Africa

CHAPTER V
WEST ASIA AND NORTH AFRICA
THE ARAB-ISRAELI CONFLICT
The West Asian situation continued to be tense. Due to,
Arab resistance to Israeli occupation and reprisals by Israel,
there were several breaches of the ceasefire as well as incident
deep inside both Arab countries and Israel. The Security
Council passed three Resolutions (Resolution 248 of Mar 24, 1968
Resolution 256 of 16 August, 1968 and Resolution, 262
of 31 December, 1968) condemning the military attacks
launched by Israel. India actively associated herself with, these
Resolutions.
The Prime Minister, in her address to the UN General
Assembly on 14 October, 1968, stated India's stand in the
following words:
"Another source of anxiety-the West Asian crisisalso needs to be resolved by political means,
There is every opportunity for doing so, if it is recognised that the security, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the States in this part of the
world cannot be based on the redrawing of Statefrontiers by force or on the basis of permanent
hostility."
The then Minister of State for External Affairs Shri B. R.
Bhagat, speaking in the General Assembly on 21 October, 1968.
reiterated Indian support for the 22 November, 1967, Resolution of the Security Council in all its parts. He also affirmed
that lasting peace can be brought about only on the. basis of the
recognition of the just rights of all States in the area.
<pg31>
<pg32>
IRAN
India and Iran continued to develop their relations, particularly in the economic field. Several high-level visits reflected
growing understanding between the two countries culminating in
the visit of the Shahenshah in January 1969.
The Chief of the Army Staff, General P. P. Kumaramangalam,
paid an official visit to Iran in June 1968. The Deputy Prime
Minister's goodwill visit in July 1968 made a special impact. In
October-November 1968, the Minister of Industrial Development
and Company Affairs also visited Iran.

The Shahenshah of Iran, accompanied by the Shahbanou,
visited India from 2 to 13 January, 1969. The Shahenshah's
talks with the President and the Prime Minister and his speeches
on several occasions reflected the awareness of both countries of
their ancient traditional ties and desire for closer understanding
and greater co-operation. Formal letters were exchanged between
the two Governments resulting in the establishment of an IndoIranian Commission for Economic, Trade and Technical collaboration headed by the Iranian Minister of Economy and the
Indian Minister of Commerce.
Relief supplies worth Rs. 1,00,000 comprising medicines,
blankets, pullovers and tents were airlifted to Iran in September
1968 by an IAF plane for the relief of the victims of the earthquake disaster in which thousands of people perished.
IRAQ
Admiral A. K. Chatterjee, Chief of the Naval Staff and
General P. P. Kumaramangalam, Chief of the Army Staff, paid
official visits to Iraq in April and October 1968, respectively.
KUWAIT
A Kuwaiti Air Delegation visited India in June 1968 and
concluded a bilateral Air Agreement.
<pg33>
In May 1968, the Kuwaiti Government decided to retrench
certain categories of foreign personnel employed by them but this
decision did not apply to Indians and Pakistanis.
The Government of India shipped a baby elephant to Kuwait.
as a gift in November 1968.
SAUDI ARABIA
The Government of India agreed to allow 15,000 Indians to,
go to Saudi Arabia for Haj in 1969.
A Saudi Arabian Petroleum Delegation visited India in JuneJuly 1968, to explore avenues of co-operation between the two
countries in various fields.
PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF SOUTHERN YEMEN
Following the visit of the two-member Indian Delegation to
Aden in December 1967, the Government of India agreed to
provide economic and technical aid to the young Republic. As a
result, six doctors, six teachers and four experts (Hide, Financial
and Fiscal, Industrial Survey and Planning) have been deputed to
work in the People's Republic of Southern Yemen.

ISRAEL
USA INDIA IRAN IRAQ KUWAIT PAKISTAN SAUDI ARABIA YEMEN
Mar 24, 1968

Africa, South of the Sahara
CHAPTER VI
AFRICA, SOUTH OF THE SAHARA
India's relations with the countries of Africa, south of the
Sahara were further strengthened during the year under report.
Mauritius, Swaziland and Equatorial Guinea became independent
in 1968 and Indian Delegations led by the Minister of State, for
External Affairs and the Indian High Commissioner in Tanzania.
participated in the Indepdence celebrations of Mauritius and.
Swaziland respectively.
India played host to a number of distinguished visitors from
East and West Africa. From East Africa Ms Imperial Majesty
Haile Selassie I, Emperor of Ethiopia and Dr. Abdul Rashid Ali
Shermarke, President of the Republic of Somali paid State visits
to India. From West Africa Dr. William R Tolbert Jr., VicePresident of the Republic of Liberia, visited India. These visits
symbolized the desire of India to foster closer understanding and
co-operation with these countries. While in New Delhi these
leaders had talks on international problems with the Indian Government and these talks revealed close similarity of views on many;
current international issues.
The drive for Africanization of Trade and Services in various
East African countries gained momentum. This resulted in considerabale hardship to people of Asian origin in these countries.
An exodus of the people of Indian origin took place from Kenya
in December 1967 and it looked as though there might be similar exodus from other East African, countries on account of
denial of work permits and trade licences to people of Indian
origin. In West Africa, the Government of Ghana has also introduced certain measures to promote business enterprises by local
<pg34>
<pg35>

people. This problem was, however, discussed during the Commonwealth Prime Miniters' Conference unofficially between the
representatives of countries concerned and the Commonwealth
Secretariat has set up a committee to, review the problem on a
continuing basis. Most of the people are U. K. citizens and,
therefore bilateral discussions between U.K. and the countries
of East Africa are also visualized in the near future. It is hoped
that any new policy that might be evolved by the Governments
concerned in regard to people of Asian origin, will take into
account legitimate interests of these people who have for several
decades contributed to the welfare and economic prosperity of
the countries of their adoption.
The internal strife in Nigeria continued unabated despite
attempts by the OAU to bring about a settlement and peace
talks arranged by the Commonwealth Secretariat at Kampala. A
tragic consequence of the hostilities has been the wide-spread suffering caused to several thousand Nigerians. The Government of
India, on humanitarian considerations, sent a gift of medicines and
vitamin tablets through the Indian Red Cross Society. Out of
approximately 2500 Indian nationals in Nigeria about 200 were
in eastern Nigeria. By September 1968 almost A the Indians
who were in the affected areas had, been evacuated.
There was continued unrest in the whole of southern Africa
during the year. South Africa continued to float the UN Resolutions asking her to give up apartheid and to hand over to the
United Nations the administration of Namibia (South-West
Africa). At the same time, she assisted the illegal regime in
Rhodesia to circumvent the effect of the sanctions approved by
the United Nations. Rhodesia continued to maintain her position
of unilaterally declared independence in disregard of the strictures
of the United Nations.
The Government of India believe that the policies, and
practices of the racist Governments of South Africa and Rhodesia
are a threat to international peace and security and strongly feel
<pg36>
that total mandatory sanctions should be imposed against these
countries by the Security Council. As regards the Rhodesian
problem the Government is of the view that maximum pressure
should be put on Britain to use force to bring down the illegal
regime of Mr. Ian Smith.
INDIA
EQUATORIAL GUINEA GUINEA MAURITIUS SWAZILAND USA TANZANIA ETHIOPIA MALI
LIBERIA KENYA GHANA UNITED KINGDOM NIGER NIGERIA UGANDA SOUTH AFRICA
NAMIBIA

Mar 24, 1968

Eastern and Western Europe
CHAPTER VII
EASTERN AND WESTERN EUROPE
Eastern Europe
THE USSR
H.E. Mr A. N. Kosygin, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR, accompanied by his party broke his journey
in New Delhi on Apr 21, 1968 on his way back from
Karachi to Moscow, and held talks with the Prime Minister of
India.
At the invitation of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of
the USSR and the Soviet Government, Dr. Zakir Husain,
President of the Republic of India, paid a state visit to the
Soviet Union from 8 to 18 July, 1968, where he received a
very friendly welcome. During his visit, the President had
frank and friendly talks with the President of the Presidium of
the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, Mr. N. V. Podgorny, and the
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR, Mr. A. N.
Kosygin.
The first Consultative, Meeting between the Governments of
India and the USSR was held in New Delhi from 11 to 16
September, 1968. The Consultations were both cordial and
frank and reflected the friendly relations existing between the
two countries. Both sides agreed that the exchange of views
had facilitated the "deepening of their mutual understanding and
reaffirmed the similarity and closeness of the points of view of
both countries on various important international problems".
The Minister of Commerce visited the Soviet Union from
23 to 28 June, 1968, and had discussions with the Soviet Minister of Foreign Trade, and other Soviet leaders and officials. He
<pg37>
<pg38>
was also received by Premier Kosygin. The two sides reviewed
the progress of Indo-USSR trade and economic relations and
agreed that further expansion of trade and economic Co-operation should reflect the changing requirements of the two

economies.
An official Delegation led by Dr. D. R. Gadgil, Deputy
Chairman of the Planning Commission, visited the Soviet Union
in the last week of September 1968, and held useful talks with
the Soviet Planning authorities. The Soviet side included Mr.
S. A. Skachkov, Chairman of the State Committee for Foreign
Economic Relations, Mr. Kuzmin, First Deputy Minister of
Foreign Trade, and Mr. N. K. Baibakov, Chairman of the Planning Commission. During the visit, Dr. Gadgil was also
received by the Prime Minister, Mr. A. N. Kosygin.
On an invitation from the Soviet Defence Minister, the
Defence Minister of India, paid an eight-day official visit to the
Soviet Union in the last week of October 1968. During his stay,
he called on Mr. L. Brezhnev, General Secretary of CPSU
Central Committee, and the Soviet Prime Minister.
An Indian Parliamentary Delegation led by Dr. N. Sanjiva
Reddy, Speaker, Lok Sabha, visited the Soviet Union in June
1968. During their stay, the Delegation was received by the
Prime Minister, Mr. A. N. Kosygin, the Chairman of the Union
of the Supreme Soviet, and the Chairman of the Nationalities
of the Supreme Soviet.
A Delegation headed by H.E. Mr. S. A. Skachkov, Chairman, State Committee for Foreign Economic Relations of the
USSR, visited India in November-December 1968, on an
invitation from the Government of India. Besides Delhi, the
Delegation visited Soviet-aided projects at Hardwar, Dehra Dun,
Ranchi, Durgapur, Bokaro, Bhilai, Kotah, Bombay and Nasik.
YUGOSLAVIA
The Yugoslav Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs, H.E. Mr.
N. Pavicevic, visited India from 6 to 9 May, 1968, and held
<pg39>
talks with the then Minister of State, Shri B. R. Bhagat, and other
officials. During his stay, Mr. Pavicevic also called on the
Prime Minister.
The President, Dr. Zakir Husain, paid a State visit to
Yugoslavia from 10 to 15 June, 1968, on an invitation from
the President of the Socialist Republic of Yugoslavia, Marshal
Josip Bros Tito. The President of India was accompanied by
Dr. Triguna Sen, Minister of Education, Shri Rajeshwar Dayal,
Foreign Secretary, and Dr. Nagendra Singh, Secretary to the
President.
Shri Dinesh Singh, the then Minister of Commerce, paid a
visit to Yugoslavia in June-July 1968, at the invitation of the

Federal Executive Council of Yugoslavia for the regular meeting
of the Indo-Yugoslav Trade and Economic Commission. The
Yugoslav side was headed by Mr. Niran Nejak, Minister of the
Federal Executive Council.
A Delegation led by Mr. Rato Dugonjic, President of the
Socialist Alliance of the Working People of Yugoslavia, visited
India from 19 to 25 November, 1968, on an invitation from
the All India Congress Committee. This was in the nature of
a return visit to that made by Shri Kamaraj to Yugoslavia when
he was President of the Congress Committee. The visit was
important in view of the need for establishing and strengthening
political contacts, in addition to the maintenance of the excellent
inter-State relations between India and Yugoslavia.
H.E. Mr. Dimce Belovski, Assistant Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Yugoslavia, accompanied by Mr. Miroslav Kreacic,
visited India in the last week of January 1969. During their
stay, they held talks with the Foreign Secretary and other
officers of the Ministry of External Affairs.
Dr. Radivoj Uvalic, formerly Ambassador of Yugoslavia to
<pg40>
India on a private visit during the last week of December 1968,
and the first week of January 1969. During his stay in New
Delhi, he called on the Prime Minister and other Ministers, the
Foreign Secretary and Shri Kewal Singh, Secretary in the
Ministry of External Affairs.
An Indian handicrafts exhibition consisting of over 250
items of metalware, jewellery, textiles and puppets from various
States of India, was opened in Belgrade on 28 December by
Mr. Otto Demes, Vice-Chairman of the Yugoslav Cultural
Commission. He traced the growth of the Indo-Yugoslav
cultural relations and expressed the hope that this exhibition
would be one more step in further strengthening friendship
between the two countries.
An Indian Theatre Exhibition consisting of about 150
typically illustrative and expressive photographs and puppet
masks. from various States of India was declared open in Belgrade by Madam Ogmjenka Milicevic, Dean of the Yugoslav
Academy of Theatre, Dance and Drama on 15 January, 1969.
HUNGARY
The President of India, Dr. Zakir Husain, paid a State visit
to Hungary, in June 1968, at the invitation of Mr. Pal Losonczi,
President of the Presidential Council of the Hungarian People's
Republic. The President was accompanied by Dr. Triguna Sen,
Minister of Education, Shri Rajeshwar Dayal, Foreign Secretary,

Dr. Nagendra Singh, Secretary to the President and other
officials.
An Indian Parliamentary Delegation led by the Speaker of
Lok Sabha, Dr. N. Sanjiva Reddy, visited Hungary in the last
week of June 1968. The Delegation was received by the
Speaker of the National Assembly. The Delegation also held
discussions with the Minister of Culture.
<pg41>
POLAND
Prof. V.K.R.V. Rao, Minister of Transport and Shipping,
visited Poland in October 1968, on an invitation from the
Polish Minister of Shipping.
Shri M. S. Gurupadaswamy, Minister of State for Food and
Agriculture, paid a visit to Poland in the last week of October
1968, on an invitation from the Polish Minister of Foreign
Trade.
BULGARIA
At the invitation of the Prime Minister of India, the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the People's Republic of
Bulgaria, His Excellency Mr. Todor Zhivkov accompanied by
his Delegation paid an official visit to India from 22 to 27
January, 1969. He was received by the President of India.
He witnessed the Republic Day parade in New Delhi.
The Chairman and the Prime Minister of India had wideranging discussions on current international questions, and on
Indo-Bulgarian relations. The discussions were held in an
atmosphere of friendship and mutual understanding and revealed a broad similarity of attitudes and approach to a number of
international problems. There was a common desire, to strengthen further, the existing friendly relations between the two
countries.
Western Europe
THE UNITED KINGDOM
Relations between India and the UK continue to be
friendly. India received several prominent visitors from the
UK. The Deputy Prime, Minister, a number of Ministers,
Parliamentarians, officials and non-officials from India visited
UK.
<pg42>
In December 1968, the Rt. Hon. Michael Stewart, British

Secretary for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, visited India
at the invitation of the Government of India and the first
bilateral discussions between the two countries were inaugurated. The visit marked the beginning of a new era in IndoBritish relations, based on realistic and practical co-operation.
Britain's role, in India's economic development consists of
both private and Government assistance and is considerable.
Britain is the largest investor in India. India has more collaboration agreements with Britain than with any other country.
India's exports to Britain have, however, received some setbacks
recently because of revised import restrictions introduced by
the United Kingdom.
FRANCE
India's relations with France continued to be cordial during
the year under review. Cultural and economic contacts between the two countries increased during the year. The State
visit of the President of India, Dr. Zakir Husain to France,
which was postponed at the request of the Franch Government,
will take place in 1969.
THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY
Dr. Rainer Barzel, Chairman of the Joint Parliamentary
Group of the CDU and the CSU in the German Parliament, and
Mrs. Barzel visited India from 6 to 10 April, 1968. Dr. Barzel
called on the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister and
the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs. Dr. Barzel also attended a Lok Sabha session and met Members of Parliament representing important political parties.
AUSTRIA
At the instance of the Commonwealth War Graves Cornmission in London, the Government of India concluded Agreements with Ethiopia, Greece and Austria for the maintenance
<pg43>
of the war graves. The Commonwealth War Graves Commission looks after the maintenance of the cemeteries of the Armed
Forces personnel of the Commonwealth countries killed in
World Wars I and II, situated in countries outside the Commonwealth.
An Agreement was also concluded between India and
Austria in regard to the Klagerft War Cemetery.
SWEDEN
A tewnty-four-member Swedish Parliamentary Delegation-

visited India from 12 to 24 October, 1968. The Government of
India extended them all possible help and facilities in arranging
their meetings and programme. The Delegation called on the
Vice-President, the Minister of Commerce, the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs, the Minister of Communications, the Minister
of State for External Affairs, the Minister of Health, Family
Planning and Urban Development, the Governor of West Bengal
and the Governor of Maharashtra. The Delegation discussed
problems of the institutions jointly set up by India and Sweden
under the various aid programmes. The Delegation visited the
Central Institute of Fisheries, the Education and Scandinavian
Seamen's Centre, Bombay; Bhabha Atomic Research Centre,
Trombay; Well-drilling Project, Sholapur; Indo-Norwegian
Fishing Project in Ernakulam; Swedish Red Cross Leprosy
Rehabilitation Centre at Katpadi; the Christian Medical
Hospital at Vellore; Madras Atomic Power Project and Kosi
Canal Project. The Delegation also visited Bombay, Agra,
Dehra Dun, Sholapur, Poona, Madras and Calcutta.
MALTA
His Excellency Dr. G. Borg Olivier, Prime Minister of Malta,
accompanied by the Minister of Trade and Industry and officials
of his Government paid an official visit to India from 16 to 27
November, 1968. This was the first visit of a Maltese Prime
Minister to India. The exchange of views between the two
<pg44>
Prime Ministers was broad-based and took place in a frank and
friendly atmosphere. Apart from Delhi, the Maltese Prime
Minister and his Delegation visited Agra, Khadakvasla, Bombay.
Bangalore and Mysore.
IRELAND
The Prime Minister of Ireland H.E. Mr. John Lynch and
Madame Lynch, accompanied by Mr. H. J. McCann, Foreign
Secretary and Mrs. McCann were the guests of the Government
of India from 4 to 8 August, during their transit halt in India,
en route to Japan. They visited Bombay, Delhi, Jaipur and
Agra. H. E. Mr. Lynch called on the Prime Minister and the
President of India.
GREECE
The Government of India concluded an Agreement with
Greece in regard to the War Cemeteries in that country.
USA
INDIA RUSSIA PAKISTAN YUGOSLAVIA IRAN HUNGARY POLAND BULGARIA UNITED
KINGDOM FRANCE GERMANY AUSTRIA ETHIOPIA GREECE SWEDEN MALTA IRELAND JAPAN

Apr 21, 1968

The Americas
CHAPTER VIII
THE AMERICAS
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
In July 1968, bilateral talks were held between the USA
and India to exchange views on matters of common interest and
on world issues. The discussions were frank, friendly. and
informal and at the conclusion of the talks, both sides felt that
"this new venture in an old friendship was beneficial in every
respect". It was agreed that this meeting should be the first of
a series and that the next such meeting should be held in
Washington in 1969.
India's Deputy Prime, Minister visited the USA in September 1968.
In January this year, India had the pleasure of welcoming
Mrs. Coretta King, who visited this country to receive the
Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding, posthumously given to her husband. The Award was made by the
President of India at a ceremony at Vigyan Bhavan on Jan 24, 1969
Relations between India and USA continued to be close
and cordial in many fields of common endeavour especially in
agriculture, education, science and technology.
CANADA
The Prime Minister had intended to visit Canada in the
autumn of 1968 after her Latin American tour to meet the new
Canadian Prime Minister, Mr. Pierre Elliott Trudeau. The visit
27 M of EA-4.
<pg45>
<pg46>
could not materialise as the Prime Minister had to advance the
date of her return to India. However, the two Prime Ministers

had an opportunity to meet at the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' meeting in January this year. The Canadian Prime Minister has been invited to visit India during 1969 and he has
accepted the invitation.
In January this year, India was visited by an eight-member
Canadian Parliamentary Delegation led by Mr. Lucian Lamoureux, Speaker of the Canadian House of Commons. The Delegation was enthusiastically welcomed in this country.
An important new stop in building cultural links between
Canada and India was the successful conclusion of the negotiations on the setting up of an Institute of Indian Studies in
Canada. The Institute is to be called the Shastri Indo-Canadian
Institute, in honour of the late Prime Minister. The main object
of the Institute will be to promote and foster the growth of
Indian studies in Canadian universities with a view to bring
about a deeper understanding on the part of the Canadians of
Indian life and culture.
THE CARIBBEAN AND LATIN AMERICA
Shri B. K. Sanyal, India's Ambassador to Uruguay, presented
his credentials to President H. E. Jorge Pacheco Areco, of Uruguay in April 1968. Shri Sanyal, who is concurrently Ambassador to Argentina, is resident in Buenos Aires.
Shri K. L. Mehta, Ambassador in Chile, who is also concurrently accredited to Peru, presented his credentials to President
H. E. Senor Eduardo, Prei Montavia of Chile on 8 August, 1968,
and to President H. E. Senor Fernando Belaunde Terry of Peru
on 7 September, 1968. Soon thereafter the Government in Peru
changed as a result of a military coup d'etat. India continued her
relations with the new Government of President Major General
Juan Valesco Alverado.
<pg47>
Shri P. Ratnam, Ambassador in Mexico and concurrently
accredited to Panama, attended the Presidential installation ceremonies in Panama in October 1968. Shortly after he took over
as President of Panama, Dr. Arnulfo Arias was overthrown by a
bloodless coup d'etat staged by the National Guard. Col. Jose
Maria Pinilla Fabrega who led the coup d'etat became the new
President. India continued to maintain relations with the new
Government.
In response to an invitation from the Governments, the Prime
Minister paid visits to Brazil, Uruguay, Argentina, Chile,
Columbia, Venezuela, Trinidad and Tobago and Guyana in that
order. This was the first visit ever made by the Prime Minister
of India to the New World. She was scheduled to visit Peru
also but the visit had to be cancelled because of the coup d'etat

which took place just before she was due to arrive in Lima. She
received a warm and spontaneous welcome in all the countries
she visited.
Brazil was the first country to be visited by the Prime Minister. An exchange of views at the ministerial and official level
revealed a close identity of approach on important international
issues. There was also general agreement to intensify co-operation in the cultural, scientific and technological fields and to increase commercial relations. A cultural agreement. between
India and Brazil negotiated earlier, was signed by the Prime
Minister. Later in the year an agreement on Co-operation Regarding the Utilisation of Atomic Energy for Peaceful Purposes
was signed by Indian Ambassador Shri B. K. Acharya and
Foreign Minister H. E. Sr. Magalhaes Pinto on behalf of Brazil.
In Uruguay the Prime Minister was presented the Keys of the
City of Montevideo by the Lord Mayor of the city. She was also
welcomed by a Joint Session of both Houses of the Uruguayan
Parliament which she later addressed. The talks which the Prime
Minister had with President of Uruguay underlined the tradition
of co-operation which had developed between Vie two countries in
<pg48>
the forums of the United Nations and its agencies. The two countries also shared the pursuit of social justice and the preservation
of democratic freedom. It was agreed that every effort would
be made to strengthen co-operation in economic, trade, cultural,
technological and scientific fields between the two countries.
In Argentina talks between the Prime Minister and H. E. the
President of the Argentine Republic, Lieutenant General Juan
Carlos Ongania, H. E. the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Workship, Dr. Nicanor Costa Mintaz and other members of the
Argentina Government showed a broad similarity of views in the
field of international affairs and it was agreed to strengthen and
develop trade and economic relations between the two countries.
The University of El Salvador in Buenos Aires conferred the
honorary degree of Doctor of International Relations on the
Prime Minister. The Prime Minister in her capacity as the
Acharya of the Visva Bharati University personally presented the
degree of Desikottama. conferred on Madam Victoria Ocampo,
earlier by the University. Madam Ocampo, a friend of poet
Tagore, is known for her sustained efforts towards the enrichment
of art and letters in Argentina.
Chile was the first among the Latin American countries to
extend an invitation to the Prime Minister. Leaders of Chile
showed a keen interest in India's democratic institutions as well
as its industrial and economic development. As a token of
Chile's admiration and esteem for our national leaders a city
park named "Plaza de la Republica de la India" was inaugurated

by Prime Minister. Statues of Mahatma Gandhi. Jawaharlal
Nehru and poet Rabindranath Tagore have been erected in the
park.
The Columbian President H. E. Dr. Carlos Lleras Restrepo
personally welcomed Prime Minister and like other Latin American leaders showed understanding of India's policies in the international as well as the domestic spheres. In the discussions held,
the desire to further develop economic and trade relations between
the two countries was underlined. The two countries also shared
<pg49>
the view that peaceful co-existence is a vital factor in the prevention of war and the promotion of international understanding.
Columbia is the first Latin American country in which an Indian
business house is collaborating with a local party to establish a
factory for the manufacturing of small machine tools.
In Venezuela also in the exchange of. views between, the Prime
Minister and the President H. E. Dr. Raul Leoni and the Foreign
Minister, H. E. Dr. Iribarren Borges an identity of approach on
various international issues was established. On bilateral relations it was agreed to expand them purposefully. The need and
scope for co-operation between the two countries in the commercial, cultural, technological and scientific fields was also recognised.
The reception accorded to Prime Minister on arrival at Port
of Spain was unprecedented in the history of Trinidad and
Tobago. The existence of a sizeable population of Indian origin
draws India and Trinidad and Tobago together in close cultural
kinship. A cultural pageant depicting the colourful spectacle of
dance and music of the Islands was specially arranged for the
Prime Minister and she also received the Freedom of the City of
Port of Spain. The talks between the Prime Minister and the
Prime Minister of Trinidad and To ago Dr. Rt. Honourable Eric
Williams and his colleagues covered a wide range of subjects of
mutual interest. The country is presently engaged in developing
its industrial potential and otherwise diversifying its economy. In
this effort Trinidad and Tobago has been offered technical assistance as far as practicable.
Prime Minister's visit to Guyana had special significance for
the people of that country. It will be recalled that more than
50 per cent of the population of Guyana is of Indian origin. By
and large they have developed roots in the country of their adoption but still cherish the cultural ties with India. The visit has
further strengthened the cultural ties between Guyana and India.
The Prime Minister had talks with the Prime Minister of Guyana,
the Honourable Forbes Burnham on questions of mutual interest
<pg50>

specialty on problems facing the newly independent developing
countries.
It has been decided to open two resident Missions-one at
Caracas, the capital of Venezuela and the other at Lima, the
capital of Peru. These Missions will be headed by Charge
d'Affaires and are expected to begin functioning shortly.
An economic and trade Delegation will visit Latin American
countries in the near future to survey the prospects for increased
trade and economic cooperation between India and that region.
A gift of 5,000 tons of wheat was announced by the President
of the Republic of Argentina as a token of friendship and solidarity of the Argentine people for the people of India.
Reverend Dr. Ismael Quiles, Rector (President) of the University of El Salvador, Buenos Aires, along with a party of
Argentine Orientalists paid another visit to India. Rev.
Dr. Quiles is well-known in educational circles in Latin America
and is an old friend of India.
USA
INDIA CANADA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC URUGUAY ARGENTINA CHILE PERU MEXICO
PANAMA BRAZIL GUYANA TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO VENEZUELA EL SALVADOR MALAYSIA
SEYCHELLES RUSSIA SPAIN
Jan 24, 1969

United Nations and International Conferences
CHAPTER IX
UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL
CONFERENCES
India's two-year term on the UN Security Council expired
on Dec 31, 1968. The role played by India in the
Council has evoked favourable response and attention. True
to its policy of non-alinment India has taken a positive stand
on the major issues which came up before the Security Council
e.g., West Asia, Rhodesia etc. India's stature in the UN has
appreciably increased in the past two years owing to the role
played by India in the Security Council and elsewhere.
India has taken active part in the work of other organs of

he United Nations e.g., the General Assembly and Economic and
Social Council. India has taken the initiative with regard to
a wide variety of important questions, relating to the work of
United Nations and its subsidiary organs such as consideration
of regime of Sea Bed and Ocean Floor, the progressive development and codification of the Law of Treaties, the Law of Outer
Space and the economic and development questions such
as those considered in Second UNCTAD in New Delhi etc.
During the year under review India was also elected to a number
of important posts of the UN and its related bodies which are
specified elsewhere in this Report.
A concise account of some important aspects of the work
of the United Nations and allied bodies is given below.
The General Assembly of the United Nations met twice
during the year under report. It met first in its resumed
XXIInd session from 24 April to 12 June, 1968, to discuss the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
question of South West Africa.
<pg51>
<pg52>
Later the XXIIIrd regular session of the Assembly met from
24, September to 21 December, 1968. Dr. Emilio Arenales,
the Foreign Minister of Guatemala, was elected President of
this session. The membership of the United Nations rose to,
126 with the admission of Mauritius, Equatorial Guinea and
Swaziland. Nauru, a former Trust Territory, became independent
on 31 January, 1968, but chose not to seek membership of
the United Nations.
India, was elected/re-elected to the following posts/bodies,
of the U.N. during the year:
1. Chairman of the Sixth (Legal) Committee of the 23rd
General Assembly Session.
2. Executive Board of the UNICEF.
3. The Commission for Social Development.
4. Population Commission.
5. Commission on Narcotic Drugs.
6. Industrial Development Board of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organisation.
7. Executive Council of the ICAO.

8. Permanent Committee on the Exploration and Exploitation of the Sea Bed and Ocean Floor.
The Prime Minister addressed the XXIIIrd session of the
General Assembly on 14 October, 1968. She expressed the
hope that conditions would be created to enable the Vietnam
peace talks to become more purposeful, and stressed that the
key to the next step lay in the total cessation of the bombing
of North Vietnam. Referring to the situation in West Asia she
stated that the crisis there needed to be resolved by political
means and there was every opportunity for doing so, if it was
recognised that the security, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the States in the area could not be based on the re-drawing.
of frontiers by force, or on the basis of permanent hostility.
<pg53>
The withdrawal of foreign forces from occupied Arab territories
was essential for the solution of the West Asian problem. She
urged all member States to extend their full support to the work
initiated by the two United Nations Conferences On Trade and
Development. She proposed that the year 1970 should be
dedicated to Peace and a united endeavour be made by ail for
a durable world peace.
The Prime Minister's proposal was taken up in the General
Assembly's General Committee and it is expected that the
necessary follow up action would be, taken in due course.
India's Delegation to the XXIIIrd session was led by Shri
B. R. Bhagat, formerly Minister of State for External Affairs.
Dr. K. Krishna Rao of India was elected Chairman of the
General Assembly's Legal Committee. This is the first time
that an Indian has been elected to this post.
The General Assembly rejected by 58 votes against 44
(with 23 abstentions) a proposal to seat the People's Republic
of China in the United Nations. India voted in favour of the
proposal.
India continued to participate actively in the deliberations,
of the UN Committee of Twenty-four on decolonisation.
Indo co-sponsored the Resolutions adopted by the Security
Council and the General Assembly on the Rhodesian problem.
The Security Council unannimously adopted a resolution on
29 May, 1968, extending the scope of sanctions to all imports,
and exports to and from Rhodesia and banning financial transactions with the illegal regime. It also called upon all States not
to recognise the passports issued by the illegal regime.
The General Assembly called upon the Government of the

UK not to grant independence to the Territory of Rhodesia
unless it was preceded by the establishment of a Government
based on free elections by universal adult suffrage and on
<pg54>
majority rule. Furthermore, it called upon all member States
not to recognise any form of independence in Southern Rhodesia
without the prior establishment of a Government based on
majority rule. In another Resolution, the General Assembly
reaffirmed the primary responsibility of the UK to put an end
to the illegal regime, and called on it to quell the rebellion
through the use of force. It also drew the attention of the
Security Council to the need to widen the scope of the sanctions
so as to include all the measures laid down in Article 41 of the
UN Charter, and suggested that sanctions be imposed against
South Africa and Portugal.
During its resumed XXIInd session (April/June 1968) the
Assembly, inter alia, called upon all States to take effective
economic and other measures to some the immediate withdrawal of the South African administration from South West
Africa and recommended to the Security Council to take other
effective measures, in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter, to remove the South African presence from the
Territory. The Assembly proclaimed that, South West Africa
would henceforth be known as Namibia, and established a UN
Council for the Territory, of which India is a member.
The Assembly, at its XXIIIrd session, drew the attention of
the Security Council to the "serious situation" in Namibia and
recommended that the Council take, effective measures to ensure
the immediate withdrawal of South African authorities from. the
Territory. It reaffirmed the right of the Namibian people to
self-determination and independence, and condemned South
Africa for its persistent defiance of the Resolutions of the United
Nations. India supported the Resolution.
India co-sponsored a Resolution in the General Assembly
condemning Portugal's refusal to implement UN Resolutions and
its violations of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of independent African States, and appealing to all States, particularly
the members of NATO, to withhold any assistance to Portugal
which may enable it to prosecute its colonial war.
<pg55>
India voted in favour of the Resolution on decolonisation
whereby the Assembly, inter alia, reaffirmed the legitimacy of
the struggle of colonial peoples to exercise their right of selfdetermination and independence, and requested all States, UN
specialised agencies and international institutions to withhold
assistance from Portugal, South Africa and Southern Rhodesia

until they renounced their policies of colonial domination and
racial discrimination.
The XXIIIrd session of the General Assembly declared that
the exploitation of the sea bed and ocean floor should be carried
out for the benefit of mankind as a whole. It established a
42-Member Committee of which India is a member to make
recommendations, inter alia, for the promotion of international
co-operation in the exploitation and use of the resources, and
the reservation exclusively for peaceful purposes of the sea bed
and the ocean floor. India had introduced a draft Declaration
setting out the principles to be observed in the exploitation of
this environment. The Assembly requested the SecretaryGeneral to undertake a study on the question of establishing an
appropriate "international machinery for the promotion of the
exploration and exploitation of the resources of this area, and
the use of these resources in the interests of mankind".
Both in the Security Council and the General Assembly,
India gave full support to the efforts of Dr. G. Jarring to bring
about a peaceful settlement of the complex problem in West
Asia. India expressed the view that a solution to this question
should be found on the basis of the Security Council Resolution
of 22 November, 1967.
The General Assembly extended the mandate of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) until 30 June,
1972 and urged increased contributions to the Agency. India
pledged a contribution of Rs. 100,000 in the form of goods and
supplies to UNRWA's fund for 1969.
<pg56>
UNCTAD II
India played host to the second UNCTAD which was held
in Delhi from 1 February to 29 March, 1968. Shri Dinesh
Singh, the then Commerce Minister, was unanimously elected
President of UNCTAD II.
At the 45th session of ECOSOC, the then Minister of State
for External Affairs, Shri B. R. Bhagat, reiterated the Governments conviction that, despite the positive gains made as a result
of its deliberations, UNCTAD II wailed "to measure up to the
dimensions and the urgency of the world's development problems". Pointing to the need for urgent and far-sighted action,
Shri Bhagat urged the ECOSOC to take stock of the whole
situation and to give further directives and guidelines, particularly with a view to the formulation and adoption of appropriate trade and aid policies. He emphasised that the current
Development Decade had belied the hopes reposed in it, and
called for the finalisation of the preparations for the Second
Development Decade. He stressed that the adoption of a

strategy of international co-operation would need to be backed
up by parallel steps to be taken by Governments to improve the
external trade and aid conditions encountered by the developing
countries.
Shri Dinesh Singh, formerly the Minister of Commerce,
presented the report of UNCTAD II to the General Assembly in
his capacity as the President of the Conference. He emphasised
the need for institutional; machinery to carry forward the work
of UNCTAD II. The Indian Delegation played a leading role,
in the decision of the Assembly to expand the Economic
Committee of ECOSOC, which has been entrusted with the task
of drafting the strategy of international co-operation in the
Second Development Decade. India, by virtue of her membership of ECOSOC, is a member of this Committee.
HUMAN RIGHTS
1968 had, been designated by the General Assembly as the
International Year for Human Rights. The 24th session of, the
<pg57>
Human Rights Commission was held in New York from 5
February to 8 March, 1968. India participated. India also
participated in the International Conference on Human. Rights,
held in Tehran from 22 April to 3 May, 1968. The Conference
adopted Resolutions on colonialism, apartheid, education of
youth, economic development, disarmament, family planning,
Women's rights, etc., in all of which India played an active role.
India played host to the United Nations Seminar on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, which was
held in New Delhi from 27 August to 9 September, 1968.
Twenty-four countries participated in this Seminar. India was
elected Chairman.
DISARMAMENT
At the end of its session from January to March 1968, the
Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee forwarded to the UN
General Assembly, as an annex to its report, a Draft Treaty
on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons sponsored joint
by the USA and the USSR. This Draft Treaty was commended
by the resumed XXIInd session of the UN General Assembly for
acceptance. The Security Council on 19th June, 1968 adopted
a Resolution welcoming the security assurances offered by the
USA, USSR and UK to those States who would become parties
to the Treaty. Neither the General Assembly's Resolution on
the Treaty nor the Security Council's Resolution on security
assurances met India's requirements, and India did not therefore
support them.

At the ENDC's July-August session India emphasised the
need to give priority to measures in the field of nuclear disarmament, and in particular proposed for urgent consideration,
a cut-off in the production of fissionable material for weapons
purposes; a comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and the conclusion
of the Convention on the prohibition of the use of nuclear and
thermo-nuclear weapons.
<pg58>
India has proposed a draft convention at the 7th session of
the Legal Sub-Committee of the UN Outer Space Committee
on "Liability for Damage caused by Objects launched into
Outer Space". This draft is under consideration by the
member States concerned.
The first UN Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space was held in Vienna from 14 to 27 August,
1968. Delegates from 79 countries took part in the Conference. Dr. Vikram Sarabhai was appointed Vice-President and,
Scientific Chairman of the Conference. The UN General
Assembly unanimously commended the results of the Conference. It also decided to convene the Fourth International
Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy in Geneva
in 1971.
A UN Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States was held
in Geneva from 29 August to 28 September, 1968. India was
elected as one of the 12 Vice-Presidents. The General Assembly considered the work of this Conference and requested the
UN Secretary-General to appoint a group of experts to report
on the contributions that nuclear technology can make to the
economic and scientific advancement of the developing countries. The Assembly also endorsed the recommendation of
the Conference regarding the establishment of nuclear freezones. As recommended by the Conference, the Assembly
asked the UN Secretary-General to prepare a report on the
establishment, within the framework of the International Atomic
Energy Agency, of an international service for nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes, under appropriate international
control. It also urged the Governments of the Soviet Union
and the United States to enter into bilateral discussions on the
limitation of offensive strategic nuclear weapons delivery system
and systems of defence against ballistic missiles.
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES
During the year under review, India participated in several
international conferences, seminars etc., a list of which is given
at Appendix I.
<pg59>

The Commonwealth Prime Ministers Conference was held
in London from 7 to 15 January, 1969. The Prime Minister
attended the Conference from 7 to 10 January. Shri B. R.
Bhagat, formerly Minister of State in the Ministry of External
Affairs, represented India for the remaining period.
A list of International Organizations of which India was a
member is given at Appendix II.
INDIA
USA GUATEMALA EQUATORIAL GUINEA GUINEA MAURITIUS NAURU SWAZILAND VIETNAM
CHINA UNITED KINGDOM PORTUGAL SOUTH AFRICA NAMIBIA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
IRAN AUSTRIA SWITZERLAND
Dec 31, 1968

External Publicity
CHAPTER X
EXTERNAL PUBLICITY
The External Publicity Division, during the year under
review, continued its efforts to promote India's publicity abroad.
Through its publicity posts in Indian Missions abroad, the
Division sought to:
(i) foster an increasing understanding of India and her
policies;
(ii) explain and interpret India's objectives and actions;
and
(iii) counteract adverse influences and false and hostile
propaganda against India.
With this aim in view, the Division regularly supplied material and information to India's publicity posts and other Indian
Missions abroad. The material supplied was in the nature of
literature, newspapers, journals, books, pamphlets, feature
articles, background notes and directives on important developments.
The Division maintained constant contacts with the Indian
Missions abroad, through daily radio transmissions received on
teleprinter machines. Transmissions containing news, statements, background material, etc., on India were broadcast by

the Division twice a day (at 2 P.m. and 8 P.M. IST) and received
on the teleprinters by 58 Missions. On the basis of these transmissions our publicity posts abroad issued daily and periodical
news bulletins and news digests in English and other local languages. During the year, arrangements were made by 6 new
posts to receive these, transmissions.
<pg60>
<pg61>
PRODUCTION
The dissemination of publicity material is mainly the responsibility of the Production Unit of the Division, which arranges the
procurement, production and distribution of feature articles,
photo features and printed literature on various aspects of
modem India. 31 specially prepared feature articles on various
aspects of India were sent to the Missions for Republic Day
publicity. These articles written by specialists in their respective fields sought to project an image of India steadily advancing
in economic and industrial. spheres.
The Production Unit also published pamphlets and periodicals
and undertook certain types of translations and printing jobs in
foreign languages within India. All the material produced and
published by the Division was widely distributed abroad through
Indian Missions.
Apart from regular publications like Foreign Affairs Record
(Monthly), Indian and Foreign Review (fortnightly), and its
French version Courrier de L'Inde (fortnightly), 10 pamphlets
were produced at the Headquarters. Foreign language versions
of some pamphlets were produced by Indian Missions abroad, in
addition to their periodical bulletins in various languages.
The Production Unit has been making efforts to get books
On India published abroad in foreign languages. It proposes
to produce a pamphlet containing basic information on India to
meet the requirements of foreign school children. It is intended
to bring out this pamphlet in various major languages of the
world.
More books on different subjects (in all about 2,900 copies)
were added to the libraries of India's Missions abroad and at
Headquarters. About 7,500 copies of five books-three on
Kashmir, one on Pakistan-China Axis and one on the West
Asian crisis were distributed to important individuals, libraries
and institutions in foreign countries, in addition to a number of
copies of selected books published in India.
27 M of EA-5.

<pg62>
AUDIO-VISUAL PUBLICITY
The audio-visual medium was extensively used to project
India abroad and to counter anti-Indian propaganda. Nearly
47,000 photographs on various subjects were distributed to
Indian Missions abroad for publicity and display purposes. Of
these, 20,500 photographs were distributed in connection with
the Gandhi Centenary Celebrations. Photographic exhibitions
depicting different aspects of India's industrial, social, cultural
and economic life were arranged in the United Arab Republic,
Australia, New Zealand and West Germany.
For participation in various general exhibitions held in
different countries, some of the Indian Missions were supplied
display material such as selected magazines, picture post cards.
stamps, photographs and coins.
Gramophone records and tape-recordings of Indian music were
regularly supplied to Indian Missions for use under their auspices and through local radio and other organizations. During
the year 61 long playing records were supplied to some of the
Indian Missions abroad for their regular use, in addition to
selected records for presentation purposes.
Audio-visual equipment was made available to several Missions during the year: seven new film projectors to Indian Missions in Zahidan, Port of Spain, Hanoi, Suva, Thimpu, Kandy
and Rangoon; and a new cinema van to India's Mission in
Bangkok.
As regards the projection of India through films, 762 prints
of various documentary films were supplied to Indian Missions
abroad. During the year, 27 documentary films were previewed
and approved for supply to the Missions. Negotiations are
under way for general permission for telecasting of Indian documentary films by the foreign broadcasting and TV Organisations.
<pg63>
For screening in local cinema houses, regular supply of 35
mm. prints of Indian documentaries and news-reels was ma
to Indian Missions in Nepal, Sikkim, Bhutan, Mogadishu, Dares Salaam and Nairobi.
Five compilation films, mainly on the visits of VIPs and
dignitaries to India, were produced and supplied to the Indian
Missions concerned.
Production of seven documentary films on different subjects
has been undertaken for the year.

Prints in 16 mm. of three feature films were, purchased for
circulation and non-commercial exhibition abroad. Negotiations for the purchase of four feature films and two children's
films are in progress.
India participated in 52 International Film Festivals during
the year and the Indian film Challenge of the Everest
was awarded a Diploma of Honour and the film I am twenty
was given Merit Award in the International Competition for
Sports Motion Pictures held at Cortina D' Ampezzo and International Festival of Short Films held at Cracow.
Proposals for holding Indian Films Week in Thailand, Syria,
Indonesia, Afghanistan, Ceylon, the Soviet Union, Turkey and
West Germany are under active consideration.
PRESS RELATIONS
The Ministry of External Affairs has a Joint Secretary in
charge of briefing the Indian and Foreign Press correspondents
in Delhi. He is available to the Press every day and also holds
briefing sessions every working day when Parliament is not in
session, and once a week when it is. The correspondents are
supplied with background information and publicity material on
subjects of interest to them. The Foreign Secretary and other
Secretaries also meet the Indian and Foreign Press informally
and periodically. As a result Press relations become considerably
improved.
<pg64>
Over 561 Press Releases were issued on various topics.
These were used by the local Press, the All-India Radio and in
Indian News Transmissions.
Logistic facilities were provided to 119 visiting foreign correspondents and TV teams. Arrangements were also made
for some of them to meet the President, the Prime Minister, the
Deputy Prime Minister and other important dignitaries. A twomember Beligan TV team visited India to prepare a documentary film on India's cultural heritage, in addition to a Spanish
team which came here to make a TV feature. Television
teams also came from Germany, U.K., Switzerland, Sweden
France and Japan for making films on various subjects relating
to India.
Press delegations from Algeria and the Lebanon were
invited to visit India during the year. Local hospitality was
also extended to visiting journalists from Canada, Nepal, Saudi
Arabia, the United Arab Republic, Indonesia, U.K., Australia,
West Germany, Switzerland, Hungary, Denmark and Malaysia.

Foreign travel facilities were provided to 76 Indian journalists
going abroad during this period.
GANDHI CENTENARY
The External Publicity Division has been associated with
the Gandhi Centenary Sub-Committee for celebrations abroad
in ail advisory capacity in regard to the formulation and organisation of the celebrations and maintenance of liaison with Indian
Missions for this purpose.
The Foreign Minister is the President of the Gandhi Centenary Committee for celebrations abroad.
The beginning of October marked the inauguration of
Gandhi Centenary celebrations abroad celebrations were held
through the association of Indian Missions in 69 countries. For
<pg65>
planning and organising the celebrations abroad, during the
Centenary Year ending Oct 02, 1969 the Missions have
arranged the formation of local and national committees and
have drawn up elaborate programmes.
In connection with the Gandhi Centenary, the Division
arranged the distribution abroad of various kinds of publicity
material-literature, books, features, photographs. and tapes. It
also arranged the production of publications in foreign languages
and helped in coordinating the programmes of presentation of
works on the Gandhian theme to foreign dignitaries and in the
organisation of an international seminar in New Delhi on
Gandhian thought (from 27 to 29 January, 1969).
BUDGET
The total budget for the External Publicity Division including the I.S.I. units abroad amounts to Rs. 1,68,54,400 for the
year 1968-69. (This does not include the information units
which have no separate budget grants.) of this amount,
Rs. 42,38,000 is for expenditure at Headquarters. The breakup in regard to the expenditure on (1) establishment, and (2)
actual publicity is as follows:
Expenditure on
Total
Establish- Publicity
ment
(1) I. S. I. units abroad

91,60,000 34,56,400 1,26,16,400

(2) Headquarters

4,21,000 38,17,000

42,38,000

Grand Total

95,81,000 72,73,400 1,68,54,400

INDIA
USA CHINA PAKISTAN AUSTRALIA GERMANY NEW ZEALAND CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
FIJI SPAIN VIETNAM BHUTAN NEPAL SOMALIA KENYA SYRIA THAILAND AFGHANISTAN
INDONESIA TURKEY SWEDEN SWITZERLAND UNITED KINGDOM FRANCE JAPAN ALGERIA
LEBANON CANADA DENMARK HUNGARY MALAYSIA
Oct 02, 1969

Technical and Economic Co-Operation
CHAPTER XI
TECHNICAL AND ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION
It is an accepted policy of the Government of India to
further economic co-operation with other countries, especially
with the developing countries. In recognition of the growing
importance of India's developing economic relations, the Economic Division of the Ministry was reorganised and in the light
of experience gained during the preceding 4 years, steps were
taken to increase the scope of the functions of the Division to
cover a wider field.
The Economic Division was associated with important
deliberations on economic matters both. in India and abroad.
As far as UN agencies were concerned, a representative of
the Division attended the 34th Session of the ECOSOC in
Geneva and the Ministerial Conference on Economic Co-operation in South-East Asia in Bangkok. The Division was associated with all important discussions held with visiting delegations
on matters pertaining to trade, shipping and air agreements and
those relating to the possibilities of joint ventures, economic
aid, credit, payments agreements etc.
A special feature of the activities of the Division was the
stress laid on technical and feasibility surveys of selected areas
for the purpose of promoting India's economic relations. The
National Industrial Development Corporation (NIDC) has been
carrying out such surveys. It is likely to undertake a survey
of the Gulf States which will be financed by the ITEC funds.
A number of joint venture proposals in Iran and Malaysia have
materialised and others are in the offing.
<pg66>

<pg67>
All Heads of Indian Missions abroad have been instructed
to take greater personal interest in matters relating to economic
and technical co-operation. The Missions were requested to
furnish periodically, special reports containing information and
data having relevance to India's economic relations with foreign
countries. During the Prime Minister's visit to countries in
South-East Asia and Latin America which took place in 1968,
possibilities of technical and economic co-operation with the
countries in the respective regions received particular attention.
These matters were also discussed at considerable length during
the Conference of Heads of Indian Mission in South-East Asia
held by the Prime Minister at Kuala Lumpur in 1968 and
a Second Conference held at New Delhi in December 1968.
Government have decided to set up a coordinating unit in
the Economic Division in order to streamline the flow of information between Indian Missions abroad and the various Ministries and other organisations in India and to ensure that specific
proposals initiated by the Missions are expeditiously processed.
This unit is, at present, being organised and will start functioning shortly.
In the field of technical and economic co-operation, the pro
gress in 1968-69 was generally satisfactory. A measure of the
increased tempo is evidenced in the expenditure incurred on
various schemes under the technical and economic co-operation
programme during the year which will be of the order of Rs. 68
lakhs. This sum is considerably higher than outlay in previous
years and is nearly double the technical assistance programmes
financed under the Colombo Plan and the Special Commonwealth African Assistance Programme (SCAAP). 41 experts
were provided to developing countries including Afghanistan,
Kenya, Ethiopia, the People's Republic of South Yemen and
Malaysia by February 1969, as against a total of 13 in the
previous year. Similarly, training places were provided to 95
foreign nationals during this period as against 51 in the previous
year. In addition, 68 training places in Defence training estab<pg68>
lishments were also made available. These figures do not include the experts or training places made available to developing countries at their own cost. Apart from providing experts
and facilities in training institutions, experts advice for the selection of technical personnel in India, was also provided.
An important development during the year was the drawing
up and/or implementation of composite bilateral economic cooperation programmes. Afghanistan and Malaysia deserve
special mention because instead of ad hoc proposals for requests

or experts or training places, India's programmes with these
countries were larger in size and covered a wider field. Thus,
in the case of Malaysia, it was agreed that training would be
provided to 500 trainees of the Majlis Amanah Ra'ayat
(MARA) a vocational training organization sponsored by the
Malaysian Government. This is to spread over a period of
five years and 100 would be financed under the ITEC Programme and 50 under the Colombo Plan, the rest to be financed
by the Malaysian Government. India provided five experts to,
the Federal Industrial Development Authority under the Colombo
Plan and another 10 experts are expected to be recruited by
the Malaysian authorities shortly. A techno-economic survey of
Malaysia is to be undertaken by the National Industrial Development Corporation (NIDC). As a part of this overall programme, India has agreed to set up an Institute of Technology
for MARA under which machinery worth Rs. 1.24 crores has
been offered. Under this scheme 80 experts and lecturers
would be deputed by India to the Institute during the initial
years and 23 MARA nominees would be trained in India.
Apart from the above, agricultural equipment worth Rs. 3 lakhs
Alas offered by the Prime Minister during her visit to Malaysia.
As a follow-up of her visit, contacts in the commercial and
industrial fields between the two countries gained momentum
and a number of visits of experts from both sides took place.
Amongst the important visitors to India, besides the Prime
Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister of Malaysia, were the
Director of Vocational Training in the Government sponsored
<pg69>
organisation, the MARA, and the Chairman of the National.
Electricity Board. On the Indian side, a delegation of Indian
industrialists visited Malaysia in November 1968.
In the case of Afghanistan, work on the 100 bed Children's
Hospital will gain momentum following an agreement, on the
preliminary essentials of the Project having been reached between the two Governments. Against the total allocation of
Rs. 92.5 lakhs for the hospital, expenditure during the current
financial year is likely to be of the order of Rs. 1.0 lakhs. Apart
from this project, agricultural implements worth Rs. 1.7 lakhs
are awaiting shipment to Kabul for presentation by the Government of India. India has also provided two jeeps with trailers
to the Afghan Government to assist the Indian irrigation engineering experts in Afghanistan conducting certain surveys underthe Colombo Plan. Training was provided to 10 Afghan
nationals in flying and aircraft maintenance. A number of
teachers and doctors were also provided.
India's relations in the technical and economic fields with,
Iran received a fillip with the visit of the Deputy Prime Minister
to Iran in July 1968 and of Ms Imperial Majesty the Shahenshah of Iran to India in January 1969. These visits greatly,

enhanced the prospects of industrial and technical collaboration
between the two countries. An officer has been specially designated to co-ordinate the various programmes of co-operation
with Iran under the Technical and Economic Co-operation
Agreement with Iran drawn up during the State visit of the
Shahenshah of Iran.
In the field of multilateral co-operation, India is participatingin the Prek Thnot Project in Cambodia under the Mekong Valley
Development Scheme. India's contribution will be of the order
of Rs. 15 lakhs in the shape of frames and gates for the Prek
Thnot Project. In Africa, close relations were maintained with,
the Economic Commission for Africa as in the past. Three.
experts were deputed to the ECA during the period under review and training provided to one of their officials. It was
<pg70>
also agreed to supply machinery worth Rs. 2.30 lakhs to the
ECA for demonstration purposes. A delegation led by the
Deputy Minister in the Ministry of External Affairs attended
the 9th Biannual Conference of the ECA in February 1969
which also marked the 10th anniversary of the foundation of
the Commission. India's continued interest in the activities of
the ECA and participation as, Observer in. its working sessions
have been greatly appreciated by the African countries.
The Government of India made a gift of machinery and
equipment worth Rs. 5 lakhs to Kenya, under its programme
of Indian Technical and Economic Co-operation.
INDIA
SWITZERLAND USA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC IRAN MALAYSIA SRI LANKA
AFGHANISTAN ETHIOPIA KENYA YEMEN LATVIA CAMBODIA
Oct 02, 1969

Passport and Consular Services
CHAPTER XII
PASSPORT AND CONSULAR SERVICES
PASSPORT SERVICES
The Passport and Visa Division is responsible for the

implementation of the passport and emigration policy of the
Government of India and control of the Central Passport and
Emigration Organisation including the Regional Passport and
Emigration Offices in Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi, Lucknow and
Madras.
During the Year 1968, the percentage of rejected applications
was about 0.05 per cent of the total number of applications
received. The number of applications received in the five
Regional Passport Offices by the Goa, Daman and Diu
Administration and the Chief Commissioner, Andaman and
Nicobar Islands including those brought forward from previous
year was 1,20,243. Out of this, 1,07,180 passports were issued.
At Headquarters, 3,614 official passports, 485 diplomatic
passports and 2,784 visas to foreigners were issued.
Emigration to Britain
According to the statistics published by the British Government, Indian visitors to Britain during 1967 were 57,496, as
against 53,469 during 1966. The net inflow of Indian nationals
into Britain after deducting the number of those who left Britain
during 1967, worked out to 22,638. The corresponding figures
in earlier years were 18,402 in 1966, 18,815 in 1965, and
15,513 in 1964. For the year 1968 (up to 30 November) 3,656
employment vouchers were issued by the British Government to
Indian nationals for employment in Britain as against 4,126 in
1967.
<pg71>
<pg72>
During 1968 (up to 30 November) 1,045 Indian nationals
were refused admission into Britain by the British Immigration
authorities, mostly on the ground that they were seeking employment without employment vouchers and had to return to India.
Emigration to countries other than Britain
Applications for passport facilities for countries other this
Britain, especially for the African and Persian Gulf countries,
continued to be received from applicants who had secured
employment as teachers, technicians, nurses, etc. in those
countries. Passports were also issued to various groups of
artistes/musicians touring abroad for cultural purposes.
The Protector of Emigrants at the air and sea ports registered
under the Emigration Act, 1922, the departure of 2,442 skilled
workers, most of whom went to the Persian Gulf and East African
countries.
Deportation

469 Indian nationals were deported from Ceylon. on charges.
of illicit immigration.
Repatriation
371 repatriates arrived in India from Malaysia in the year
1968.
Revenue receipts
The Regional Passport Offices earned a revenue of Rs.
18.36,791 during the year 1968.
CONSULAR SERVICES
The Consular Division of the Ministry of External Affairs is
responsible for guiding the Indian Missions/Posts abroad on
consular work and offers assistance and advice on consular matters
<pg73>
to foreign Missions in India. It also performs consular and
quasi-consular functions on behalf of a few Commonwealth
countries, at the request of those Governments, who do not have
resident Missions in India.
Broadly speaking, this Division deals with cases of repatriation, deportation of Indian, nationals from foreign countries and
extradition of fugitive offenders from India to foreign countries
and vice versa under the Extradition Act, 1962, etc. It also
arranges to extend financial assistance and relief to Indian
nationals stranded abroad, assists Indian nationals in tracing the
whereabouts of their relatives abroad, and deals with matters of
estates and properties of deceased Indian nationals abroad and
foreign nationals in India.
The Government of India looks after consular and quasiconsular functions on behalf of the Governments of Jamaica,
Malta and Malawi. This work is being handled by the Consular
Division.
Reciprocal arrangements with foreign countries in respect of
the service of summonses in civil cases, execution of decrees,
examination of witnesses in criminal cases, enforcement of
maintenance orders, authentication of documents required in
foreign countries, etc., are also processed in the Division.
Proposals to have reciprocal arrangements under section
29(c) of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908, for the service of
summonses and other processes with Japan, West Germany,
Belgium, Hong Kong, U.A.R., U.S.S.R. and Switzerland could
not be finalised pending amendment of Order 5, Rule 26(b)
of the Civil Procedure Code, which is currently engaging the

attention of the Ministry of Law. Reciprocal arrangements in
this regard with New Zealand, Thailand, Spain and France and
the revision of the existing arrangement with Nepal are being
pursued.
Reciprocal arrangements under Section 3 of the Maintenance
Orders Enforcement Act, 1921, have been completed with Fiji
<pg74>
during the year. Proposals to revise these arrangements with
Australia, Tanzania, Uganda, Malaysia, Malawi, Zambia, Lesotho
and Botswana have been initiated during the year. Arrangements
for the conclusion of these arrangements with Nepal, Sikkim,
France, Canada and West Germany are being expedited.
Cases relating to reciprocal arrangements for execution of
decrees under section 44A of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908
with Japan, Nepal and Australia are being pursued, while
arrangements with Singapore and Trinidad and Tobago were
concluded during the year.
Negotiations for reciprocal arrangements under section
504(3) and section 508A of the Criminal Procedure Code for
examination of witnesses on Commission in Criminal Cases with
Nepal, Cameroon, Czechoslovakia, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Aden,
Malaysia and West Germany are still in progress. A Proposal
to enter into such arrangements with Sweden has been initiated
during the year.
The proposal to enter into reciprocal arrangements with
Czechoslovakia, Ireland, Canada, Greece and the USA under
section 14 of the Notaries Act, 1952 is still being pursued. The
proposal for concluding reciprocal arrangements under section 57
of the Administrator General's Act, 1963, with Kuwait is being
pursued with that Government. The proposal to conclude
extradition arrangements under the Extradition Act, 1962 with
Ceylon, Ghana, Uganda, Malaysia and West Germany is being
pursued.
During the period under review, 2 persons were extradited
to Tanzania. 5 cases of extradition of offenders from or to
India were initiated during the year and cases of 6 persons for
extradition were being pursued. 15 cases of trial of Indian
citizens for offences committed abroad and trial of foreigners.
in the country of their nationality for offences committed in
India were processed during the year. In addition, 17 cases of
deportation of Indian nationals from other countries and 11 cases
of arrests of Indian nationals abroad were also dealt with.
<pg75>
17 Letters of Request and Commissions for Examination of

Witnesses abroad were forwarded to the authorities concerned
after scrutiny. Also, 40 summonses and 28 Maintenance Orders
and other processes which were sent abroad for servicing and,
execution were dealt with during the period under review.
2,411 judicial and commercial documents including births,
deaths, marriages and educational certificates and Power of
Attorney, etc., for use abroad, were attested.
63 cases of estates and properties of Indians abroad and.
17 cases of foreigners in India in respect of their properties
were dealt with during the year.
69 persons were repatriated from foreign countries by Indian
Missions/Posts abroad, at public expense, at a total cost of
Rs. 50,440.70.
A total sum of Rs. 1,172.29 was advanced to seven Indian
citizens by Indian Missions/Posts abroad, to tide over their
temporary difficulties which arose due to unforeseen circumstances
e.g., theft, illness, delay in the departure of ships, or because
their travellers' cheques were not endorsed for the country where
they were stranded.
459 cases for the grant of Indian citizenship, referred to by
the Ministry of Home Affairs were scrutinised in the Division,
during the year, in addition to examination of 250 references
received from Indian Missions/Posts abroad as well as foreign
Missions in India. The above figures also include requests for
Indian citizenship received from persons of Goan origin who,
failed to surrender their foreign passports within the stipulated
time for being recognised as Indian citizens. 65 cases received
from PV Division in respect of persons who had applied for
Indian passports were also examined and returned to that
Division with our comments and views thereon.
33 cases of marriages, desertion, bigamy, etc., and 51 cases
of enquiries regarding whereabouts and welfare of Indian
nationals abroad were also dealt with.
<pg76>
52 cases of deaths of foreign nationals in India Were reported
to the concerned foreign missions in India.
6. Cases relating to remittances and Customs facilities were
dealt with. 67 cases relating to complaints against Indians
abroad and foreigners in India and against Indian firms and
vice versa and recovery of private outstanding dues from Indians
abroad were handled during the year under review. 11 cases
regarding issue of certificates of birth, death, marriage, etc., and
5 cases pertaining to the verification of dates of birth, death,
etc., were dealt with. 9 "No Obligation to Return to India"

certificates were issued to Indian students abroad, who wanted
to settle down in foreign countries, during the period. 29 cases
relating to the settlement of claims of Indian citizens for pay,
pension, gratuity, etc., against foreign Governments were received
and taken up with the respective foreign Governments through
diplomatic channels.
During the period 1942-47, a sum of Rs. 7,18,03,561 was
advanced to the evacuees from War Zones during World War II
on repayable basis. Out of this amount, a sum of Rs.
25,53,381.85 is debitable to the Government of Burma. So far
a sum of Rs. 40,59,738.39 has been recovered, a sum of
Rs. 2,77,729.78 has been written off and a sum of Rs.
4,00,15,092.83 is still outstanding. This outstanding amount will
be further reduced by Rs. 25,53,381.85 when debits are accepted
by the Government of Burma. Efforts are also being made to
recover the outstanding balance from the evacuees through the
State Governments and Missions concerned and to write off the
irrecoverable amount.
Several officers and staff who were either fresh, appointees or
who had not handled consular work in the Indian Missions/Posts
abroad previously, were imparted training in consular matters
during the year.
Consular Activities Abroad
A statement showing the statistical data regarding the
<pg77>
activities of Indian Missions/Posts abroad. is given at Appendix
IX.
Diplomatic Missions in India
During the period under review, the Government of Mauritius
established their High Commission in New Delhi and appointed
His Excellency Mr. Ratindrah Ghurburrun as their first High
Commissioner to India, who took up his office on Jun 27, 1968.
The total number of diplomatic missions in India is 70. A
list of the diplomatic missions in India and a list of sub-offices
of the High Commissions are given at Appendix III.
Consular Posts in India
The total number of foreign consular posts in India at the
end of October 1968, was 112.
A list of consular posts in India is given at Appendix IV.
Distinguished Visitors from abroad

A list of distinguished visitors to India from abroad during
the year is given at Appendix V.
27 M of EA-6.
INDIA
USA MALAYSIA JAMAICA MALAWI MALTA GERMANY JAPAN BELGIUM HONG KONG
SWITZERLAND FRANCE NEW ZEALAND SPAIN THAILAND NEPAL FIJI AUSTRALIA LESOTHO
TANZANIA UGANDA ZAMBIA BOTSWANA CANADA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE TRINIDAD AND
TOBAGO CAMEROON LIBERIA NORWAY SIERRA LEONE SLOVAKIA SWEDEN GREECE
IRELAND KUWAIT GHANA BURMA MAURITIUS
Jun 27, 1968

Organization and Administration
CHAPTER XIII
ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION
There was no change in the sphere of responsibilities of the
Ministry of External Affairs except that the work relating to the
rehabilitation of Tibetan Refugees was transferred to the
Department of Rehabilitation.
Organization
Shri Dinesh Singh took over as Foreign Minister in February
1969 while Shri Surendra Pal Singh continued to hold charge
as Deputy Minister.
At the level of Secretaries, there were a few changes in the
Ministry's set-up. On the retirement of Shri R. Dayal, Shri T. N.
Kaul took over as Foreign Secretary with effect from Nov 06, 1968
After the retirement of Shri R. G. Rajwade, Shri Kewal
Singh took over as Secretary with effect from 17 December,
1968. Shri V. H. Coelho assumed charge of the post of
Secretary with effect from 7 November, 1968.
A second post of Additional Secretary was created and
Sri A. G. Meneses assumed charge of the post. On Shri
Meneses' appointment as Ambassador of India to Ireland,
Shri P. R. S. Mani took over the post with effect from 11
October, 1968. Shri S. Krishnamurti assumed charge of the
other post of Additional Secretary vacated by Shri V. H. Coelho

with effect from 27 January, 1969.
I.F.S. Committee
A substantial portion of the recommendations of the I.F.S.
Committee were accepted in principle. Of these recommendations
such of those as fell within the administrative competence of
<pg78>
<pg79>
the Ministry have largely been implemented. In regard to other
recommendations which require consultation with other Ministries
and the Union Public Service Commission, etc. such consultations
are in progress. A number of major recommendations which
involve considerable expenditure have to be phased out over a
period of years; some can only be implemented when funds are
available.
The Committee's recommendations relating to induction of
officers of the Indian Information Service into the Indian Foreign
Service (A) and increase of promotion quota of I.F.S. (B)
officers have been implemented. The process of selection of
I.S.I./I.F.S. (B) Grade I officers has also been completed.
Deputations/Delegations Abroad
A Statement of deputations/delegations sent abroad, countries
visited and the purpose of visits is given in Appendix VI.
Rationalisation of methods of work, etc.
In the interest of efficiency, the work relating to scholarships,
which had hitherto been dealt with in various Divisions, was
centralised in the Economic Division of this Ministry. The work
relating to Indians Overseas was also centralised in South-East
Asia Division of this Ministry.
Recording and Indexing
The R. & I. Unit was strengthened which resulted in weeding
out of 40,000, files and in having 50,000 files recorded and
transferred to the Record Rooms by various Sections/Registries
in the Ministry.
Missions Abroad
During the year, two new Missions at the level of ConsulateGeneral were opened at Seoul (Republic of Korea) and
<pg80>
Pyongyang (Democratic People's Republic of Korea). The

Minister resident in Washington was accredited as Ambassador
(non-resident) to Costa Rica. A list of Indian Missions/Posts
abroad is given at Appendix VII
Foreign Service Inspections
The Foreign Service Inspectorate visited Indian Missions in
Sydney, Canberra, Wellington, Suva, Manila, Phnom Penh,
Bangkok, Singapore, Kathmandu, Gangtok, Thimpu, Karachi
and Islamabad during 1968. The Inspectors made various
recommendations including those regarding rationalisation of
staff and reorganisation of work, most of which have been
implemented. A few more are under examination.
The need for maximum economy consistent with efficiency
was kept in view in dealing with requests for additional staff
in Missions abroad, as well as at Headquarters.
Office Accommodation
Three Divisions of this Ministry have now been accommodated
in the newly constructed "Shastri Bhawan". Various other
Sections of the Ministry are still scattered in different buildings
As soon as additional accommodation in South Block becomes,
available, efforts will be made to bring them together within the
South Block to the extent possible.
Purchase and Supply of Furniture/Equipment, etc. to Missions
Abroad
The Purchase Unit of the Ministry arranged supplies to the
Indian Missions abroad to the tune of Rs. 16 lakhs in the year
1968. This resulted not only in saving scarce foreign exchange
but also gave token encouragement to our indigenous industries,
besides becoming a vehicle for external publicity for Indian
products.
<pg81>
EXPENDITURE
The expenditure of this Ministry in 1968-69 is expected to
be Rs. 4089.35 lakhs and falls under the following two main
heads:
(In lakhs of Rupees)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------(i) External Affairs
1931.00
(ii) Other Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry of External Affairs.
2158.35
TOTAL

4089.35

-----------------------------------------------------------------------The annual expenditure of 100 resident Missions/Posts abroad
amounts to Rs. 1036.45 lakhs. Out of which Rs. 73.15 lakhs
is spent on salaries of officers, Rs. 219:89 lakhs on salaries of
staff, Rs. 349.26 lakhs on foreign and other compensatory
allowances and Rs. 394.15 lakhs on office and residential accommodation and other contingent expenditure. This works out to
an average annual expenditure of Rs. 10.36 lakhs per Mission.
The item-wise break-up of the expenditure is as follows:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------Revised
Estimates
1968.69
(in lakhs)
Rs.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------I. EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
(a) Establishment Charges and Travelling Allowances including cost of passage:
(i) Headquarters

122.58

(ii) Regional Passport and Emigration Organization

15.89

(iii) Missions/Posts abroad, including High Commission for
India, London.
579.64
(iv) Travelling Allowance including cost of Passage

93.13

TOTAL ESTT. CHARGES & TRAVELLING ALLOWANCE
-------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg82>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------Revised
Estimates
1968-69
in lakhs)
Rs.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------(b) Publicity expenditure
(c) Other contingent expenditure

59.05
446.77

811.24

(d) Contributions to

(i) U.N.O.

180.51

(ii) Commonwealth Sectt. &
Foundation.
10.85
(iii) U.N. Relief and Work Agency
(e) Delegation to

0.69

(i) U. N. General Assembly and other
international conferences
9.00

(ii) Indo-China Commission

13.57

(f) Demarcation of boundaries

65.74

(g) Entertainment Charges/Hospitality Grant
(h) Miscellaneous items
TOTAL

18.91
314.67

1931.00

II. OTHER REVENUE EXPENDITURE OF THE MINISTRY OF
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS.
(a) Aid to Nepal:

(i) Projects outlay .

(ii) Establishment Charges

1118.45
13.00

TOTAL AID TO NEPAL
(b) Subsidy to Sikkim
(c) Subsidy to Bhutan

1131.45
306.82
571.50

(d) Technical assistance and economic aid to developing
countries of Asia and Africa
40.00
(e) Other Miscellaneous items ad hoc grant-in-aid contributions, loss by exchange, etc.
105.58
TOTAL 'OTHER REVENUE EXPENDITURE'
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg83>
HISTORICAL DIVISION AND LIBRARY
As part of its normal tasks involving Historical research, the
Division prepared several Papers on different topics, providing
background to current problems of international affairs and also
other useful or detailed information and analysis of facts pertain-

2158.85

ing to those Problems required in the formulation of long-term.
policies. The printing of selected old records for official use is
progressing satisfactorily. The Research and Intelligence Section,
working under the direction of the Historical Division, continued
to bring out Monthly Summaries for official use. The Division
prepared and issued monthly summaries of the activities of the
Government of India for the information of Indian Missions
abroad. In addition, the Division provided assistance to scholars
working on official research projects. Assistance was also given
to private scholars, to the degree permitted by current restrictions
on access to official records. The Division continued to act as
the coordinating agency of the Ministry in the matter of examining and clearing maps and publications imported from abroad.
The Ministry's Library, functioning under the overall supervision of the Director, Historical Division, houses about 67,000
books besides a large collection of maps. The Library also makes
available to the members of the Ministry a large number of
Indian and foreign periodicals and newspapers, Government
documents and reference material.
POLICY PLANNING AND REVIEW DIVISIONS
In the course of the year under review, the Policy Planning
and Review Division continued the study and analysis of the
long-term problems of India's external relations with a view to
helping Government to determine future lines of its policy. It
was also associated with analysis and advice on important current
policy problems. The Division assisted in preparing for discussions and consultations with foreign Governments. This Division's work has enabled the Ministry to increase its contacts with:
academic institutions whose work relates to foreign affairs.
INDIA
IRELAND USA KOREA NORTH KOREA COSTA!!AUSTRALIA CAMBODIA FIJI NEW ZEALAND
PHILIPPINES NEPAL PAKISTAN REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
UNITED KINGDOM CHINA BHUTAN
Nov 06, 1968

APPENDIX I INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES,
CONGRESSES, SEMINARS
APPENDIX I
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES, CONGRESSES, SEMINARS, ETC.
INDIA PARTICIPATED IN 1968

IN WHICH

-----------------------------------------------------------------------S.No.

Name of the Conference

-----------------------------------------------------------------------IN INDIA
1.

United Nations Conference on Trade and Development-II Session,
Feb 01, 1968o 28th March, 1968.

2.

CASTASIA-Conference on the Application of Social and Technology
to Development of Asia-New Delhi, 9 to 2o August, 1968.

3.

US Seminar on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
New Delhi, 22 August to 9 September, 1968.

4.

21st Session of WHO Regional Committee for South-East Asia,
New Delhi, September, 1968.

5.

ILO Regional Workers' Education Seminar on Workers' Participation
in Economic and Social Development, India, 30 September to 12
October, 1968.

6.

ILO Inter-Regional Seminar on Industrial Relations and Personnel
Management, Jamshedpur, October-December 1968.

7.

ILO Seminar on the Role of Handicrafts in Economy on Developing
Countries, New Delhi, 4 to 11 November, 1968.

8.

UNESCO Asian Seminar on India and Central Asia on "Movement of
peoples and ideas between India and other countries of Central Asia
from the earliest times", New Delhi, December 1968.

9.

International Seminar on Human Rights (National and Bombay Women's Association), Bombay, 10 to 16 December, 1968.

10.

Symposium on Role of Housing and Supply, New Delhi, 19 December,
1968.

ABROAD
1. ECAFE Committee on Trade 11th Session held at Bangkok, 1 to 26
January, 1968.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------<pg84>
<pg85>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.

Name of the Conference

-----------------------------------------------------------------------2.

41st Session of the Executive Board of the World Health Organisation,

Geneva, 23 January to 2 February 1968.
3.

ECAFE-Seminar on the relationship of Social Work Education to
Development Needs and Problems at Bangkok, 29 January to 19 February, 1968.

4.

16th Session of the Transport & Communications Committee, Bangkok
29 January to 5 February, 1968.

5.

ECAFE Committee on Trade (Eleventh Session), Bangkok, 18 to 26
January 1968.

6.

Meeting of the Eighteen Nation Disarmament Committee, Geneva,
18 January to 14 March, 1968.

7.

Meeting of Kutch Tribunal, Geneva, 21 to 27 January, 1968.

8.

United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL)
New York, 29 January to 26 February, 1968.

9.

Committee on Industry & Natural Resources (20th Session), 20 to 27
February, 1968.

10.

3rd Session of the Asian Industrial Development Council, Bangkok,
12 to 19 February, 1968.

11.

2oth Session of the ECAFE Committee on Industry and Natural
Resources held at Bangkok, 20 to 27 February, 1968.

12

13.

UN Study Group visit to Treatment and Rehabilitation Centres for
Drug Addicts at Bangkok, Singapore and Hong Kong in February,
1968.
Meetings of the Technical Committees of the International Standards
Organisation (Europe and America), Geneva, 23 to 27 February
1968.

14.

4th Session of the Commission for Controlling the Desert Locust
in the Eastern Region and Third Session of the Executive Committee
of the Commission held in Kabul, 17 to 24 February, 1968.

15.

3rd Session of the Study Group on Oil seeds, Oils and Fats, held at

Technica
l
16.

Rome, 12 to 13 February, 1968, and the Session of the Groups
Working Party held at Rome, 5 to 10 February, 1968.
FAO Conference on Pig Production and Diseases in the Far East,
Bangkok, 19 to 24 February, 1968.
<pg86>

-----------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.

Name

of the Conference

------------------------------------------------------------------------

o
f

17.

Meetings of the Working Parties of the UPU
held at Berne, 25 to 29 February, 1968.

Executive Council

18.

Seminar organised by UPU held in Tokyo, 1 to 14 February, 1968.

19.

General Assembly of the International Institute for the Unification
Private Law (UNIDROIT) held at Rome on 29 February, 1968.

20.

171st Session of the Governing Body of ILO, Geneva, 27 February
to 1 March, 1968.

21.

24th Session of Commission on Human Rights, New York, 5 February
to 8th March, 1968.

22.

Codex Alimentarius Commission, 5th Session held in Rome, 20 February
to 1 March, 1968.

23.

7th Commonwealth Broadcasting Conference held in Wellington
(New Zealand), 18 February to 6 March, 1968.

24. 19th Meeting of the Executive Council of the International
Commission
on Irrigation and Drainage held at Cairo, 29 February to 7 March,
1968.
25.

Meeting of Working Party of Experts on Facilitation of International
Traffic, Bangkok, 26 to 30 March, 1968.

26.

Conference of Plenipotentiaries, Vienna, 24 March to 25 June, 1968.

27.

24th Session of ECAFE held at Canberra, 17 to 30 April, 1968.

28.

W.F.P. 13th Session of the Inter-Governmental Committee held in
Rome, 17 to 24 April, 1968.

29.

Meeting of the Working Party of the Management Council of the Consultative Committee for Postal Studies, Paris. 22 to 25 April, 1968.

30. 8th Meeting of the International Tin Council held at La Paz
(Bolivia)
on 22 April, 1968.
31.
Executiv
e

3rd General Session of the Conference and 8th Session of the
Committee of the Afro-Asian Rural Reconstruction Organisation held
in Seoul (South Korea), 22 to 29 April, 1968.

32.

Spring Meetings of the Inter-Parliamentary Union held in Dakar
(Senegal) in April 1968.

33.

UN Sugar Conference, Geneva, from 17-4-1968 for about a month.

34.

8th Session of the Textiles Committee of ILO, Geneva, 10 March
to 29 April, 1968.
<pg87>

-----------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.

Name of the Conference

-----------------------------------------------------------------------35. Meeting of UN Committee for Programme and Co-ordination, NewYork, 15 April to 6 May, 1968.
36. UN International Conference on Human Rights, Tehran (Iran), 22
April to 13 May, 1968.
37.

Meetings of F.A.O. Programme Committee held in Rome, 29 April
to 10 May, 1968.

38.

Meetings of the Study Group X, XI & XII of the International Radio
Consultative Committee (C.C.I.R.) held at Palma de Mallocra,

Ballocra
,

3
1

Ballearic Islands (Spain), 29 April to 10 May, 1968.

39.

2nd Session of UNIDO, Vienna, 17 April to 14 May, 1968.

40.

Meetings of the UPU Executive Council and its Sub-Committees held,
at Paris and Berne, 22 April to 24 May, 1968.

41.

Resumed XXIInd Session of UN General Assembly, New York, 24
April to 12 June, 1968.

42.

International Civil Aviation Organisation Division, Montreal, 14 to
May, 1968.

43.

20th Assembly of the International Rubber Study Group, Paris &
London, 27 to 31 May, 1968.

44.

2nd Session of the FAO Panel of Experts on Agricultural Education
Rome, 8 to 10 May, 1968.

45.

1st Session of FAO Panel of Experts on Agricultural Information,
(Farm Broadcasting), Rome, 7 to 16 May, 1968.

46.

XXIIIrd Session of the Administrative Council of the ITU, Geneva,
11 to 31 May, 1968.

47.

11th Plenary meeting of COSPAR, Tokyo, 9 to 21 May, 1968.

48.

XXth Session of the IMCO Council, London 14 to 17 May, 1968.

49.

6th Session of the Trade & Development Board, Geneva, 6 & 7 May,
1968.

50.

44th Session of Economic and Social Council, New York, 6 to 31 May,

1968.
51.

21st World Health Assembly, Geneva, 6 May, 1968.

52.

ILO Study on Pre-Vocational Training Meeting, Tunis, May 1968.
<pg88>

-----------------------------------------------------------------------S.No.

Name of the Conference

-----------------------------------------------------------------------53. 172nd Session of the Governing Body of ILO, Geneva, 27 May to 1
June, 1968.
54.

4th International Conference on Universal Aspect of Atmospheric
Electricity, Tokyo, 12 to 18 May, 1968.

55.

Seminar on Economic Development in Asia, Tokyo, 20 to 22nd May,
1968.

56.

11th Session of the Joint FAO/WHO Committee of Experts on
the Code of Principles concerning Milk and Milk Products, Rome,
10 to 15 June, 1968.

57.

2/th meeting of the International Cotton Advisory Committee, Athens,
3 to 12 June, 1968.

58.
59.
60.

4th Session of the FAO Regional Commission on Farm Management
for Asia and the Far East, Bangkok, 3 to 7 June, 1968.
UNDP Governing Council, Vienna, 11 to 28 June, 1968.
52nd Session of the International Labour Organisation (ILO), Geneva,
5 to 27 June, 1968.

61.

UNICEF Executive Board Meeting, New York, 6 to 18 June, 1968.

62.

Meeting of International Organisation for Standardisation, Geneva,
10 to 19 June, 1968.

63.

Meeting of the Legal Sub-Committee, Geneva, 4 to 28 June, 1968.

64.

UNESCO Inter-Regional Meeting of the Group of Secretaries-General
of National Commissions, Cairo, 1 to 8 July, 1968.
Joint Meeting of UN Committee of Programmes and Co-ordination and
the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, Bucharest, 3 to 5
July 1968.

65.

66.

1st Session of the Committee on Statistics of FAO's Study Group on
Bananas, Rome 1 to 3 July, 1968.

67.

FAO/IAEA Symposium on the use of Isotopes and Radiation in Soil
Organic Matter Studies, Vienna, 15 to 19 July, 1968.

68.

The Agricultural Project Course under IBDR-Washington, 8 to 20
July, 1968.

69.

Meetings of I.S.O./T.C. 113-Measurements of Liquid Flow in Open
Channels and its Working Groups, Paris 1 to 13 July, 1968.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------<pg89>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------S. NO.

Name of the Conference

-----------------------------------------------------------------------70.

2nd FAO World Conference on Animal Production at the University
of Maryland, USA, 14 to 20 July, 1968.

71. Seminar on Civil Registration and Vital Statistics,
Copenhagen(Denmar
k)
22 July to 9 August, 1968.
72.

7th Session of the Sub-Committee on Mineral Resources Development
and Working Party Seminar Geologists of ECAFE, Tehran, 22 July to
3 August, 1968.

73.

Interim Meetings of the International Radio Consultative Committee
(CCIR) Study Groups V, VI, VII & VIII, Colorado (USA), 9 July to
7 August, 1968.

74.

International Seminar on Freedom of Association, London, 18 July to1 August, 1968 under the auspices of the United Nations.

75.

45th Session of the Economic and Social Council, Geneva, 8 July to 2
August, 1968.

76.

Meeting of the Eighteen Nation Disarmament Committee, Geneva,16 July to 28 August, 1968.

77.

Seminar on Adult Literacy sponsored by UNESCO, Karachi, 27 July
to 3 August. Organised by coutry women of the world and the International Alliance of Women and All Pakistan Women's Association.

78.

Seminar on Financing Public Sector Investment, Bangkok, 1 to 10
August, 1968.

79.

ECAFE meeting of Government Experts on Trade Expansion, Bangkok,
20 to 28 August, 1968.
Industrial Development Organisation Inter-Regional Seminar on Indus-

80.

trial Location & Regional Development organised in co-operation with
the Government of Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic at Minsk,
August 1968.
81.

Seminar and Study tour of Industrialisation of Housing for Asia and

the Far East, Copenhagen, 25 August to 14 September, 1968.
82.

Working Group of Experts on Water Resources Planning, Bangkok,
29 August to 9 September, 1968.

83.

UN Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,
Vienna, 14 to 27 August, 1968.

84.

Conference on Non-Nuclear Weapon States, Geneva, 29 August to 28
September, 1968.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------<pg90>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.

Name of the Conference

-----------------------------------------------------------------------196
8.

85.

XIIth International Centres of Genetics, Tokyo, 18 to 28 August,

86.

International Symposium on "Genetic Effects of Radiation and Radiomimetic Chemicals, Kyoto, 30 to 3 1 August, 1968.

87.

UNESCO Inter-Governmental Conference of Experts on the Scientific
Basis for Rational Use and Conservation of the Resources of the
Biosphere, Paris, 4 to 13 September, 1968.

88.

7th Session of Trade & Development Board, Geneva, 2 to 20 September, 1968.

89.

ILO lnter-Regional Seminar on Co-operatives Distribution of Consumers Goods, Denmark, 2 to 27 September, 1968.

90.

6th Asian Regional Conference of the ILO, Tokyo, 2 to 14 September,
1968.

91.

Joint UNCTAD/FAO Working Party on Forest and Timber Products,
Geneva, 23 to 27 September, 1968.

92.

Conference of Ministers responsible for Social Welfare, New York,
3 to 12 September, 1968.

93.

16th Session of the General Assembly of ICAO, Buenos Aires,
3 to 28 September, 1968.

94.

Meeting of the UN Committee for Programme and Co-ordination, New
York, 16 to 30 September, 1968.

95.

UN Sugar Conference, Geneva, from 23 September for one month
or more.
3rd Session of the FAO Technical Working Party on Coconut Production, Protection and Processing, Djakarta (Indonesia), 9 to 19
September, 1968.

96.

97.

1st Session of the Indian Ocean Fisheries Commission, Rome, 16 to 21
September, 1968.

98.
(Canada
),
99.
100.
Executive

13th Session of the International Poplar Commission, Montreal
23 to 26 September, 1968.
Meeting of FAO's Programme Committee, Rome, 2 to 7 September, 1968.
Meeting of the Inter-Union Co-ordination Committee and the
Committee of the Paris Union of BIRPI, Geneva, 24 to 27 September,
1968.
<pg91>

-----------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.

Name of the Conference

-----------------------------------------------------------------------101.

56th Inter-Parliamentary Conference Lima (Peru in September 1969.

102.

IMCO-First session of the Ad Hoc Sub-Committee on Simla Rules,
London, 23 to 27 September, 1968.

103.

Inter-Regional Seminar on Technico Economic Organisational and
Administrative Aspects of Inland Water Transport, USSR in

September

1968.
104.

2nd Meeing of the Advisory Group of the Asian industrial Development Council ECAFE, Bangkok, 10 to 16 September, 1968.

105.

UNIDO Working Group meeting on Industrial Investment Promotion
in Developing Countries, Vienna, 23 to 27 September, 1968.

106.

Meeting of ISO/TC 45th Rubber, London, 21 to 28 September 1968

107.

Regional Seminar and Study Tour on State Trading, Moscow, 25
September to 22 October, 1968.

108.
Moscow.,

2nd UN Inter-Regional Symposium on Iron and Steel Industry,
19 September to 9 October, 1968.

109.

Group Fellowship Study Tour and International Seminar on Mechanisation of Forest Site Preparation, USSR, 18 September to 17 October,

1968.
110.
October,

Group Fellowship Study Tour and International Seminar on Livestock
and Livestock Products Statistics, USSR, 30 September to 30
1968.

111.
112.
Telephon
e

43rd Session of the FAO Committee on Commodity Problems (CCP),
Rome, 25 September to 4 October, 1968.
Fourth Plenary Assembly of the International Telegraph and
Consultative Committee (C.C.I.T.T),
23 September to 12 October, 1968.

Mardel Plata (Argentina),

113. 34h Meeting of Interim Communications Satellite
Committee(I.C.S.C.D,
)
Washington, 23 September to 5 October, 1968.
114.

115.
C.M.T.T.

Annual Session of the UPU Management Council of the Consultative
Committee for Postal Studies, Moscow, 20 September to 5 October,
1968.
Interim Meetings of C.C.I.R. Study Groups IV, IX, XIII and
Geneva, during September-October, 1968.

116.

8th Session of the Building, Civil Engineering and Public Works
Committee of International Labour Office, Geneva 30 September to
11 October, 1968.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------<pg92>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.

Name of the Conference

-----------------------------------------------------------------------117. ILO Inter-Regional Technical Meeting-cum-Study Tour on management of Small Enterprise, Turin, 23 September to 11 October, 1968.
118.

ILO Seminar on Maritime Training, Denmark, 2.9 September to 20.
October, 1968.

119.

UNESCO International Conference on History, Archaeology and Culture
of Central Asia in Kushan epoch in Dushawbe, Tajikistan (USSR) 22,
September to 7 October, 1968.

120.

23rd Session of the UN General Assembly, New York, 24 September to
26 December, 1968.

121.

ILO Asian Regional Study Tour on Manpower Planning, Japan, 7 to
26 October, 1968.

122.

Committee on Manufactures Third Session, Geneva, 8 to 19 October
1968.

123.

Inter-Governmental Group on Supplementary Financing-Fourth Session, Geneva, 21 to 25 October, 1968.

124.

Pledging Conference of UNDP, New York on 8 October, 1968.

125.

Pledging Conference on Capital Development, New York on 18 October,
1968.

126.

Permanent Group on Synthetics and Substitutes, Second Session,
Geneva, 22 to 29 October, 1968.

127. 12th Session of FAO Desert Locust Control Committee, Rome, 7
to 11 October, 1968.
128.

51st Session of the FAO Council, Rome, 7 to 22 October, 1968.

129.

Meeting of the Commonwealth Telecommunications Council on Network Planning and Unified Accounting System, Montreal, 7 to 18
October, 1968.

130. 37th General Assembly of International Criminal
Organisation

Police

(I.C.P.O.), Tehran, 1 to 8 October, 1968.
131.

Conference of South Asian Travel Commission, Rawalpindi, 23 to 26
October, 1968.

132.

Meetings of the Customs Co-operation Council held at Brussels and
of UPU Contact Committee Parcel Post Working Party of the Executive Council and Transit, Charges Sub-Committee of Letter Post Commtitee of the Executive Council held at Berne, 7 to 18 October,

1968
.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------<pg93>
----------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.

Name of the Conference

-----------------------------------------------------------------------133. Regional Plan Harmonisation Sub-Regional Consultation on Coconut
and Coconut Products, Bangkok, 20 to 28 October, 1968.
134.

4th Session of the Asian Highway Co-ordination Committee,

Bangkok, 10 to 18 October, 1968.
135.

Technical Committee of International Coffee Organisation, London,
28 October to 8 November, 1968.

136. UNESCO 15th General Conference, Paris, October-November, 1968.

Nov-

137.

UN Conference on Road Traffic, Vienna 7 October to 8 November,
1968.

138

Committee on Commodities, Third Session, Geneva, 8 October to 8
November, 1968.

139.

ILO Meeting of Experts on Co-operation, Geneva, 28 October to 1
ember, 1968.

140.

ILO-Technical Meeting on Productive Employment in Construction,
Bangkok, 28 October to 8 November, 1968.

141.

45th Resumed Session of Economic and Social Council, New York,
October-December, 1968.

142.

19th Colombo Plan Consultative Committee for Co-operative Economic
Development in South and South-East Asia, Seoul, 8 to 25 October,
1968.

143.

Conference of Art Experts from 10 Countries, Tokyo, 1 to 3,
October, 1968.

144.

Conference of Educational Leaders, Tokyo, October-November 1968.

145.

ECAFE Regional Port Seminar, Singapore, 20 to 28 October, 1968.

146.

2nd Tripartite Technical Meeting for Mines other than Coal Mines
of the ILO, Geneva, 18 to 29 November, 1968.

147.
Novembers
,

173rd Session of Governing Council of ILO, Geneva, 4 to 15
1968.

148.

3rd Session of the Consultative Sub-Committee of the Study Group,
on Hard Fibres, Rome, 4 to 8 November, 1968.

149.

Asian Regional Experts Meeting on Vocational Training Planning,
Sydney, 2 to 20 December, 1968.

150.

ILO Committee of Experts on status of Chief

Industrial Importance,

Geneva, 16 to 20 December, 1968.
----------------------------------------------------------------------27 M of EA-7.
INDIA

USA SWITZERLAND HONG KONG REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE AFGHANISTAN ITALY
NEW ZEALAND EGYPT LATVIA AUSTRIA AUSTRALIA FRANCE BOLIVIA KOREA
SENEGAL IRAN SPAIN UNITED KINGDOM TUNISIA GREECE ROMANIA DENMARK
PAKISTAN COMMONWEALTH OF INDEPENDENT STATES(CIS) RUSSIA BELORUSSIA
ARGENTINA INDONESIA CANADA PERU TAJIKISTAN BELGIUM SRI LANKA

JAPAN

Feb 01, 1968

APPENDIX II INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS OF WHICH INDIA WAS A MEMBER

APPENDIX II
INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS OF WHICH INDIA WAS A MEMBER
IN 1968-69
United Nations and its Specialised Agencies
1. General Assembly.
2. Committees and Commissions of the General Assembly:
(a)

Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.

(b)

Committee on Agreements for a Conference for the purpose of
Reviewing the Charter.

(c)

Special Committee of 24 on the situation with regard to the implementation of the Declaration on the granting of independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.
(i) Its Working Group.
(ii) Sub-Committee on Petitions.
(iii) Sub-Committee (Pacific Territories).

(d)

Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation.

(e)

Peace Observation Commission.

(f) Disarmament Commission.
(g) International Law Commission.
(h) Committee on Contributions.
(i) Administrative Tribunal.
(j) 18-Nation Disarmament Committee.
(k)

Investment Committee.

(l) Working Group of 21 to examine Administrative aid Budgetary

Procedures of the United Nations.
(m) Staff Pension Committee.
(n)

UN Committee for International Co-operation Year

(o) UN Advisory Committee on Congo.
(p)

Scientific Advisory Committee.

(q) Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions.
(r)

Special Committee on Peace-Keeping Operations.
<pg94>
<pg95>

(s) Panel of Experts for preparation of the United Nations Conference
on Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.
(t) Special Committee on Principles of International Law Concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States.
(u) Committee on Conferences.
3. Security Council.
4. Economic and Social Council.
5. Functional Commissions and Committees of the Economic and Social
Council:
(a) Commission on Human Rights.
(b) Commission on Narcotic Drugs.
(c) Statistical Commission.
(d) Population Commission.
(e) Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection
of Minorities.
(f) Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE).
(g) Permanent Central Narcotic Board (PCNB).
(h) Advisory Committee of Experts on the Prevention of Crime and
Treatment of the Offenders.
6.

Other Subsidiary Bodies of the Economic and Social Council:
(a) Executive Board of UN Children's Fund (UNICEF).
(b) UN/FAO Inter-Governmental Committee on the World Food
Programme.
(c) Permanent Central Opium Board,

(d) Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and Technology
and Development.
(e) Committee on the International Year for Human Rights.
(f) Drug Supervisory Body.
(g) Committee for Programme and Co-ordination and Expanded
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination.
(h) Committee on Non-Governmental Organisations.
(i) Committee for Development Planning.
(j) Ad Hoc Working Group on the question of a Declaration on International Economic Co-operation.
(k) Committee on Housing, Building and Planning.
(l) Programme Committee of UNICEF.
(m) FAO/UNICEF joint Policy Committee.
<pg96>
7. UN Conference on Trade and Development (The Trade and Development Board):
(a) Committee on Commodities.
(b) Permanent Sub-Committee on Commodities.
(c) Committee on Manufactures.
(d) Group on Preferences.
(e) Committee on Invisibles and Financing related to Trade.
(f) Inter-Governmental Group on Supplementary Financing.
(g) Committee on Shipping.
8. United Nations Industrial Development Organisation (UNIDO).
9. Industrial Development Board.
10. United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
11. UN Specialised Agencies:
(a) Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO).
(b) International Bank of Reconstruction and Development (IBRD).
(c) International Finance Corporation (IFC).
(d) International Monetary Fund (IMF).
(e) International Development Association (IDA).

(f) International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO).
(g) International Telecomunication Union (ITU).
(h) World Meteorological Organisation (WMO).
(i) Universal Postal Union (UPU).
(j) International Labour Organisation (ILO).
(k) UN Educational Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO).
(l) World Health Organisation (WHO).
(m) Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organisation (MCO).
12.

International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
Other Inter-Governmental Organisations

1.

Afro-Asian Rural Reconstruction Organisation, New Delhi.

2.

Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee, New Delhi.

3.

Asian Development Bank.
<pg97>

of

4.

Asian Productivity Organisation, Tokyo.

5.

Asian Statisticians' Conference.

6.

Commonwealth Advisory Aeronautical Research Council, London.

7.

Commonwealth Agriculture Bureau, London.

8.

Commonwealth Telecommunication Board, London.

9.

Commonwealth Statisticians Conference.

10

General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.

11.

Indo-Pacific Fisheries Council, Bangkok.

12.

International Bureau of Education, Geneva.

13.

International Centre for the Study of Preservation and Restoration
Cultural Property, Rome.

14.
(Belgium)
.

International Committee of Military Medicine and Pharmacy

15.

International Institute of Refrigeration, Paris.

16.

International institute for the Unification of Private Law, Rome.

17.

International Lead and Zinc Study Group, New York.

18.

International Office of Epizootics, Paris.

19.

International Sugar Council, London.

20.

International Tin Council, London.

21.

International Wheat Council, London.

INDIA
USA CONGO
FRANCE

RUSSIA

JAPAN

UNITED KINGDOM

SWITZERLAND

ITALY

Feb 01, 1968

APPENDIX III FOREIGN DIPLOMATIC MISSIONS IN INDIA

APPENDIX III
FOREIGN DIPLOMATIC MISSIONS IN INDIA
(I) Embassies
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

Afghanistan
Algeria
Argentina
Austria
Belgium
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burma
Cambodia
Chile
China
Colombia
Congo (Democratic Republic)
Cuba
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Germany (Federal Republic)
Greece
Holy See (Apostolic Nunciature)
Hungary
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Italy

29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.

Japan
Jordan
Kuwait
Laos
Lebanon
Mexico
Mongolia
Morocco
Nepal
Netherlands
Norway
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Rumania
Saudi Arabia
Spain
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland.
Syria
Thailand
Turkey
U.S.S.R.
U.A.R.
U.S.A.
Uruguay
Venezuela
Yugoslavia

BELGIUM

<pg98>
<pg99>
(II) High Commissions
1.

Australia

8.

New Zealand

2.

Britain

9.

Nigeria

3.

Canada

10.

Pakistan

4.

Ceylon

11.

Singapore

5.

Ghana

12.

Tanzania

6.

Malaysia

13.

Uganda

7.

Mauritius

(III) Legation
1. Albania (stationed at Baghdad)
(IV) Sub-Offices of High Commission
1. Office of the Deputy High Commissioner of Ceylon at Madras
2. Office of the Assistant High Commissioner for Malaysia at Madras.
3. Office of the Deputy High Commissioner for Pakistan at Calcutta.
4. Office of the Deputy High Commissioner for Australia at Bombay.
5. Office of the Deputy High Commissioner for Britain at Bombay.
6. Office of the Deputy High Commissioner for Britain at Calcutta.
7. Office of the Deputy High Commissioner for Britain at Madras.
INDIA
AFGHANISTAN JAPAN ALGERIA JORDAN ARGENTINA KUWAIT AUSTRIA LAOS USA
BELGIUM LEBANON BRAZIL MEXICO BULGARIA MONGOLIA BURMA MOROCCO CAMBODIA
NEPAL CHILE CHINA NORWAY COLOMBIA PERU CONGO PHILIPPINES CUBA POLAND
SLOVAKIA DENMARK SAUDI ARABIA ETHIOPIA SPAIN FINLAND SUDAN FRANCE
SWEDEN GERMANY SWITZERLAND GREECE SYRIA THAILAND HUNGARY TURKEY
INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ IRELAND URUGUAY ITALY VENEZUELA YUGOSLAVIA
AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND NIGER NIGERIA CANADA PAKISTAN REPUBLIC OF
SINGAPORE GHANA TANZANIA MALAYSIA UGANDA MAURITIUS ALBANIA
Feb 01, 1968

APPENDIX IV FOREIGN CONSULAR OFFICES IN INDIA

APPENDIX IV
FOREIGN CONSULAR OFFICES IN INDIA
-----------------------------------------------------------------------S.NO.

Country

Location

Status

-----------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Afghanistan
Bombay
Consulate General
2.

Austria

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

3.

Austria

Madras

Hon. Consulate

4.

Austria

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

5.

Belgium

Calcutta

Consulate General

6.

Belgium

Bombay

Consulate General

7.

Belgium

Madras

Hon. Consulate

8.

Bolivia

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

9.

Bolivia

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

10.

Brazil

Bombay

Consulate

11.

Brazil

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

12.

Brazil

Madras

Hon. Consulate

13.

Burma

Calcutta

Consulate General

14.
15.

Burma
Colombia

Madras
Bombay

Vice Consulate
Hon. Consulate

16.

Costa Rica

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

17.

Costa Rica

Madras

Hon. Consulate General

18.

Czechoslovakia

Bombay

Consulate General

19.

Czechoslovakia

Calcutta

Consulate General

20.

Denmark

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

-----------------------------------------------------------------------<pg100>
<pg101>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------S.NO.

Country

Location

Status

-----------------------------------------------------------------------21.
Denmark
Calcutta
Hon. Consulate
22.

Denmark

Cochin

Hon. Consulate

23.

Denmark

Madras

Hon. Consulate

24.

Dominican Republic

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

25.

Dominican Republic

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

26.

Equador

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

27.

El. Salvador

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

28.

Ethiopia

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

29.

Ethiopia

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

30.

Finland

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

31.

Finland

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

32.

Finland

Madras

Hon. Consulate

33.

France

Bombay

Consulate General

34.

France

Calcutta

Consulate General

35.

Prance

Cochin

Hon. Consular Agent

36.

France

Madras

Consulate General

37.
38.

France
Germany

Pondicherry
Calcutta

Consulate General
Consulate General

39.

Germany

Madras

Consulate General

40.

Germany

Bombay

Consulate General

41.

Greece

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

42.

Greece

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

43.

Haiti

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

44.

Haiti

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

45.

Indonesia

Bombay

Consulate

46.

Indonesia

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

-----------------------------------------------------------------------<pg102>

-----------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.

Country

Location

Status

-----------------------------------------------------------------------47. Iran
Bombay
Consulate General
48.

*Iran

Hyderabad

Consulate General

49.

Iraq

Bombay

Consulate General

50.

Israel

Bombay

Consulate

51.

Italy

Bombay

Consulate General

52.

Italy

Calcutta

Consulate General

53.

Italy

Cochin

Hon. Consulate Agent

54.

Japan

Calcutta

Consulate General

55.

Japan

Bombay

Consulate General

56.

Japan

Madras

Consulate General

57.

Jordan

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

58.

Kuwait

Bombay

Consulate General

59.

Lebanon

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

60.

Liberia

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

61.

Nepal

Calcutta

Consulate General

62.

Netherlands

Bombay

Consulate General

63.
64.

Netherlands
Netherlands

Calcutta
Madras

Hon. Consulate General
Hon. Consulate

65.

Nicaragua

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

66.

Nicaragua

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

67.

Norway

Bombay

Consulate General

68.

Norway

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

69.

Norway

Cochin

Consulate

70.

Norway

Madras

Hon. Consulate.

71.

Panama

Bombay

Consulate General

-----------------------------------------------------------------------* Opening of the
approved.

Iranian

Consulate
<pg103>

General at Hyderabad has been

-----------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.

Country

Location

Status

-----------------------------------------------------------------------72. Panama
Calcutta
Consulate General
73.

Panama

Madras

Hon. Consulate

74.

Peru

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

75.

Peru

Calcutta

Consulate General

76.

Philippines

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

77.

Philippines

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

78.

Philippines

Madras

Hon. Consulate General

79.

Poland

Bombay

Consulate

80.

Poland

Calcutta

Consulate

81.

Spain

Bombay

Hon. Vice Consulate

82.

Spain

Calcutta

Hon. Vice Consulate

83.

Spain

Madras

Hon. Vice Consulate

84.

Sudan

Bombay

Consulate General

85.

Sweden

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

86.

Sweden

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

87.

Sweden

Madras

Hon. Consulate

88.
89.

Switzerland
*Switzerland

Bombay
Calcutta

Consulate General
Vice Consulate

90.

Switzerland

Cochin

Hon. Consular Agent

91.

Syrian Arab Republic

Bombay

Consulate General

92.

Thailand

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

93.

Thailand

Calcutta

Consulate General

94.

Turkey

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

95.

Turkey

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

96.

Turkey

Madras

Hon. Consulate General

-----------------------------------------------------------------------*Closed w.e.f. Sep 30, 1968.

<pg104>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No.

Country

Location

Status

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------97.

U.S.S.R.

Bombay

Consulate General

98.

U.S.S.R.

Calcutta

Consulate General

99.

U.S.S.R.

Madras

Consulate General

100.

United Arab Republic

Bombay

Consulate General

101.

United Arab Republic

Calcutta

Consulate General

102.

U.S.A.

Bombay

Consulate General

103.

U.S.A.

Calcutta

Consulate General

104.

U.S.A.

Madras

Consulate General

105.

Yugoslavia

Bombay

Consulate General

106.

Yugoslavia

Calcutta

Consulate General

107.

Korea (D.P.R.)

New Delhi

Consulate General

108.

Korea (Republic)

New Delhi

Consulate General

109.

Monaco

New Delhi

Hon. Consulate General

110.

San Marino

New Delhi

Hon. Consulate General

111.

Viet Nam (D.P.R.)

New Delhi

112.

Viet Nam (Republic)

New Delhi

Consulate General
Consulate General

INDIA
USA AFGHANISTAN AUSTRIA BELGIUM BOLIVIA BRAZIL BURMA COLOMBIA
COSTA!!NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK DOMINICA ETHIOPIA FINLAND FRANCE GERMANY
GREECE HAITI INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ ISRAEL ITALY JAPAN JORDAN KUWAIT
LEBANON LIBERIA NEPAL CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC NICARAGUA PANAMA PERU
PHILIPPINES POLAND SPAIN SUDAN SWEDEN SWITZERLAND SYRIA THAILAND
TURKEY YUGOSLAVIA KOREA MONACO SAN MARINO
Sep 30, 1968

APPENDIX V DISTINGUISHED VISITORS FROM ABROAD

APPENDIX V
DISTINGUISHED VISITORS FROM ABROAD
------------------------------------------------------------------------Sl.
No.

Name and Designation

Period of Visit

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------Heads of State
1

His Imperial Majesty the Emperor of Ethiopia.

Apr 28, 1968 to 1 May, 1968.

2

The Chogyal and Gyalmo of
Sikkim.

25 September
1968.

3

H. E. Mr. Abdirashid Ali Shermarke, President of the Somali
Republic.

22 to 29

to

7

October,

November, 1968.

Vice-President
1.

H. E. Dr. William R. Tolbert Jr.
Vice-President of the Republic
of Liberia.

6 to 12 November, 1968.

Heads of Government.
1

H. E. Tunku Abdul Rahman
Putra Al-haj, Prime Minister
of Malaysia.

20 to 21 July, 1968.

2

H. E. Dr. G. Borg Oliver, Prime
Minister of Malta.
H. E. Mr. Dudley Senanayake,
Prime Minister of Ceylon.

16 to 2o November, 1968

3

27 November to 4 December,
1968.

Other Dignitaries
1

H. E. Tun Haji Abdul Razak
bin Dato Hussain, Deputy
Prime Minister, Ministes of
Defence and Minister of National and Rural Development
of Malaysia.

30 April to 2 May, 1968.

<pg105>
<pg106>
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sl.
NO.

Name and Designation

Period of Visit

-----------------------------------------------------------------------2

Her Majesty the Queen of Bhutan

22 to 29 June

1968.

3

Hon'ble Nicholas Katzenbach,
Under Secretary of State of the
USA.

23 to 29 July, 1968.

4

H.E.Ato Ketema Yifru, Foreign
Minister of Ethiopia.

25 to 27 July. 1968.

5

Hon'ble Earnest Eastman, Under
Secretry of State of the Republic
of Liberia.

29 to 31 July, 1968.

6

H. E. Dr. Toh Chin Chye, Minister for Science and Technology of Singapore.

13 to 20 August, 1968.

7

H. R. H. Namgyal Wangchuk,
The Tengye Longo, Minister
of Trade, Commerce and Industries of Bhutan.

18 to 24 August, 1968.

8

H. R. H. Princess Dina, ex-Queen
of Jordan.

4 to 6 September. 1968.

9

H. E. Mr. N. Bissember, Minister of Parliamentary Affairs,
and Second Deputy Prime
Minister of Guyana.

7 to 8 September, 1968.

10

H. E. Mr. N. P. Firyubin, Deputy ,
Minister of Foreign Affairs,
of the U. S. S. R. and Leader
of the U. S. S. R. Delegation
to the Bilateral Talks.

11 to 18 September, 1968.

11

H. R. H. Birendra Bir Bikram

27 September to 7 October, 1968.

Shah Deva, Crown Prince of
Nepal.
12.

The Rt. Hon'ble Michael Stewart, M. P. Her Britannic
Majesty's Secretary of State
for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs and Mrs. Stewart.

2 to 8 December, 1968.

13

H. E. Dr. Abdul Samad Hamed,
Afghan Minister of Planning
and Mrs. Hamed.

13 to 19 Decembers 1968.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------<pg107>

-----------------------------------------------------------------------Sl.
No.

Name and Designation

Period of Visits

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------14

H. E. Mr. V. J. Mwaanga, Permanent Representative of Zambia to the United Nations.

18 to 2o December, 1968.

15

Lord Denning, Master of the

29 December, 1968 to 10 Jan-

Rolls of U.K. and Lady Denning.

nary, 1968.

16

H. E. Dr. Adam Malik, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia.

20 to 24 February, 1969.

17

His Highness The Agha Khan

21 to 26 February, 1969.

ETHIOPIA
MALI LIBERIA MALAYSIA MALTA USA BHUTAN
KINGDOM JORDAN GUYANA NEPAL INDONESIA

REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE

UNITED

Apr 28, 1968

APPENDIX VI VISIT OF INDIAN DIGNITARIES TO FOREIGN COUNTRIES

APPENDIX VI
VISIT OF INDIAN DIGNITARIES TO FOREIGN COUNTRIES AND OTHER DEPUTATIONS/DELEGATIONS SPONSORED BY THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------S.

Names/Delegation

No.

Countries

Purpose of visit

of visit

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
In

Shri T. T. P. Abdullah,

Hongkong, Japan

Inspection of

-

Director,

Ministry of

and Thailand.

dian Missions.

Shri J. S. Mehta, Joint Sec-

Thailand Singa-

South-East Asian

retary, Ministry of Ex-

pore, Indonesia

Ministerial Con-

ternal Affairs.

and Malaysia.

ference.

Shri M. R. Shroff, Director,

Thailand and

South-East Asian

Ministry of Finance.

Singapore.

Ministerial Con-

External Affairs.
2

ference.
3
Shri K. C. Nair, joint SecConference
.
retary, Ministry of External Affairs.

Ceylon

Quakers

4

United Kingdom

Inspection of Do-

Shri B. K. Basu, Directors,
Ministry of External Affairs.

5

Shri S.D. Khadilkar, Art
Executive, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting.

6

Prime Minister.
Shri T. N. Kaul, Secretary,
Ministry of External
Affairs and Party.

7

Prime Minister.

cuments.
Nigeria

Singapore, Australia, New
Zealand and
Malaysia.
Sikkim and Bhutan.

Nehru Memorial
Exhibition

Goodwill visit.

Goodwill visit.

Shri T. N. Kaul, Secretary,
Ministry of External
Affairs.
Shri P.N. Haksar, Secretary,
to Prime Minister and Party.
8
InC
oncom
-

Shri M. G. Kaul, Minister,
Embassy
shington.

of India, Wa-

Italy

Meeting of
ternational
sortium on
satellite
munication.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg108>
<pg109>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------S.
No.

Names/Delegation

Countries
of visit

Purpose of visit

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------9

President of India

Hungary and

Dr. Triguna Sen, Minister
of Education and Party.
10
Shri J. S. Mehta, joint SecMeeting
of Schoretary,
Ministry of Exan
d Scienternal Affairs.
under the

Yugoslavia.

U.S.A.
lars
tistis

auspice
s of

Nehru

F
ounda-

11
Foreign
Service
Inspect
ion.

12
v
isit.

Sate visit

tion.
Shri A. G. Meneses, joint Nepal
Secretary, Ministry

of

External Affairs, Shri
M. S. Sundara, joint
Secretary, Ministy of
Finance.
President of India.

Shri C. M. Poonacha Minister of Railways and
Party.

U.S.S.R

State

13
Indepen
dence

Shri V. C. Vijaya Raghavan,

Cel
ebrations

High, Commissioner of

Shri B. R. Bhagat, Minister

15
Demarca
tion at

Dr. K. Krishna Rao, joint

Bou
ndry.
16
Goodwil
l visit.

Day

India, Dar-es-Salaam.

14
Officia
l visit.

of State, Ministry
External Affairs.

Indo-We
st pakis-

Swaziland

France

of

Secretary, Ministry

Pakistan

of

External Affairs and

tan

Survey Party.
Prime Minister.

South American

Shri Rajeshwar Dayal,
Foreign Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs.

countries.

Shri P. N. Haksar, Secretary
to Prime Minister
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------27 M of EA-8
<pg110>
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------S.
No.

Names/Delegation

Countries
of Visit

Purpose of Visit

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------17
visi
t.

Shri Jaisukh Lal Hathi, Minister of Labour, Em,

Fiji and Malaysia

Goodwill

ployment, and Rehabilitation.
a
nd
v
isit.

18
vis
it.

Shri Manjit Singh, Director, Mi-

Fiji, Australia,

Goodwill

nistry of External Affairs.

New Zealand,

Official

Phillippines and
Hongkong.
President of India.

Nepal

State

Shri C M. Poonacha, Minister of Railways, and Party.
19
Shri U. C. Soni, Deputy
Demarcati
on of
Secretary, Ministry of
Indo-Burm
a
External Affairs.
Boundary.

Burma

Col. M. M. Datta, Deputy
Surevyor General of India
and Party.
20
Shri N. D. Buch, joint SecDemarcati
on of
retary, Ministry of DeIndo-Burm
a
fence.
Boundary.

Burma

Shri K. C. Nair, joint Secretary, Ministry of External
Affairs.
Brig. J. S. Paintal, Surveyor General of India, and
Party.
21
Service
Inspectio
n.

Shri A. G. Asrani, Deputy
Secretary, Ministry of
External

Affairs.

Shri V. R.
Gupta, Deputy
Financial Advisor, Minis-

West Pakistan

Foreign

try of Finance.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg111>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------S.
No.

Names/Delegation

Countries
of visit

Purpose of visit

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------22
I.S.I.

Shri R.

G.

Rajwade, Sec-

Switzerland

retary, Ministry of External
Affairs.

Interview of
Candidates
for
induction into
Indian Foreign
Service

Shri V. H. Coelho, Secretam Ministry of External
Affairs.
23
Servic
e

Shri P.

R. S. Mani, Addi-

tional Secretary, Ministry
of External Affairs.

Sikkim and

Foreign

Bhutan

Inspection.

Shri M. S. Nadkarni, Financial Adviser, Ministry
of Finance.
24

Prime Minister.

United Kingdom

Commonwealth
Prime

Minister
's

Conference.

Shri B. R. Bhagat, Minister
of State in the Ministry of
External Affairs.
Shri P. N. Haksar, Secretary
to Prime Minister.

25
Servic
e

Shri E. Gonsalves, Director,
Ministry of External Affairs,
and Party.
Smt. S. Kochar, Deputy

East Pakistan

Foreign

Secretary, Ministry of
External Affairs.

Inspection.

Shri V. R. Gupta, Deputy
Financial Adviser, Ministry of Finance.
26

Shri T. N. Kaul,
Secretary.

Foreign Japan

Indo-Japanese
Official consultations.

Shri R. Jaipal, Joint Secretary,
Ministry of External Affairs,
Shri K.R.P. Singh, Joint
Secretary, Ministry of
External Affairs
27
S
ervice

Shri P. R. S. Mani, Addition-

Afghanistan

and Foreign

al Secretary, Ministry of

Iran.

Inspection.

External Affairs.
Shri M. S. Nadkarni, Financial Adviser, Ministry of Finance.

Lebanon

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg112>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------S.
No.

Names/Delegation

Countries
of visit

Purpose of visit

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------28

Dr. Nagendra Singh, SecPakistan
retary to President.
Dr. S. P. Jagota, Director,
Ministry of External Affairs.

29

Shri Surendra. Pal Singh,
Deputy Minister in the
Ministry of External Affairs.
Shri S. Venkatesan, Joint
Secretary, Ministry
of
Commerce.

Ethiopia

To attend Tenth
Session of AfroAsian Legal
Consultative Committee.
Biannual Session
of Economic Commission for Africa.

30

Shri R. Jaipal, joint Secretary, Ministry of External

Ethiopia

Affairs.

Discussions with
Govt. of Ethiopia
regarding proposed Consultative
Meeting of
Non-aligned
States.

U.A.R.

Official visit.

INDIA
JAPAN THAILAND INDONESIA MALAYSIA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE NIGER
USA ITALY HUNGARY YUGOSLAVIA NEPAL SWAZILAND FRANCE PAKISTAN
UNITED KINGDOM AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND BURMA SWITZERLAND BHUTAN
AFGHANISTAN IRAN LEBANON ETHIOPIA

NIGERIA
FIJI

Apr 28, 1968

APPENDIX VII INDIAN

MISSION/POSTS ABROAD

APPENDIX VII
INDIAN

MISSION/POSTS ABROAD

-----------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.

Country

Location

Remarks

------------------------------------------------------------------------EMBASSIES--(a) Resident
1.

Afghanistan

Kabul

2

Algeria

Algiers

3.
Argentina
accre
-

Buenos Aires

Ambassador concurrently
dited to-Paraguay as Ambassador and to
Minister.

4.

Austria

5.
Belgium
accre
-

Uruguay as

Vienna
Brussels

Ambassador concurrently
dited to Luxembourg as
Ambassador. Additionally,

the Ambassador is India's
Special Representative for
Economic, Financial and Commercial Affairs and he is

als
o

accredited to the European
Economic Community and the
European Coal and steel
Community.

6.
Brazil
accre
-

Rio de janene

7.

Burma

Rangoon

8.

Cambodia

Phnom Penh

Ambassador concurrently
dited to Venezuela
and
Bolivia as Ambassador.

9.
Chile .
accr
e-

Santiago

Ambassador concurrently
dited to Colombia and Peru

as

Ambassador.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------113
<pg113>
<pg114>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.

Country

Location

Remarks

--------------------------------------------------------------------------10.
China
Peking
11.
accre
-

Congo

12.
Secretary
/

Cuba

Ambassador

Kinshasa

Ambassador concurrently
dited to Gabon and Congo
(Brazzaville).

Havana

Incharge of a First
Charge d'Affaires,
resident in Mexico.

13.

Czechoslovakia

Prague

14.

Denmark

Copenhagen

15.

Ethiopia

Addis Ababa

16.
Finland
Counsellor/Cha
rge

Helsinki

17.

France

Paris

18.

Federal Republic
of Germany

Bonn

19.
acc
re-

Guinea

Conakry

Incharge of a
d' Affaires.
resident in
(Sweden).

Ambassador
Stockholm

Ambassador concurrently
dited to Mali as

Ambassador
.
20.

Hungary

Budapest

21.
a
ccre-

Italy

Rome

Ambassador concurrently
dited, to Albania as

Mini
ster

and as High Commissioner

to

Malta and First

Secretary
con-

currently accredited

the

Republic of San Marino

as

Consul General.
22.

Indonesia

Djakarta

23.

Iran

Tehran

24.

Iraq

Baghdad

25.

Ireland

Dublin

26.

Japan.

Tokyo

27.
Secreta
ry/

Jordan

Amman

Incharge of First
Charge d' Affaires.

Amb
as-

sador resident in

Beirut
.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg115>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.

Country

Location

Remarks

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------28.
Kuwait
jurisd
iction MM

Kuwait

tends to Gulf

Sheik
hdoms, viz

Bahrein, Dubai,

Mus
cat.
29.

Laos

30.
Lebanon
concurre
ntly accre-

Vientienne
Beirut

and as High

Commiss
ioner in

Cyprus.
Tripoli

dor resident in

Cai
ro.

Gen

Incharge of First
Charge d'

Affaires.
Ambassa-

32.
Malagasy
concurre
ntly accre-

Ambassador
dited as

Ambassador
to Jordan

31.
Libya
S
ecretary/

Ambassador's

Tananarive

Ambassador
dited as Consul

eral to

Reunion Island and

Comores.
33.
Mexico
concurre
ntly accre-

Mexico City

Ambassador
dited to Cuba and

P
anama as

Ambassador.

34.
Morocco
concurre
ntly accre-

Rabat

Ambassador
dited to Tunisia

as
Ambassa-

dor.

35.

Nepal

Kathmandu

36.

Netherlands.

The Hague

37.
38.

Norway
Philippines

Oslo
Manila

39.

People's Republic
of Southern Yemen

Aden

40.

Poland

Warsaw

41.
Rumania
concurre
ntly accre-

Bucharest

Ambassador
dited to Bulgaria

a

dor.
42.

Saudi Arabia

43.
Senegal
concurre
ntly accreAmbassado
r to
Upp
er Volta
Hi
gh ComGambia
.

Jeddah
Dakar

Ambassador
dited

as

Ivory Coast and
& Mauritania and
missioner to

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

-----------------<pg116>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No.
Country
Location
Remarks
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------44.

Somalia

Mogadishu

45.

Spain

Madrid

46.

Sudan

Khartoum

47.
a
ccre-

Sweden

Stockholm

dited to Finland as

Ambas
sa48.
accre-

dor.
Switzerland

Berne

dor

49.

Syrian Arab Republic.

Damascus

50.

Thailand

Bangkok

51.
Secre
tary/,

Tunisia

Tunis

52.

Turkey

Ankara

53.
a
ccre-

United Arab Re-

Cairo

Amb
assa-

Incharge of a First
Charge d'Affaires.

Ambas
sa-

54.
accre-

Ambassador concurrently
dited to Vatican as

Ambas
sa-

Li
bya

Ambassador concurrently

public.

dor resident in Rabat.
Ambassador concurrently
dited as Ambassador to
and Minister to Yemen.

Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics.

Moscow

Ambassador concurrently
dited to Mongolia as
dor

55.

United States of
America.

56.
accre-

Yugoslavia

Washington
Belgrade

Ambassador concurrently
dited to Greece as Ambassador

EMBASSIES--(b) Non-resident
1.

Bolivia

Ambassador resident in Rio de Janeiro.

2.

Bulgaria

Ambassador resident in Bucharest.

3.

Burundi

Ambassador resident in Kampala.

4.

Cameroon

Ambassador resident in Lagos.

5.

Columbia

Ambassador resident in Santiago (Chile).

6.

Congo (Brazzaville)

Ambassador resident in Kinshasa.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg117>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Country
Location
Remarks
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------7.

Costa Rica

Minister resident in
Ambassador.

Washington accredited as

8.

Dahomey

Ambassador resident in Lagos.

9.

Gabon

Ambassador resident in Kinshasa.

10.

Greece

Ambassador resident in Belgrade.

11.

Ivory Coast

Ambassador resident in Dakar.

12.

Liberia

Ambassador resident in Accra.

13.

Luxembourg

Ambassador resident in Brussels.

14.

Mali

Ambassador resident in Conakry.

15.

Mauritania

Ambassador resident in Dakar.

16.

Mongolia

Ambassador resident in Moscow.

17.

Panama

Ambassador resident in Mexico City.

18.

Paraguay

Ambassador resident in Buenos Aims.

19.

Togo

Ambassador resident in Lagos.

20.

Peru

Ambassador resident in Santiago.

21.

Ruanda

Ambassador resident in Kampala.

22.

Upper Volts

Ambassador resident in Dakar.

23.

Venezuela

Ambassador resident in Rio de Janeiro.

HIGH COMMISSION - (a) Resident
1.

Australia

Canberra

2.

Guyana

Georgetown

3.

Canada

Ottawa

4.

Ceylon

Colombo

High Commissioner accredited
to Maldives.

5.
to
,

Ghana

Accra

High Commissioner accredited

6.

Kenya

Nairobi

Liberia as Ambassador and as
High Commissioner to Sierra
Leone.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg118>
------------------------------------------------------------------------------S.NO.

Country

Location

Remarks

------------------------------------------------------------------------------7.

Malawi

Blantyre

8.

Malaysia

Kuala Lumpur

9.

Maritius

Port Louis

10.

New Zealand

Wellington

11.

Nigeria

Lagos

Incharge of an Acting High
Commissioner.

High Commissioner concurrently accredited to Togo, Daho-

mey and Cameroun
Ambassador.
12.

Pakistan

Islamabad/
Karachi

13.

Singapore

Singapore

14.
Trinidad & Tobago
concurrent-

Port of Spain

as

High Commissioner,
ly accredited as High
Commissioner to Jamaica,
Barbados, Antigua, Grenada
Dominica, St. Kitts, St.
Lucia, St. Vincent, Montserrat and as Consul General
to Surinam.

15.

Uganda

Kampala

High Commissioner concurrently
accredited as Ambassador to
Ruanda & Burundi.

16.

United Kingdom

London

17.

United Republic
of Tanzania

Dar-es-Salaam

18.

Zambia

Lusaka

HIGH

COMMISSION-(b) Non-resident

1.

Cyprus

High Commissioner resident at Beirut.

2.

Sierra Leone

High Commissioner resident in Accra.

3.

Malta

High Commissioner resident in Port of Spain.

4.

Malta

High Commissioner resident in Rome.

5.

Gambia

High Commissioner resident in Dakar.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg119>
------------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.

Country

Location

Remarks

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------DEPUTY HIGH COMMISSION/ASSISTANT HIGH COMMISSION

1.

Ceylon

Kandy

Assistant High Commissioner.

2.

Pakistan

Dacca

Deputy High Commissioner.

3.

Australia

Sydney

Deputy High Commissioner.

COMMISSIONS- (a) Resident
1.

Fiji

Suva

2.

Hong Kong

Hong Kong

3.

Kenya

Mombasa
COMMISSIONS--(b) Resident

1.

Antigua

Commissioner resident in Port of Spain

2.

Barbados

Do.

3.

Dominica

Do.

4.

Grenada

Do.

5.

Montserrat

Do.

6.

St. Kitts

Do.

7.

St. Lucia

Do.

8.

St. Vincent

Do.
LEGATIONS--Non-Resient

1.

Albania

Minister resident in Rome (Italy).

2.

Uruguay

Minister resident in Buenos Aires.

3.

Vatican.

Minister

4.

Yemen

Minister resident in Cairo,

resident in Berne.

CONSULATES GENERAL--(a) Resident
1.
(Functio
ning

Denmark

Copenhagen

Hon. Consul General

under the Ambassador.)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg120>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No.
Country
Location
Remarks

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------2.

German
(Federal Republic)

Berlin

Ambassador resident in Bonn.

3.

Do.

Frankfurt

Do.

4.

Do.

Hamburg

Do.

5.

Japan

Kobe

6.

Muscat

Muscat

7.

North Korea

Pyongyang

8.

South Korea

Seoul

9.

Switzerland

Geneva

Resident Consul General.

10.
Washing-

United States of

New York

Ambassador resident in

Ambassador resident in Tokyo.

America.

ton.

11.

Do.

San Francisco

12.

Vietnam (North)

Hanoi

13.

Vietnam (South)

Saigon

14.

Paraguay

Asuncion

Resident Consul General; Ambassador resident in Washington.

Honorary

Consul

General.

CONSULATES GENERAL-(b) Non-resident
1.

Comores

Consul General resident in Tananarive.

2.
3.

Republic of San Marino
Re-union Island

Consul General resident in Roar.
Consul General resident in Tananarive.

4.

Surinam

Consul General resident in Port of Spain
CONSULATES-Resident

Afghanistan

Jalalabad

2.

Afghanistan

Kandhar

3.

Belgium

Ghent

4.

Burma

Mandalay

Consul. Ambassador resident in
Kabul.
Do.
Hon. Consul. Ambassador resident in Brussels.
Consul. Ambassador
Rangoon.

resident in

5.

Canary islands

Las Palmas

6.

French Somaliland

Djibouti

7.

Germany
(Federal Republic)

Munich

Hon. Consul.
Hon. Consul.
Hon. Consul. Ambassador residentin Bonu.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg121>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No.
Country
Location
Remarks
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------8.

Germany
(Federal Republic)

Stuttgart

Hon. Consul. Ambassador resident in Bonn.

9.

Greece

Athens

Hon. Consul. Ambassador resident in Belgrade.

10.

Iran

Khorramshahr

Ambassador resident in Tehran.

11.

Italy

Genoa

Hon. Consul. Ambassador resi-dent in Rome.

12. Indonesia
Djakarta.

Medan

Ambassador resident in

13.

Iraq

Basra

Ambassador resident in Baghdad.

14.

USSR

Odessa

Ambassador resident in Moscow.

15.

U.S.A.

Cleveland,

16.

U.S.A.

Honolulu

Hon. Consul. Ambassador resident in Washington.
Hon. Consul. Ambassador resident in Washington.

17.

Panama

Bandar Abbas

Hon. Consul. Ambassador resident in Mexico City.

VICE CONSULATE--Resident
1.

Iran

Zahidan

Ambassador resident in Tehran.

TRADE COMMISSIONS AND OFFICE-Resident

1.

Canada

Vancouver

2.

Bahrein

Bahrein

High Commissioner resident in
Ottawa.
In charge of a Trade Agent.

3.

Dubai

Dubai

In charge of a Trade Agent.

SPECIAL MISSIONS-(a) Resident
1.

Political Office,
Sikkim

2.
Special Office,
Officer
Thimpu (Bhutan)

Gangtok

Political Officer.

Thimpu

Special Officer. Political
resident in Gangtok.

3.

Permanent Mission
New York
Permanent Representative.
of India to the
United Nations.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg122>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No.
country
Location
Remarks
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------NEW RESIDENT MISSIONS BEING OPENED
1. Bulgaria

Sofa

Under the charge of First
Secretary/Charge do Affaires.

2. Peru

Lima

Under the charge of First
Secretary (Com)/Charge d'
Affaires.

3. Venezuela

Caracas

Under the charge of First
Secretary/Charge
Affaires.

INDIA
AFGHANISTAN ALGERIA ARGENTINA PARAGUAY URUGUAY AUSTRIA USA BELGIUM
BRAZIL VENEZUELA BOLIVIA BURMA CAMBODIA CHILE COLOMBIA PERU CHINA
CONGO ZAIRE GABON CUBA MEXICO CZECH REPUBLIC NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK
ETHIOPIA FINLAND SWEDEN FRANCE GERMANY GUINEA MALI HUNGARY ITALY
ALBANIA MALTA SAN MARINO INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ IRELAND JAPAN JORDAN
LEBANON KUWAIT LAOS CYPRUS LIBYA MOROCCO TUNISIA NEPAL PHILIPPINES
YEMEN POLAND ROMANIA BULGARIA SAUDI ARABIA SENEGAL MAURITANIA SOMALIA
SPAIN SUDAN SWITZERLAND SYRIA THAILAND TURKEY EGYPT RUSSIA MONGOLIA
YUGOSLAVIA GREECE BURUNDI UGANDA CAMEROON COSTA!!GHANA LIBERIA PANAMA
AUSTRALIA GUYANA CANADA SRI LANKA MALDIVES KENYA MALAWI MALAYSIA
MAURITIUS NEW ZEALAND NIGER NIGERIA PAKISTAN REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE
JAMAICA GRENADA DOMINICA UNITED KINGDOM TANZANIA ZAMBIA SIERRA LEONE
FIJI HONG KONG MONTSERRAT OMAN KOREA NORTH KOREA VIETNAM DJIBOUTI
BHUTAN CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

Apr 28, 1968

APPENDIX VIII TREATIES, CONVENTIONS AND AGREEMENTS CONCLUDED

APPENDIX VIII
TREATIES, CONVENTIONS AND AGREEMENTS CONCLUDED OR RENEWED ByINDIA WITH OTHER COUNTRIES DURING 1968-69.
Multilateral Conventions
1. Convention on the International Hydrographic Organisation, 1967
India ratified on Jun 12, 1968.
Bilateral Agreements with International Organisations/other Countries.
THE UNITED NATIONS
2. Agreement between the United Nations and the Government of India
concerning arrangements for 1968 Racial Discrimination Seminar22 July, 1968.
BELGIUM
3. Agreement between the Government of India and the Government ofthe Kingdom of Belgium for "Air Services" between and beyond
their respective territories-6 April, 1967. Entered into force 25
November, 1968.
DENMARK
4. Agreement between the Government of India and the Government of
Denmark on a Third Danish Government Loan to India
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY
5. Agreement between the Government of India and the Government of
the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the duty-free entry of
donated goods-24 July, IOU
MALAWI
6. Arrangement for the Exchange of Money Orders between the Postal
Administration of India and the Postal Administration of Malawi1 June 1968.
NEPAL
(a) Agreements between India and Nepal

7. Agreement for the establishment of a 5-K.W. Radio Telephone link.
between Nepal and India-24 June, 1968.
<pg123>
<pg124>
8.

Agreement for the development of Horticulture in Nepal-2o, August,
1968.

(b) Letters exchanged between India and Nepal
9.

Exchange of letters to establish a Teleprinter Circuit

link between

Kathmandu and Calcutta-24 June, 1968.
10. Exchange of Letters in regard to Indian assistance for the
installation
of
three Generating Sets in the Trisuli Hydel Project-24 June, 1968.
11.
town-

Exchange of Letters for the preparation of Master Plan for Pokhra
24 June, 1968.

12.

Exchange of Letters regarding development of Tribhuvan University24 June, 1968.

13.

Exchange of Letters for the construction of Bagmati Bridge-24 June.
1968.

14.

Exchange of Letters regarding development of Airports-24. June, 1968.

NORWAY
15.

Credit Agreement between the Government of India and the Government of Norway for equipment, spare parts, and other items foe
vessels and shore installations-16 September, 1968.

SWEDEN
16.

Development Grant Agreement (Fertilizer) between the Government
of India and the Government of Sweden-8 May, 1968.

THAILAND
17.

Trade Agreement between the Government of Republic of India and
the Government of the Kingdom of Thailand-13 December, 1968.

UNITED KINGDOM
18.

U.S.A.

Exchange of Utters between the Government of India and the Government of United Kingdom concerning the Guarantee by the
Government of the United Kingdom for the maintenance of the
Minimum Sterling Proportion by India-21 September, 1968.

19.

Loan Agreement between the Government of India and the Government of United States of America-12 May, 1968.

20.

Loan Agreement between the Government of India and the Government of United States of America-29 June, 1968.
<pg125>

21.

Loan Agreement between the Government of India and the Government of United States of America-19 July, 1968.

22.

Agreement between the Government of the United States of America
and the Government of India for duty-free entry and Defrayment
of Inland Transportation Charges of Voluntary Agency supplies and
equipment-5 December, 1968.

23.

P.L. 480 AGREEMENT
Fourth Supplementary Agreement between the Government of the
United States of America and the Government of India for sales
of Agricultural Commodities-23 December, 1968.

24.

A.I.D. Loan NO. 386-H-187-Loan Agreement for $37 million
for Trombay Fertilizer-26 December, 1968.

25.

A.I.D. Loan NO. 386-H-196 Loan Agreement for $194 million
(India Production Loan 1969)-26 December, 1968.

U.S.S.R.
26.

Exchange of Letters between the Government of India and the Govern.
ment of the U.S.S.R. concerning Assistance for the Fourth-Plan
10 June, 1969.

INDIA
BELGIUM

DENMARK

GERMANY

MALAWI

NEPAL

USA

NORWAY

SWEDEN

THAILAND

Jun 12, 1968

APPENDIX IX Statement showing Statistical Data regarding Consular Activities

APPENDIX IX
Statement showing Statistical Data regarding Consular Activities of Indian
Missions/Posts Abroad
1.

Passports issued

2.

Emergency Certificates

3.

Visas issued.

37,598
issued

13,489
1,50,999

4.

Total revenue on account of Consular services rendered

5.

Cases

6.

Repatriation

Number
Amount Spent

7.

Financial Assistance

Number
Amount

8.

Deportation

relating

to

Estates.

cases handled
<pg126>

GMGIPND-L-27 E. A-3000

INDIA

Jun 12, 1968

33,26,882.47
281
8,073
1,18,107.35
14
3,012.24
167


