   java script is required for this page java script is required for this
   page java script is required for this page java script is required for
   this page java script is required for this page java script is required
   for this page

   Mon, February 09, 2015 at 00:50:31 IST Indian Flag
   Ministry of                      Print Content Small Font Medium Font      
    External       MEA Library      Large Font                                
    Affairs,   Ministry of External   * Sitemap                               
   Government  Affairs, Government    * Contact Us                            
    of India         of India         * Feedback                              
                                      * _____________________           [  ]  

     * Home
     * Director's Office
          * Director Lib & Info
          * Library Officers & Staff
     * Journals
          * Current Journals
          * Online Journals
          * CD-ROMs Databases
     * Online Services
          * Business Monitor Online
          * EIU
          * JSTOR
          * Janes Online Services
          * Kessing World News Archive
          * Marketline MDIC
          * Online Service Links
     * Newspapers
          * E-Newspapers
          * Subscribed Print Newspapers
     * Library Bulletins
          * Foreign Affairs Documentation Bulletin
          * Recent Additions
          * Chronicle of Events
     * Alert
          * Book Alert
          * Article Alerts
     * Important Abbrevations

 Annual Reports Prior to 1999                                                                 
   * Home >   Annual Reports Prior to 1999 >   Annual Report 1993-94          * Home          
 Annual Report 1993-94                                                        * Director's    
                                                                                Office        
                                  CONTENTS                                    * Journals      
 S.No.   CHAPTERS                                                 PAGE No.    * Online        
 1.    India's Neighbours                                         1             Services      
 2.    South-East Asia and the Pacific                            12          * Newspapers    
 3.    East Asia                                                  19          * Alert         
 4.    Central Asia                                               26          * Important     
 5.    The Gulf, West Asia & North Africa                         31            Abbrevations  
 6.    Africa (South of the Sahara)                               45          * Back          
 7.    Europe                                                     52                          
       Eastern Europe                                             52                          
       Western Europe                                             65                          
 8.    The Americas                                               69                          
       North America                                              69                          
       Central and South America and the Caribbean                74                          
 9.    United Nations and International Conferences               79                          
       Disarmament and International Security                     82                          
       Human Rights                                               85                          
       Economic, Social and Humanitarian Issues                   86                          
       Administrative and Budgetary Issues                        90                          
       Elections/ Appointments                                    90                          
       Activities of the Non-Aligned Movement                     90                          
       Commonwealth                                               91                          
       Conferences                                                92                          
       International Law: Developments and Activities             93                          
 10.   Foreign Economic Relations                                 97                          
 11.   Trade and Investment Promotion                             105                         
       Trade Promotion                                            106                         
       Investment Promotion                                       107                         
       Back-up Support to Missions and Posts                      108                         
       World Economic Forum                                       109                         
 12.   Policy Planning and Research                               111                         
 13.   External Publicity                                         114                         
 14.   Protocol                                                   119                         
 15.   Passport and Consular Services and Indians Overseas        121                         
 16.   Administration and Organization                            126                         
 17.   Foreign Service Institute                                  128                         
 18.   Implementation of Official Language Policy and Propagation 131                         
       of Hindi Abroad                                                                        
 19.   Cultural Relations                                         133                         
 20.   International Assistance for Maharashtra Earthquake        141                         
       Victims                                                                                
                                                                                              
       APPENDICES                                                 143-204                     
 -iv>                                                                                         
 1993                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Introduction                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 THE Ministry of External Affairs, as the introduction to the report for                      
 1992-93 stated, was engaged in adjusting to the changes and uncertainties                    
 which characterised the international situation at that point of time. The                   
 current year 1993-94 was characterised by more complexities in which                         
 India's Joreign policy had to be fashioned and. implemented.                                 
                                                                                              
 The year commenced in an atmosphere of challenge for India's foreign                         
 relations. The destruction of the disputed structure in Ayodhya and the                      
 subsequent communal disturbances generated international doubts about our                    
 future. The bomb blasts in Bombay perpetrated by criminal elements,'                         
 supported by Pakistani intelligence agencies, struck at the economic                         
 capital of India to generate doubts about the continuity of our economic                     
 policies and the stability of our economy. India's foreign policy                            
 therefore had to meet the external ramifications of these serious and                        
 volatile events, while, at the same time addressing the problems and                         
 issues generated by external events, emerging inter-state equations of                       
 important countries, and their attitudes towards issues affecting India's                    
 basic concerns and interests.                                                                
                                                                                              
 The macro-level issues which India had to deal with were:                                    
                                                                                              
 (a) The increasing and collective pressure on non-proliferation, arms                        
 control and disarmament issues.                                                              
                                                                                              
 (b) International trends generated by some countries to control, and to                      
 the extent possible, deny access to sophisticated technologies in the                        
 spheres of space exploration and satellite development and other civilian                    
 end-uses.                                                                                    
 -v>                                                                                          
                                                                                              
 (c) To adjust to emerging new global regimes affecting international                         
 trade, trans-border movement of technologies and those related to                            
 environment.                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 (d) First to assess and define, and then to acquire an appropriate role                      
 for India in relation to the various regional groupings, in a manner which                   
 will subserve India's interests.                                                             
                                                                                              
 (e) To establish a pattern Of relationship and equation with countries in                    
 the region, as well as those which are further distant, which would ensure                   
 a safe security environment for India.                                                       
                                                                                              
 (f) To ensure projection of India's economic potential and capacity in a                     
 manner, where the necessary external contributions to Indian economy would                   
 continue, safeguarding the socio-economic well-being of the people and                       
 improvements in. their quality of life.                                                      
                                                                                              
 Issues of more immediate concern, on which attention had to be fiocussed                     
 in terms of India's foreign policy, were:                                                    
                                                                                              
 (a) Managing the persistently adversorial relationship with Pakistan.                        
                                                                                              
 (b) The pressure mounted on India by some countries, on the human rights                     
 issues.                                                                                      
 (c) The encouragement of centrifugal tendencies by external entities and                     
 their agencies.                                                                              
                                                                                              
 (d) Stabilising India's relations with her other neighbours despite                          
 inevitable problems affecting relations between countries in geographical                    
 proximity.                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 (e) Dealing with multilateral issues on which international attention was                    
 focussed, like establishment of new international trading arrangements                       
 under the Uruguay Round, the restructuring and reform of the UN system,                      
 fashioning appropriate policies and responses to numerous suggestions and                    
 proposals put forward by different countries in discussions on disarmament                   
 and security arrangements, arranging for India's diplomatic presence in                      
 different countries, responding to the emergence of new states on the                        
 international scene.                                                                         
 -vi>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 The conduct of India's foreign relations was characterised by flexibility,                   
 a clear perception of India's national interests and a measured, down to                     
 earth, approach in meeting these interests.                                                  
                                                                                              
 India's relations with the major countries in the international community                    
 were maintained on a stable pattern despite the fluctuations in the                          
 attitudes and policies of some. US policy did not attach high priority to                    
 India,- US concerns being Euro-centric, specially in relation to East                        
 Europe and its Asian attention concentrating mostly on China and Japan.                      
 Russia was largely pre-occupied with its internal issues. Despite these                      
 limitations, India's relations with these two countries remained on an                       
 even keel in the substantial spheres of economic, commercial and                             
 technological interaction responsive to India's requirements. Hopes for an                   
 incremental relationship were not fully achieved, not because of any                         
 lacuna in India's policies towards these countries, but because of their                     
 perceptions and limitations of policies and India's firmness in                              
 safeguarding her own interests on matters on which there were differences                    
 of approach with them.                                                                       
 With China, Japan and major European countries, relations were positive,                     
 demonstrating an increase in the content and range of bilateral relations.                   
                                                                                              
 India's relations with her immediate neighbours in the South Asian region                    
 continued to receive primary attention. While relations with Pakistan                        
 remained uneven due to Pakistan's intrusive and adversary attitude, the                      
 Indian endeavour was to prevent the relationship from degenerating into                      
 any adventurist or conflict situation. In this, India succeeded without                      
 compromising her interests in any manner. Our relations with Bangladesh,                     
 barring on issues related to the sharing of water resources, are stable                      
 and developing on practical lines. The positive patterns of relationship                     
 established with Nepal, Bhutan and Sri Lanka were given adequate momentum.                   
                                                                                              
 India played an active role in encouraging the consolidation of                              
 cooperation in the SAARC region through the institutional mechanisms of                      
 the SAARC.                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 Despite the upheavals in Afghanistan, India maintained contacts with all                     
 important political leaders and factions of the country. The traditionally                   
 friendly relations with Maldives continued to develop, and a constructive                    
 equation has been established with Myanmar.                                                  
                                                                                              
 President's visit to Iran in July 1993 in transit and the Prime Minister's                   
 visit to Tehran in September 1993 forged positive links with this                            
 important neighbour. The foundation for a multifaceted and positive                          
 relationship with Iran was laid during Prime Minister's visit.                               
 -vii>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 As far as East and South-East Asia are concerned, the Prime Minister's                       
 visit to Beijing and Seoul in early September 1993 and his visit to                          
 Thailand in April 1993 were important landmarks. The signing of the                          
 Sino-Indian Agreement on Maintaining Peace and Tranquillity on the Line of                   
 Actual Control between the borders of the two countries was an important                     
 step forward towards normalising bilateral relations and developing them                     
 on positive lines. The Prime Minister's visit to South Korea was the first                   
 ever by an Indian Prime Minister, opening significant new avenues of                         
 co-operation. Prime Minister's visit to Bangkok and his meetings with the                    
 President of Indonesia and the Prime Ministers of Malaysia and Singapore                     
 galvanised the on-going process of India's efforts to establish close                        
 links with the ASEAN region.                                                                 
                                                                                              
 India signed the Third Generation Agreement on Economic Cooperation with                     
 the European Community and issued a joint statement on political                             
 cooperation between the Community and India in December 1993. This was a                     
 step in the right direction to establish a steady relationship ensuring                      
 continuity in our interaction with the important countries of Europe. The                    
 visit to India of President Yeltsin, Prime Minister john Major and                           
 Chancellor Kohl, in quick succession in the first quarter of 1993 on the                     
 one hand indicated mutuality of interests, on which close and incremental                    
 relationships are being established with the UK, Germany and the Russian                     
 Federation, important entities in the European area. On the other our                        
 President's visit to Ukraine, Hungary, Turkey and the United Kingdom in                      
 the late summer of 1993 created an additional dimension to India's                           
 relations with the European continent.                                                       
                                                                                              
 Responding to new developments in West Asia and South Africa, India                          
 continued to expand relations with South Africa and Israel, at the same                      
 time expanding the economic, cultural and commercial content of our                          
 relations with the Arab countries. The visits of Foreign Ministers of                        
 South Africa and Israel to India during 1993 constituted the beginning of                    
 high-level political contacts between these two countries and India.                         
                                                                                              
 Prime Minister's visit to Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan completed the initial                    
 cycle of highest level political visits between the leaders of Central                       
 Asian Republics and India. The objective was to work out long- term plans                    
 for political and economic contacts with our Central Asian partners.                         
 -viii>                                                                                       
                                                                                              
 India has always been an active participant in the proceedings of the                        
 United Nations and all its specialised agencies. India effectively                           
 countered efforts by Pakistan to get the UN and its agencies to pass                         
 resolutions against India on issues of human rights and Kashmir. India,                      
 along with Turkey, successfully co-sponsored a resolution against                            
 terrorism at the UN General Assembly in 1993. India also co-sponsored the                    
 important resolutions on disarmament-related to comprehensive test ban                       
 treaty and control of fissile material, which were passed at the General                     
 Assembly. India's approach to issues before the United Nations was                           
 structured to meet her concerns and interests. India actively participates                   
 in the discussions in the working group meeting dealing with the                             
 restructuring and democratisation of the UN.                                                 
                                                                                              
 The Prime Minister led the Indian delegation to the SAARC Summit in April                    
 1993. External Affairs Minister, Shri Dinesh Singh, led the Indian                           
 delegation to the SAARC Foreign Ministers' meeting in December 1993. India                   
 played an active role in promoting the project for a South Asia                              
 Preferential Trade Arrangement. India was asked to be the host for the                       
 next SAARC Summit which will be held in late 1994 or early 1995. India                       
 commenced her formal relationship with ASEAN by participating in the first                   
 sectoral dialogue with the ASEAN countries at the meeting held in Bali                       
 (Indonesia) in january 1994.                                                                 
                                                                                              
 Responding to the requirement of added and focussed publicity efforts to                     
 counter pressures related to issues like human rights, Kashmir etc, a                        
 decision was taken by the Government to create a separate publicity wing                     
 under the charge of an officer of the rank of Secretary to the Government.                   
 This unit was established in 1993 and is now operational.                                    
                                                                                              
 In overall terms, the Ministry of External Affairs met the difficulties,                     
 faced the challenges and utilised the opportunities affecting                                
 international relations in a manner which safeguard India's interests.                       
 -ix>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 USA                                                                                          
 INDIA PAKISTAN URUGUAY CHINA RUSSIA JAPAN BANGLADESH BHUTAN NEPAL                            
 AFGHANISTAN MALDIVES IRAN KOREA THAILAND MALI INDONESIA MALAYSIA REPUBLIC                    
 OF SINGAPORE GERMANY UNITED KINGDOM UKRAINE HUNGARY TURKEY SOUTH AFRICA                      
 ISRAEL KAZAKHSTAN UZBEKISTAN                                                                 
 1993                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 1. India's Neighbours                                                                        
                                                                        Top                   
 RELATIONS between India and Nepal have traditionally been close and                          
 friendly. India has an open border with Nepal and shares strong ties based                   
 on history, geography, culture and religion.                                                 
                                                                                              
 During the year under review, the traditionally close and friendly                           
 relations with Nepal continued to develop. The King of Nepal, His Majesty                    
 King Birendra Bir Bikram Shah, paid a State visit to India in May 1993.                      
 The visit was a symbol of the close links between the two countries at the                   
 highest level, since the King as constitutional Monarch is the Head of                       
 State of Nepal.                                                                              
                                                                                              
 India's economic co-operation programme with Nepal continued to bear                         
 fruit. An industrial estate at Rajbiraj and a telephone exchange at                          
 Rangeli in Nepal were successfully commissioned during the year.                             
 Government of India also made available ten thousand tonnes of rice and                      
 corrugated sheets for the flood affected people of Nepal.                                    
                                                                                              
 Under the new trade regime which came into force in April 1993 access to                     
 the Indian market free of customs duty for manufactured articles was                         
 improved to. include articles containing not less than 50% of Nepalese                       
 materials and labour. Several procedural simplifications were introduced                     
 and it is hoped that these, along with the growth in the Indian and                          
 Nepalese economies, will lead to further growth in bilateral trade.                          
                                                                                              
 The presence of approximately 100,000 Bhupali refugees in Nepal was a                        
 sensitive issue between two friendly neighbours of India. A joint                            
 Nepal-Bhutan Ministerial Committee consisting of three members from each                     
 side was established and met in October 1993 in Kathmandu. Both sides                        
 agreed on a categorisation of refugees. India hopes that Nepal and Bhutan                    
 will arrive at an amicable settlement of the issue.                                          
 -1>                                                                                          
                                                                                              
 The warm, close and friendly relations between India and Bhutan were                         
 further strengthened during the year. His Majesty King Jigme Singye                          
 Wangchuck visited India from 4 to 7 January 1993 and held discussions with                   
 the President, Prime Minister and other senior Ministers of the Government                   
 of India on issues of mutual interest. The Prime Minister, Shri P V                          
 Narasimha Rao, paid a goodwill visit to Bhutan on 21 and 22 August 1993.                     
 The visit was fruitful and helped to advance co-operation in several                         
 on-going projects in Bhutan. At the talks, both India and Bhutan resolved                    
 to expand their traditionally strong, warm and cordial ties. Close and                       
 regular exchanges at all levels continued with the visits of the Bhutanese                   
 Planning Minister, Minister for Trade and Industry, Foreign Minister and                     
 Finance Minister. The Minister of External Affairs and Secretary (Power)                     
 of India also visited Bhutan.                                                                
                                                                                              
 Bhutan's 7th Five Year Plan (1992-97) was launched in July 1992. The total                   
 Indian assistance for Bhutan's 7th Plan would be Rs 750 crores. The close                    
 economic co-operation which has been steadily increasing right from 1961                     
 when India fully funded Bhutan's Ist Five Year Plan has been intensified                     
 during the 7th Five Year Plan. The Annual Plan talks were held in February                   
 1993 in New Delhi and review of the Plan was done in September 1993 in                       
 Thimphu.                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 Work on several major projects began during the financial year including                     
 an airport terminal building at Paro, Kurichu Hydel Project in Eastern                       
 Bhutan, hospitals, schools, roads and bridges, transmission lines and                        
 substations, rural electrification, survey projects, etc. The long co-                       
 operation between India and Bhutan in the power sector was further                           
 strengthened in January 1993 with the signing of the Memorandum of                           
 Understanding between India and Bhutan for a multipurpose project on                         
 Sankosh river with an estimated capacity of 1525 MW of power and is                          
 expected to irrigate half a million acre of land downstream in India.                        
 India also provided assistance for rehabilitation of mini hydel projects.                    
                                                                                              
 India continued to offer Bhutanese students opportunities for secondary as                   
 well as higher education and training in various fields like survey                          
 sector, road sector, etc. Co-operation in the educational and cultural                       
 fields continued to be close.                                                                
 -2>                                                                                          
                                                                                              
 During the year 1993, the level of interaction with the Government of                        
 Bangladesh continued to remain high despite differences of opinion on some                   
 important bilateral issues such as the sharing of river waters,                              
 repatriation of Chakma refugees to Bangladesh and illegal immigration from                   
 Bangladesh.                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 Prime Minister visited Dhaka on 10 and 11 April 1993 to attend the 7th                       
 SAARC Summit. During a bilateral meeting with the Prime Minister of                          
 Bangladesh on 11 April 1993, SAARC-related matters, bilateral issues such                    
 as the sharing of river waters, demarcation of Indo-Bangladesh Land                          
 Boundary and Maritime Boundary, transit facilities and economic co-                          
 operation were discussed.                                                                    
                                                                                              
 Minister of External Affairs paid visits to Dhaka from 7 to 11 April 1993                    
 to attend the 7th SAARC Summit and from 1 to 5 December 1993 to                              
 participate in the 13th Session of the Council of Ministers from SAARC                       
 countries. During these visits, he had bilateral meetings with the Foreign                   
 Minister of Bangladesh.                                                                      
                                                                                              
 The goodwill generated by these visits was further enhanced by the visits                    
 to Delhi of the Bangladesh Ministers for Communications from 2 to 9 May                      
 1993 and Foreign Affairs from 11 to 13 June 1993 and the Bangladesh Army                     
 Chief from 10 to 16 May 1993, and the visit to Dhaka by the Home Secretary                   
 from 7 to 9 October 1993.                                                                    
                                                                                              
 However, there were some setbacks to the relationship due to a critical                      
 statement by Bangladesh on the River Water question in the United Nations                    
 General Assembly on 1 October 1993. It was alleged that the economic                         
 structure of Bangladesh was facing disaster as a consequence of the                          
 Farakka Barrage which had created unimaginable adverse effects on their                      
 economy and environment.                                                                     
                                                                                              
 In a statement issued on 8 October 1993, India noted with considerable                       
 regret that Bangladesh thought it fit to raise the bilateral issue of                        
 river waters at UN General Assembly. References to the Farakka Barrage and                   
 related issues neither did justice to the documented facts nor referred to                   
 the understanding in May 1992 between the two Prime Ministers on the                         
 principles and framework of a solution. India remains committed to                           
 devising "an equitable, long-term and comprehensive arrangement" on water                    
 sharing with Bangladesh through bilateral discussions.                                       
                                                                                              
 Despite the understanding reached between India and Bangladesh on the                        
 repatriation of Chakma and other tribal refugees now in Tripura during the                   
 visits of the Bangladesh Minister for Communications and of the Minister                     
 of State for External Affairs, Shri Salman Khurshid, to Tripura on 8 and 9                   
 May 1993, the repatriation did not take off on 9 June 1993 as refugees                       
 remained largely unconvinced about the assurances given by the Government                    
 of Bangladesh about their security and safety in Bangladesh and also about                   
 the rehabilitation package offered. During the visit of the Home Secretary                   
 to Dhaka in October 1993, it was agreed to continue efforts to remove the                    
 negative factors in connection with the repatriation.                                        
 -3>                                                                                          
                                                                                              
 The first meeting of the Indo-Bangladesh joint Business Council was held                     
 in New Delhi on 5 July 1993.                                                                 
                                                                                              
 India's exports to Bangladesh in 1992-93 were valued at Rs 1,031 crores                      
 whereas imports from Bangladesh were Rs 35 crores.                                           
                                                                                              
 As the internal situation in Myanmar improved following the policies of                      
 liberalisation introduced by the SLORC, India developed a better working                     
 relationship with the Myanmar Government. Simultaneously, India continued                    
 to support the restoration of democratic government in Myanmar.                              
                                                                                              
 An Indian delegation led by Foreign Secretary visited Myanmar from 29 to                     
 31 March 1993. The two sides held wide-ranging discussions on bilateral                      
 issues such as insurgency, drug trafficking, trade, contacts between                         
 civilian and military authorities in the border regions of the two.                          
 countries to prevent illegal activities, etc. An agreement on Prevention                     
 of Drug Abuse and Trafficking was signed during the visit. Discussions                       
 held during the visit included negotiations on a Border Trade Agreement                      
 and a Memorandum of Understanding on co-operation between civilian border                    
 authorities of the two countries. A Tripartite Maritime Agreement                            
 determining T-Point in the Andaman Seas between India, Myanmar and                           
 Thailand was signed on 27 October 1993.                                                      
                                                                                              
 An Indian delegation led by Surveyor General of India successfully visited                   
 Myanmar during September 1993 and worked out a schedule for joint                            
 inspection, repair and maintenance of boundary pillars.                                      
                                                                                              
 Deputy Foreign Minister of Myanmar, U Nyunt Swe, paid an official visit to                   
 India from 19 to 24 January 1994 at the invitation of the Foreign                            
 Secretary. He was accompanied by a six-member Inter-Ministerial                              
 Delegation. Delegation level talks took place on 20 and 21 January 1994                      
 which covered the entire gamut of bilateral relationship. The Indian                         
 delegation was led by Foreign Secretary. A Memorandum of Understanding on                    
 Co-operation between Civilian Border Authorities and a Border Trade                          
 Agreement we're signed during the visit. The Deputy Foreign Minister of                      
 Myanmar called on External Affairs Minister, Commerce Minister and                           
 Ministers of State for External Affairs, Home Affairs and Defence during                     
 his visit.                                                                                   
 -4>                                                                                          
                                                                                              
 The assassination of President Premadasa of Sri Lanka by the forces of                       
 violence on 1 May 1993, was a grave loss not only for Sri Lanka, but for                     
 the entire SAARC region, as President Premadasa had played an active and                     
 significant role in promoting regional co-operation under the auspices of                    
 the SAARC. As a mark of respect to the departed leader, the Government of                    
 India declared a three-day State mourning. India's delegation for the                        
 State funeral of President Premadasa was led by the Vice President and                       
 included the Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri R L Bhatia.                        
                                                                                              
 The new Government in Sri Lanka under President D B Wijetunga shares                         
 India's desire to continue the process of further strengthening the                          
 friendly relations between the two countries. The visit of the new Prime                     
 Minister, Mr Ranil Wickremesinghe, to India in June 1993, shortly after                      
 his assumption of office, provided a very useful opportunity for                             
 interaction at the highest level. The Sri Lankan Prime Minister conveyed                     
 to Prime Minister and other Indian leaders his Government's desire to                        
 further expand bilateral co-operation for mutual benefit in various areas.                   
 The Prime Minister conveyed to the Sri Lankan Prime Minister that India                      
 fully favoured the strengthening of economic and commercial co- operation                    
 between the two countries. It was agreed that the second session of the                      
 Indo-Sri Lanka joint Commission co-chaired by the Foreign Ministers would                    
 be held shortly to identify further possibilities of co- operation.                          
                                                                                              
 In pursuance of the above decision, official level discussions preparatory                   
 to the joint Commission were held in Colombo in November 1993. Besides                       
 reviewing progress on various proposals at these talks, the officials                        
 prepared a set of recommendations for the consideration of the joint                         
 Commission at the level of Foreign Ministers.                                                
                                                                                              
 India continued to favour a peaceful solution to the ethnic crisis in Sri                    
 Lanka within the framework of the unity, sovereignty and territorial                         
 integrity of Sri Lanka, through negotiations involving all those parties                     
 which have eschewed the path of violence.                                                    
 -5>                                                                                          
                                                                                              
 The successful completion of the resumed phase from 12 April to 6                            
 September 1993, of the voluntary repatriation of Sri Lankan refugees to                      
 their country, has been a matter of satisfaction for both countries.                         
 During this phase, nearly 7,000 refugees returned to Sri Lanka; the total                    
 number of refugees who have returned so far is about 36,000.                                 
                                                                                              
 The problems pertaining to fishermen from both countries straying into                       
 each other's waters and related matters continue to be a subject of                          
 consultations between India and Sri Lanka. The Government of India                           
 strongly conveyed its concerns to the Government of Sri Lanka in the wake                    
 of reports of attacks on Indian fishermen in the Palk Straits in                             
 September/October 1993 and the proclamation by Sri Lanka Government in                       
 September 1993 of a "prohibited zone" in Sri Lankan territorial waters.                      
 Talks were held at the Foreign Secretaries level in New Delhi on 15                          
 October 1993. Both sides agreed on the need for effective measures to                        
 prevent such incidents in future. Further discussions continued on the                       
 subject.                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 During the year 1993, there was active interaction between the two                           
 countries in economic, commercial and technical areas. The meetings of the                   
 Sub-Commissions on Science & Technology, and on Social, Educational and                      
 Cultural matters, were held in Delhi in the first quarter of the year                        
 1993. The Joint Business Council met in Colombo in March 1993. Among                         
 notable bilateral proposals/exchanges were the visits by the Chairman and                    
 other officials from National Dairy Development Board to Colombo for                         
 co-operation in dairy development sector; official level discussions on                      
 civil aviation matters and on co-operation in the tea sector; visit of a                     
 team of experts to Sri Lanka to prepare a blue print for the proposed                        
 setting up of an Institute of Technology and Management in Sri Lanka;                        
 gifting of Radiosonde equipment to Sri Lanka; and setting up of a joint                      
 venture in Sri Lanka for the manufacture of automotive tyres.                                
                                                                                              
 India's traditionally close and friendly relations with Maldives were                        
 further consolidated by high-level meetings and consultations during the                     
 year / 1993. Both countries looked forward to furthering bilateral co-                       
 operation in mutually identified areas during the fourth term of office of                   
 President Gayoom, to which he was re-elected on the basis of a referendum                    
 held in October 1993. The Indian Government was represented by the Railway                   
 Minister at the inaugural ceremonies of President Gayoom's fresh term.                       
 -6>                                                                                          
                                                                                              
 The visit of the Foreign Minister of Maldives, Mr Fathulla Jameel, to                        
 India in May 1993, provided a very useful forum for discussions. Besides                     
 calling on the Prime Minister and the Minister of External Affairs, Mr                       
 Jameel held discussions with the Ministers of State for External Affairs,                    
 Surface Transport and Commerce. The Foreign Minister of Maldives                             
 interacted with a wide cross-section of Indian business community during                     
 his stay in Bombay and Delhi and discussed ways, and means for promoting                     
 bilateral economic and commercial co-operation.                                              
                                                                                              
 The Minister of Justice and Islamic Affairs of the Government of Maldives                    
 visited New Delhi in October 1993. The Maldivian Minister called on Prime                    
 Minister and held discussions with the Minister of State for Law, justice                    
 and Company Affairs.                                                                         
                                                                                              
 During the SAARC Ministerial meeting held in Dhaka in December 1993, the                     
 Foreign Minister of Maldives called on the Minister of External Affairs.                     
 The two Ministers held wide ranging discussions on matters of mutual                         
 interest.                                                                                    
 During the year 1993, the Indian Government made vigorous efforts to                         
 complete the Indira Gandhi Memorial Hospital at Male, which is a major                       
 landmark of India-Maldives friendship and co-operation. Senior officials                     
 from the Indian side visited Male to monitor the works-in-progress in                        
 coordination with their Maldivian counterparts. The hospital is expected                     
 to be handed over to the Government of Maldives shortly and is due for                       
 commissioning during 1994.                                                                   
                                                                                              
 India-Pakistan relations continued to show a negative trend. Pakistan's                      
 support to terrorism directed against India and its proclivity to                            
 interfere in India's internal affairs was manifest in the bomb blasts in                     
 Bombay in March 1993. Pakistan's aid to and abetment of terrorism directed                   
 against India in the States of Jammu & Kashmir, Punjab and other parts of                    
 the country vitiated the atmosphere and has had a negative impact on                         
 bilateral relations.                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Pakistan's complicity in the planning and execution of the bomb blasts in                    
 Bombay resulted in an increased perception of the public in India of                         
 Pakistan's designs to interfere in India's internal affairs and to                           
 engineer conditions of instability. This issue was firmly taken up by the                    
 Prime Minister in his meeting with Mr Nawaz Sharif, the then Prime                           
 Minister of Pakistan, in April in Dhaka during the SAARC Summit. In spite                    
 of Pakistani assurances of co-operation in locating, apprehending and                        
 returning to India the members of the Memon family, prime suspects in the                    
 incident of the bomb blasts in Bombay, there has been no positive response                   
 from Pakistan.                                                                               
 -7>                                                                                          
                                                                                              
 Internal political developments in Pakistan including frequent changes in                    
 Government through most of the year also precluded any meaningful                            
 interaction between the two Governments.                                                     
                                                                                              
 In his congratulatory message to Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto on 19                         
 October, Prime Minister offered wide ranging and sustained bilateral                         
 discussions at the earliest to progressively normalise the relations.                        
 Foreign Secretary level talks were announced on 24 November and were held                    
 in Islamabad from 1 to 3 January 1994.                                                       
                                                                                              
 Earlier, Pakistan indulged in a spate of false propaganda in reaction to                     
 the incident at Hazratbal with a view to arousing communal feelings and                      
 further encouraging extremist elements. Pakistan's efforts to introduce a                    
 resolution on the human rights situation in Jammu & Kashmir at the Third                     
 Committee of the UN General Assembly Session did not fructify. Meanwhile,                    
 Pakistan has been sending delegations and addressing special messages to a                   
 number of countries with a view to furthering its designs on Jammu &                         
 Kashmir. The views of the Government of India were made known to all,                        
 concerned.                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 India has consistently held the view that the only logical and rational                      
 approach is harmonious co-existence based on the fundamental principle of                    
 non-interference in each other's internal affairs as enshrined in the                        
 Simla Agreement. This approach requires an equal commitment on behalf of                     
 Pakistan.                                                                                    
                                                                                              
 The seventh round of Foreign Secretary level talks between India and                         
 Pakistan took place in Islamabad from I to 3 January 1994. Foreign                           
 Secretary called on the President, Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of                    
 Pakistan. There were four rounds of delegation-level talks. The                              
 discussions were intensive and wide ranging and both sides reiterated the                    
 need to engage in a meaningful dialogue with a view to addressing all                        
 outstanding problems.                                                                        
                                                                                              
 As indicated during the Seventh Round of Foreign Secretary level talks,                      
 India handed over to Pakistan on 24 January 1994 six non-papers on                           
 Siachen, Sir Creek, a proposed agreement on maintaining peace and                            
 stability on Line of Control, Tulbal Navigation Project, Additional                          
 Confidence Building Measures and the Indo-Pak joint Commission.                              
 -8>                                                                                          
                                                                                              
 The continuing instability in Afghanistan was a major impediment in the                      
 continuance of traditional programmes of co-operation between India and                      
 Afghanistan. Owing to a serious deterioration in the security situation,                     
 the Indian Mission in Kabul had to be temporarily closed down in February                    
 1993. The Mission was reopened in September 1993. India maintained useful                    
 official exchanges with the Afghan leadership. The Foreign Minister of                       
 Afghanistan, Mr Hidayat Amin Arsala, visited New Delhi in July 1993. As a                    
 humanitarian gesture to the people of Afghanistan, India donated Rs 1.4                      
 crore worth of medicines and tea to Afghanistan under the UN's assistance                    
 programme.                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 The climate of uncertainty, instability and conflict which has                               
 characterised the situation in Afghanistan since April 1992 has continued.                   
 India has stood for a sovereign, independent, non-aligned and united                         
 Afghanistan. The Government believes that a political settlement taking                      
 into account the wishes of all sections of the Afghan people should be                       
 arrived at by the Afghans themselves without any form of external                            
 interference.                                                                                
                                                                                              
 The holding of the Seventh SAARC Summit in Dhaka on 10 and 11 April 1993                     
 was a major event. On the conclusion of the Summit, the Dhaka Declaration                    
 was adopted unanimously on 11 April 1993. The SAARC leaders also agreed on                   
 setting up of the SAARC Preferential Trading Arrangement (SAPTA).                            
                                                                                              
 The Seventh SAARC Summit welcomed the Report of the Independent South                        
 Asian Commission on Poverty Alleviation which had been established at the                    
 Colombo Summit. The Heads of State/Government committed their Governments                    
 to the eradication of poverty in South Asia preferably by 2002 AD through                    
 an Agenda of Action, which embodies a strategy of social mobilisation,                       
 decentralised agricultural development, small scale labour intensive                         
 industrialisation and human development policies with a priority focus on                    
 the rights to work and to primary education. A basic nutritional or                          
 "dal-bhat" approach has been advocated.                                                      
                                                                                              
 Another notable event has been the enactment by the Government of India of                   
 enabling legislation to implement the SAARC Regional Convention on                           
 Suppression of Terrorism. The necessary legislation in this regard has                       
 been passed by both Houses of Parliament and has become an Act of                            
 Parliament after receiving the assent of the President of India on 26                        
 April, 1993.                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 India ratified the SAARC Convention on Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic                       
 Substances in August 1993 and the Convention came into force with effect                     
 from 15 September 1993 after being ratified by all the SAARC member                          
 States.                                                                                      
 -9>                                                                                          
                                                                                              
 The SAARC leaders at their Seventh SAARC Summit endorsed the "Colombo                        
 Resolution on Children" adopted by the Second SAARC Ministerial Conference                   
 on Children held at Colombo in September 1992. The "illustrative goals"                      
 contained in the Colombo Resolution on Children have been incorporated as                    
 intermediate goals in the Indian National Plan of Action on Children.                        
                                                                                              
 The SAARC leaders welcomed the decisions to institutionalise co- operation                   
 in core areas. They further underlined the critical importance of urgently                   
 promoting intra-regional co-operation, particularly in the area of                           
 manufactures in order to enhance the productive capacity of the member                       
 countries, and to promote sustained growth and development to prevent the                    
 marginalization of South Asia's trade interest in the larger global                          
 context.                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 One of the major achievements of the Seventh SAARC Summit was the signing                    
 of the SAARC Preferential Trading Arrangement (SAPTA), which is a concrete                   
 step in the direction of trade liberalisation in the SAARC region. The                       
 Third Meeting of the Inter-Governmental Group on Trade Liberalisation was                    
 held in November in Colombo and after that the Fourth Meeting of the                         
 Committee on Economic Co-operation was held in Dhaka on 21 and 22 November                   
 1993. The lists of items for seeking tariff concession have been exchanged                   
 and negotiations being held on the subject. At the Council of Ministers                      
 Meeting held in Dhaka on 4 and 5 December 1993, the Council strongly urged                   
 member States to complete all formalities to put into operation the SAPTA                    
 latest by 1995.                                                                              
                                                                                              
 The meetings of the 13th Session of the Programming Committee, 18th                          
 Session of the Standing Committee and 13th Session of the Council of                         
 Ministers were held at Dhaka between 30 November and 5 December 1993. In                     
 her inaugural address at the 13th Session of the Council of Ministers, the                   
 Prime Minister of Bangladesh and Chairperson of the South Asian                              
 Association for Regional Co-operation, emphasised that the SAARC                             
 activities must keep pace with the preparations being made by the                            
 international community for the World Conference on Population and Women                     
 in 1994, the World Social Summit in 1995 and the Habitat-IIts in 1996. The                   
 Council of Ministers welcomed India's offer to host two Workshops in 1994                    
 with a view to evolving a collective position by SAARC member States for                     
 the World Summit for Social Development to be held in Copenhagen in 1995                     
 and the World Conference on Natural Disaster Reduction in 1994. India has                    
 also offered to host in February 1994 a Workshop of the representatives of                   
 the non-govern mental organizations active in the field of girl-child                        
 combinid with the preparatory meeting for the 4th World Women's                              
 Conference.                                                                                  
 -10>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 In accordance with the decision of the Seventh SAARC Summit, a SAARC                         
 Ministerial Conference on Women and Family Health was held in Kathmandu                      
 from 21 to 23 November 1993. The Ministers adopted a Kathmandu Resolution                    
 on Women and Family Health and resolved that the text of the Kathmandu                       
 Resolution may be forwarded to the International Conference on Population                    
 and Development Secretariat at New York as the input of SAARC member                         
 countries to facilitate preparatory work of the Conference on Population                     
 and Development.                                                                             
                                                                                              
 Under the aegis of SAARC, so far approximately 66 activities have been                       
 held in 1993 out of which 15 were held in India. These include training                      
 courses, seminars, workshops, technical studies, etc.                                        
                                                                                              
 The Eighth SAARC Summit will be held in India in late 1994 or early                          
 1995.                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 India values SAARC co-operation as a complementary dimension of her                          
 bilateral relationship with the neighbouring countries and continues to                      
 play an active role with the view to achieve and promote the objectives                      
 enshrined in the SAARC Charter.                                                              
 -11>                                                                                         
 1993                                                                                         
 2. South-East Asia and the Pacific                                                           
                                                                        Top                   
 INDIA'S traditionally close and friendly relations with member countries                     
 of Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and with countries in                     
 Indo-China were further strengthened by numerous high level contacts                         
 during 1993-94. The special policy focus continued on forging close                          
 economic ties with 'the ASEAN countries.                                                     
                                                                                              
 Traditional ties with Thailand were revitalised with the visit of Prime                      
 Minister, Shri Narasimha Rao, to Thailand in April 1993. The two Prime                       
 Ministers agreed on the need for high level political direction to augment                   
 bilateral trade and commerce by at least 20% each year. Specific areas                       
 such as fisheries, aquaculture, tourism, agriculture, and science &                          
 technology including peaceful uses of atomic energy were identified for                      
 time-bound co-operation.                                                                     
                                                                                              
 Subsequent to the Prime Minister's visit, two rounds of talks on fisheries                   
 co-operation have already been held. India, Thailand and Myanmar signed                      
 the Trilateral Maritime Boundary Agreement, along with an Indo-Thai                          
 Bilateral Maritime Boundary Agreement in New Delhi in October 1993.                          
                                                                                              
 The Second India-Thailand joint Commission Session held in New Delhi from                    
 2 to 5 November 1993, co-chaired by the Thai Foreign Minister, Sqn Ldr                       
 Prasong Soonsiri and the Minister of External Affairs, Shri Dinesh Singh,                    
 reviewed follow-up action to Prime Minister's visit to Thailand. Both                        
 sides agreed to take specific action to augment. trade and expand economic                   
 relations between the two countries. The two sides exchanged views on the                    
 positive. trends in bilateral relations on regional issues such as SAARC,.                   
 ASEAN, ARF and APEC and on                                                                   
 -12>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 international issues such as human rights, cross border terrorism and                        
 disarmament.                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 The Singapore industry and corporate sector is displaying a high level of                    
 interest in India, particularly in the wake of India's economic                              
 liberalisation and her attempt to integrate with the global economy.                         
 Several India-Singapore Joint ventures in the field of information                           
 technology, an integrated complex of hotels, shopping arcades, etc are                       
 already in the pipeline. A Software Technology Park is being planned in                      
 Bangalore by the Karnataka Government in collaboration with Singapore                        
 companies and the Tatas.                                                                     
                                                                                              
 At the political level, Singapore has consistently signalled its desire to                   
 bring about a qualitative upgradation in the bilateral relations. Prime                      
 Minister of Singapore, Mr Goh Chok Tong, visited India from 23 to 30                         
 January 1994 as the Chief Guest for the Republic Day celebrations this                       
 year. He led a delegation comprising Foreign Minister, Minister of Trade                     
 and Industry, CEOs of 36 major business houses, senior civil servants and                    
 a large media team. Apart from ceremonial attendance at Republic Day                         
 celeberations, his programme in Delhi consisted of meetings with                             
 President, Vice President, Prime Minis ter, Finance Minister, and,                           
 Ministers of Surface Transport, Communications and Environment. He also                      
 addressed about a 100 strong gathering of captains of Indian industry at a                   
 Round Table Conference organized by CII He laid the foundation stone in                      
 Bangalore of an Information Technology Park, a Rs 150 crores joint venture                   
 project between private companies in India and Singapore and the State of                    
 Karnataka in the fields of computer software and electronics. In Bombay,                     
 he inaugurated the representative office of Development Bank of Singapore.                   
 His visit was aimed towards forging a strategic economic alliance with                       
 India for coordinated action by the Governments and business in both                         
 countries to enhance joint ventures in diverse areas such as tourism,                        
 civil aviation, telecommunications, real estate and highways, financial                      
 services, ports and shipping, warehousing and information exchange.                          
                                                                                              
 Relations with Malaysia continued to be close. The Malaysian Prime                           
 Minister, Dr Mahathir Mohammad, visited India in December 1993 during the                    
 G-15 meeting and had bilateral discussions with the Indian leadership on                     
 issues of mutual interest. Six Memorandums of Understanding were signed                      
 during this visit in various fields with Indian private/ public firms. The                   
 Malaysian Minister for Energy, Telecommunication and Posts visited India                     
 in April 1993 and held discussions with his counterparts.                                    
 -13>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 As a result of the recent Supreme Court judgement about admissions to                        
 professional colleges, Malaysian students may not be able to pursue                          
 medical education in India as in the past.                                                   
                                                                                              
 Philippines Agriculture Minister, Mr Roberto Sebastian, visited India in                     
 August 1993 and held discussions with his counterpart, Shri Balram jakhar,                   
 on enhancing co-operation with the Philippines, particularly in the                          
 livestock sector. The Agriculture Minister also paid an official visit to                    
 the Philippines in September 1993 and held discussions on matters of                         
 bilateral interest.                                                                          
                                                                                              
 A Memorandum of Understanding was signed with the Philippines firm                           
 Autocorp in August 1993 for the assembly and sale of Tata trucks.                            
 Discussions are going on with the Philippines authorities for                                
 collaboration in various sectors including power projects.                                   
                                                                                              
 The Indonesian President, Mr Suharto, visited India in December 1993 for                     
 discussions on bilateral and multilateral issues with the President and                      
 the Prime Minister. President Suharto also participated in the "Education                    
 for All" Summit meeting in New Delhi. Earlier, Minister of State for                         
 External Affairs, Shri R L Bhatia, had visited Indonesia in May 1993 for                     
 the NAM Ministerial meeting and subsequently in September as Special Envoy                   
 of Prime Minister carrying a letter of invitation for President Suharto                      
 for the G-15 Summit. Shri Bhatia had meetings with Indonesian Foreign                        
 Minister, Mr Ali Alatas, and called on President Suharto. The latter was                     
 also invited for an official visit to India. These visits have helped both                   
 the countries in getting a better idea of each other's viewpoints on                         
 various issues of mutual concern.                                                            
                                                                                              
 The political co-operation between the two countries has been enhanced.                      
 Regular discussions and consultations are being held in the context of the                   
 Non-Aligned Movement, G-15, GATT and on human rights.                                        
                                                                                              
 The meeting of the Indo-ASEAN Sectoral Dialogue took place in January 1994                   
 in Jakarta. Bilateral trade is on the increase. More Indian companies are                    
 in the process of setting up joint ventures in Indonesia. Some Indonesian                    
 firms are also investing in joint ventures in India in the field of palm                     
 oil and other projects. The India-Indonesia joint Business Council meeting                   
 was held in Delhi in November 1993.                                                          
                                                                                              
 The close and friendly relations with Vietnam were given a further boost                     
 by exchange of high-level visits. Shri Salman Khurshid, Minister of State                    
 for External Affairs, visited Vietnam in February 1993. Many                                 
 -14>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 areas for economic co-operation between India and Vietnam were identified.                   
 Minister of State for Petroleum and Natural Gas, Capt Satish Sharma,                         
 visited Vietnam in July 1993, to review the progress of the off- shore                       
 exploration project of the Oil and Natural Gas Commission (Videsh Ltd) in                    
 southern Vietnam and discuss about other areas of co-operation. Vice                         
 President, Shri K R Narayanan, accompanied by his wife, paid a good-will                     
 visit to Vietnam from 22 to 28 September 1993. The visit provided an                         
 opportunity for an exchange of views with the Vietnamese leadership. Both                    
 sides felt the need to enhance the economic co- operation to make it                         
 commensurate with the excellent political relations existing between India                   
 and Vietnam.                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 The Vietnamese Vice-Minister of Finance, Mr Pham Van Trong, visited India                    
 in October 1993 for discussions on Indo-Vietnamese economic relations and                    
 the forthcoming joint Commission meeting to be held in Hanoi in early                        
 1994.                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 A number of Indian companies are, in the, process of setting up projects                     
 in Vietnam. KCP of Madras has signed an agreement with a Vietnamese                          
 company for setting up a sugar plant. Another Indian company, Harrison                       
 Malayalam, is setting up a rubber plantation and processing project in                       
 Vietnam.                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 Through agreement on recycling of the credit of Rs 390 million to Vietnam,                   
 continued economic co-operation between the two countries was spurred. An                    
 agreement on air services between India and Vietnam was signed in May                        
 1993, opening up opportunities for direct air services between India and                     
 Vietnam.                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 The close and cordial relations between India and Cambodia were further                      
 strengthened. The 1,800 strong Indian contingent under United Nations                        
 Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) made significant contribution                     
 to the UN efforts towards the establishment of peace in Cambodia and in                      
 the electoral process. The UNTAC authorities gave fulsome praise for the                     
 peace-keeping role and the civic action programme of the Indian                              
 contingent. The Prime Minister, Prince Ranariddh, also expressed his                         
 appreciation for the contributions of the Indian contingent.                                 
                                                                                              
 On completion of their 7-year project for restoration of the Angkor Vat                      
 Temple in Cambodia, the Archaeological Survey of India team returned to                      
 India in May 1993. The Indian contribution has been appreciated by various                   
 Cambodian leaders.                                                                           
 -15>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 India sent a consignment of 2,000 tonnes of rice to Cambodia in May 1993.                    
 Cambodian trainees continued to be offered facilities for various                            
 technical courses in India under Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation                   
 Programme.                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 The traditionally friendly relations with Laos were maintained. A 2-                         
 member delegation of the Lao PDR National Assembly led by Dr Khamlieng                       
 Pholsena, member of the Standing Committee of the National Assembly And                      
 Head of the National Assembly Foreign Affairs Commission,, visited India                     
 in April 1993 to attend the 89th Inter Parliamentary Congress held in New                    
 Delhi.                                                                                       
                                                                                              
 Bilateral relations with Australia continued to be cordial. The Prime                        
 Minister in his message of greetings to Prime Minister Paul Keating on his                   
 re-election as Prime Minister also invited him to visit India. Visits                        
 during the year included that of Minister of State for Waste Land                            
 Development, Col Rao Ram Singh, to Western Australia from 13 to 18 June                      
 1993 at the invitation of the Deputy Prime Minister of Western Australia,                    
 Mr, Hendy Cowan, to study the development of Wastelands. In turn, Mr Hendy                   
 Cowan visited India at the invitation of Minister of State for Commerce,                     
 Shri Kamaluddin Ahmed, from 14 to 24 November 1993 to explore the                            
 possibilities of joint ventures with India. The Speaker of the Lok Sabha,                    
 Shri Shivraj Patil, accompanied by the Leader of the Opposition, Shri A B                    
 Vajpayee, visited Canberra from 10 to 18 September 1993, to participate in                   
 the IPU Conference. The Deputy Speaker, of Lok Sabha, Shri S                                 
 Mallikarjunaiah, attended the 5th Commonwealth Parliamentary Seminar in                      
 Perth in May 1993. An Australian Parliamentary delegation led by the                         
 Deputy Speaker, Mr Henry Jenkins, visited India from 21 to 27 November                       
 1993.                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 The Bilateral Official Consultations with Australia took place on 2 and 3                    
 February 1994. Secretary (East) led the talks from Indian side and was                       
 accompanied by joint Secretary (AP).                                                         
                                                                                              
 Exchanges on defence and related fields were another feature of India-                       
 Australia relations. Vice Admiral, IDG MacDougall, Chief of Naval Staff of                   
 Australia, visited India from 9 to 16 May 1993 at the invitation of Chief                    
 of the Naval Staff of India. An NDC Team from India visited Australia from                   
 20 June to 4 July 1993. A senior officer also participated at a Conference                   
 on "Australia's Maritime Bridge into Asia" in November 1993. A senior                        
 official from the Australian Foreign Office visited New Delhi in November                    
 1993 for discussions and to brief India on Australia's views on CTBT.                        
 -16>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Bilateral trade with Australia, which has been growing steadily over, the                    
 years, reached a total of Rs 31084.77 crores in 1992-93 reflecting an                        
 increase of 102% compared to the bilateral trade in 1987-88. However,                        
 Australia continued to enjoy a trade surplus, which stood at Rs 1,737                        
 crores in 1992-93 mainly on account of Australia's supplies of coal and                      
 wool to India. The India-Australia joint Working Group in Power met in New                   
 Delhi in March 1993. The Seventh India-Australia joint Business Council                      
 (JBC) met in New Delhi in February 1993.                                                     
                                                                                              
 The India-Australia joint Ministerial Committee had its 3rd meeting in                       
 Sydney on 4 February 1994. The Indian delegation was led by Minister of                      
 State for Commerce, Shri Kamaluddin Ahmed.                                                   
                                                                                              
 Bilateral relations with New Zealand continued to be friendly and cordial.                   
 The general elections in New Zealand on 6 November 1993 resulted in the                      
 ruling National Party returning to power with a wafer- thin majority                         
 winning 50 of the 99 seats and enabling Prime Minister Jim Bolger to form                    
 the Government again. Prime Minister, Shri P V Narasimha Rao, sent a                         
 message of congratulations to Prime Minister Bolger.                                         
                                                                                              
 The Bilateral Official Consultations with New Zealand took place on 7 and                    
 8 February 1994 in Wellington. joint Secretary (AP) led the Indian side.                     
                                                                                              
 Trade continued to be the focal point in India's relations with New                          
 Zealand. Exports from India in 1992-93 stood at Rs 93 crores against the                     
 imports from New Zealand of Rs 177 crores. The India-New Zealand joint                       
 Business Council met in New Zealand on 4 August 1993. A Punjab Government                    
 delegation visited New Zealand in March 1993 and a delegation from the                       
 Gujarat Chamber of Commerce and Industry visited New Zealand from 9 to 14                    
 October 1991 New Zealand participated in the 89th Inter Parliamentarians                     
 Congress held in New Delhi from 9 to 17 April 1993. The first India-New                      
 Zealand joint naval exercises took place off Bombay from 27 to 29 July                       
 1993 during the visit of the two New Zealand warships to India. Former                       
 Prime Minister of New Zealand, Mr David Lange, visited New Delhi twice                       
 during the period under review.                                                              
                                                                                              
 The situation in Fiji continued to receive India's attention. Following                      
 the Fiji Parliament's rejection of the Budget on 29 November 1993, Prime                     
 Minister Sitiveni Rabuka dissolved the Parliament and called for elections                   
 now scheduled to be held in February 1994. Earlier, in response                              
 -17>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 to persistent demands, the Fijian Parliament had under the terms of                          
 reference called for the setting up of a Constitutional Review Commission.                   
 The ban on economic, technical and commercial co-operation with Fiji                         
 continued to remain in force. Scholarships however continued to be given                     
 to deserving Fijian students.                                                                
                                                                                              
 The President of Nauru, Mr Bernard Dowiyogo, visited India on 10 and 11                      
 June 1993 to sign the agreement for sale of the equity held by Nauru in                      
 Paradeep Phosphates Ltd. India acquired the equity share of Nauru in PPL                     
 for Australian S 63.8 million (Rs 135.745 crores).                                           
                                                                                              
 The Speaker of the Lok Sabha visited Papua New Guinea in connection with                     
 the Conference of Commonwealth Speakers and Presiding Officers held there                    
 in January 1994. High Commissioner of India, Kuala Lumpur, will                              
 concurrently be accredited to Papua New Guinea.                                              
 -18>                                                                                         
 1993                                                                                         
 3. East Asia                                                                                 
                                                                        Top                   
 THE momentum of high-level political dialogue and steady improvement in                      
 India-China relations was maintained during 1993-94 as Government                            
 continued their efforts to work towards the goal of establishing a long-                     
 term,, stable and good neighbourly relationship with China. It was                           
 recognised by the two countries that in a rapidly changing international                     
 situation where developing nations were being subjected to new pressures,                    
 countries like India and China must maintain substantive contacts and that                   
 a constructive engagement between them would not only conform to their                       
 mutual interests but would also be conducive to peace, stability and                         
 development in Asia and the world.                                                           
                                                                                              
 The visit of Prime Minister, Shri P V Narasimha Rao, to China in September                   
 1993 reinforced the positive trend in bilateral relations. The most                          
 significant outcome of the visit was the signing of the Agreement on the                     
 Maintenance of Peace and Tranquillity Along the Line of Actual Control in                    
 the India-China Border. Areas. It is an enabling agreement which lays down                   
 the framework for ensuring peace and harmony along the Line of Actual                        
 Control (LAC). Under it, India and China have agreed to observe the LAC                      
 without prejudice to their positions on the boundary question. Experts                       
 from both sides would jointly check and determine the LAC in those                           
 segments where there were differences. The two countries have also agreed                    
 to put in place several other measures, including redeployment of forces                     
 in border areas.                                                                             
                                                                                              
 The India-China Expert Group, set up to assist the joint Working Group                       
 (JWG) in implementation of the agreement, had its first meeting                              
 -19>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 in New Delhi, in February 1994. It is Government's expectation that the                      
 implementation of this agreement would strengthen the likelihood that                        
 peace and tranquillity would continue to be maintained along the India-                      
 China border, thus creating a tension-free atmosphere in which the two                       
 countries could address the larger issue of boundary settlement.                             
                                                                                              
 India and China persevered in their efforts in the JWG to seek a fair,                       
 reasonable and mutually acceptable settlement of the boundary question.                      
 The sixth meeting of the India-China JWG was held in New Delhi in June                       
 1993. Apart from continuing their useful dialogue on the boundary question                   
 in an atmosphere free of rancour, the two sides also made significant                        
 progress in their discussions on concrete steps that could be taken by                       
 them to enhance mutual confidence and harmony in border areas.                               
                                                                                              
 As part of the process of generating mutual trust, defence exchanges                         
 between India and China were carried forward. The visit of the Chinese                       
 Naval ship 'Zheng He' to Bombay in November 1993 was the first visit by a                    
 Chinese warship to an Indian port.                                                           
                                                                                              
 India and China continued their efforts to expand the dialogue and                           
 exchanges between their parliamentary institutions. In November 1993, Mr                     
 Li Ruihuan, Chairman of the Chinese People's Political Consultative                          
 Conference and a top-ranking leader of the, Chinese Communist Party, led a                   
 high-level delegation to India at the invitation of the Vice- President.                     
                                                                                              
 Bilateral trade and economic co-operation showed signs of modest increase.                   
 A positive development was the approval given for the setting up of                          
 several Chinese joint ventures in India and the agreement on the                             
 establishment of the first-ever Indian joint venture in China.                               
 Recognising, however, that the present level of bilateral economic                           
 interaction remained inadequate, the two countries agreed during Prime                       
 Minister Rao's visit to make special efforts to enlarge their economic                       
 links. New ideas were also explored during the visit of Commerce Minister,                   
 Shri Pranab Mukherjee, to China in June 1993 and, later, during the visit                    
 of the Chinese Vice-Premier, Mr Li Lanqing, to India in December 1993.                       
 During the Prime Minister's visit, a Protocol extending border trade to                      
 Shipki Pass, on, Himachal Pradesh-Tibet border was signed.                                   
                                                                                              
 There was also a marked increase in functional exchanges between India and                   
 China in 1993-94, based on the logic of mutual co-operation for mutual                       
 benefit. A Festival of India would be mounted in China in                                    
 -20>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 May-June 1 994; a Chinese cultural festival had earlier been organized in                    
 India in December 1992.                                                                      
                                                                                              
 On the whole, it was possible for India and China to steadily improve                        
 their relations in all spheres of state-to-state and people-to-people                        
 interactions. The peace and tranquillity agreement in particular reflected                   
 the determination of the two countries to overcome past differences and                      
 seek durable relationship on the basis of mutuality of interests.                            
                                                                                              
 The Asia-Pacific region emerged as the focus of global attention during                      
 the year, particularly in the context of rapid evolution of the Asia-                        
 Pacific economic co-operation. This region, in India's immediate                             
 neighbourhood, is one of great importance, and India continued to sustain                    
 her close and cordial relations with the countries in the region.                            
                                                                                              
 The momentum in India's relations with Japan generated by Prime Minister,                    
 Shri P V Narasimha Rao's visit to Japan and the visit of Prince Akishino                     
 to India in 1992 was maintained during the year under review.                                
 Parliamentary Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan,, Mr Shozo Azuma,                   
 paid an official visit to India in January 1994. Important visitors to                       
 Japan included Finance Minister, Dr Manmohan Singh, who visited Japan                        
 between 27 and 30 June 1993 as the Special Envoy of the Prime Minister in                    
 his capacity as Chairman of G-15 carrying a message from Prime Minister to                   
 the then Japanese Prime Minister, Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, who had assumed                        
 Chairmanship of G-7. He also met Foreign Minister Kabun Muto and Finance                     
 Minister Yoshiro Hayashi to discuss bilateral matters particularly the                       
 economic reforms. Minister of Power, Shri N K P Salve, visited Japan from                    
 15 to 17 June 1993 to attract Japanese investment in the power sector in                     
 India. Minister of State for Petroleum, Shri Satish Sharma, visited Japan                    
 in April 1993 to promote Japanese interest in the hydro-carbon sector.                       
                                                                                              
 At the official level, contacts between India and Japan were intensified.                    
 The Annual Foreign Office Bilateral Consultative Talks held in New Delhi                     
 on 1 and 2 April 1993 covered a wide-range of issues including                               
 non-proliferation in the Indian sub-continent. As a follow-up to the                         
 understanding reached between Prime Minister and the then Prime Minister                     
 of Japan, Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, in June 1992, the first ever official level                    
 talks on Non-Proliferation and Nuclear-issues were held in New Delhi on 11                   
 and 12 March 1993. The discussions afforded the two sides a better                           
 understanding of each others respective positions on non- proliferation                      
 and related matters. Other official meetings that took                                       
 -21>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 place during the year were Annual Consultations on the Bilateral                             
 Assistance Programme, the Trade Talks and the Railway Working Group. For                     
 the first time a Vice-Minister from the Ministry of International Trade                      
 and Industry of Japan visited New Delhi in March 1992 for discussions with                   
 senior Government officials.                                                                 
 Japan's interest and continuing support for India's restructuring of the                     
 economy was reflected in tangible ways. It retained its primary position                     
 in the list of donor nations pledging Yen 119.64 billion as Official                         
 Development Assistance (ODA) for 1993-94, a 7% increase over 1992-93. The                    
 six projects selected included three in the power sector, two in the                         
 transport/infrastructure sector and one in the small scale sector.                           
 Additionally, Japan extended Grant-in-Aid for Small Scale, Health,                           
 Education and Social Welfare Projects and technical training. The Japan                      
 International Co-operation Agency JICA) set up an independent Resident                       
 Office in New Delhi. Japan Interntional Co-operation Agency President, K                     
 Yanagiya, visited India in December 1993. Government of India accepted the                   
 recommendation of the Japan International Co-operation Agency Expert Team                    
 for Gurgaon as the first priority site for an Industrial Model Town (IMT)                    
 in India. While Japanese Official Development Assistance increased,                          
 investment figures showed a decline. Investment from Japan to India which                    
 had shown a dramatic increase and was the third highest in 1992 at Rs                        
 610.23 crores, fell sharply in 1993 to Rs 257.43 crores. Government of                       
 Japan, as a follow up to the Economic Mission sent in January 1992, led by                   
 Mr R Ishikawa, stated its intention to send a second high level Economic                     
 Mission in March 1994 to follow up and see the progress in Indian economic                   
 reforms. Japan continued to remain one of India's largest trade partners                     
 though India's share in Japan's total trade remained miniscule at less                       
 than 1 per cent. In terms of volume, bilateral trade which has shown                         
 consistent growth registered a total of Rs 8,213.77 crores in 1992-93. In                    
 the first six months of fiscal year 1993-94 1 e from April to September                      
 1993, the trade turnover with Japan stood at Rs 4,484.82 crores.                             
                                                                                              
 At the non-government level too, exchanges and interaction continued.                        
 Extensive and fruitful discussions on wide range of issues were covered at                   
 the 23rd joint Meeting of the India-Japan Standing Committee (IJSC) held                     
 in Tokyo on 7 and 8 October 1993 led by Shri Vasant Sathe, on the Indian                     
 side and former Prime Minister of Japan, Mr Toshiki Kaifu, the Hony                          
 Chairman, on the Japanese side. The Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)                   
 sent several delegations to Japan including its second Economic Mission                      
 from 16 to 20 October 1993 and also participated at the Global Business                      
 Opportunities Convention (GBOC) in Osaka. The India- Japan Business                          
 Co-operation Committees met in Japan on 22 and 23 April 1993 at Urabandai,                   
 Fukushima Prefecture. The 16th Standing Committee of the India-Japan                         
 Business Co-operation Committee (IJBCC) which met in New Delhi on 25 and                     
 26 November 1993 concentrated on sectoral discussions on financial                           
 services, power and telecommunications. In response to an Indian                             
 initiative, a Study Mission from the power sector of Japan representing                      
 both business and industry and government officials of Japan visited India                   
 from 12 to 18 December 1993 to examine prospects for investment in the                       
 power sector in India. From India other delegations to Japan included                        
 those from the forgings & castings, cashew, spice, tea, electronics and                      
 computer software, sericulture, leather, coir and marine products sectors.                   
 -22>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 In the cultural field co-operation continued apace. The Japan Foundation                     
 opened an office in India. The Indira Gandhi Prize for Peace, Disarmament                    
 and Development was awarded to Dr Saburo Okita, eminent economist and                        
 former Japanese Foreign' Minister, posthumously, for his contribution to                     
 the economic development of Japan and for enhancing India-Japan relations.                   
                                                                                              
 The enhanced importance that India and the Republic of Korea placed in                       
 each other's bilateral relations saw the visit of Prime Minister, Shri P V                   
 Narasimha Rao, to the Republic of Korea from 9 to 11 September 1993 at the                   
 invitation of President Kim Young Sam. The visit was the first ever by an                    
 Indian Head of Government to the Republic of Korea. In addition to the                       
 Summit Meeting with the President, Prime Minister also met Prime Minister                    
 Hwang In Sung, and Foreign Minister Han Sung Joo. Prime Minister's visit                     
 laid a firm foundation for mutual efforts to upgrade and diversify                           
 India-Republic of Korea exchanges at all levels-political, economic and                      
 cultural. President Kim Young Sam undertook to provide positive                              
 encouragement to the Republic of Korea's private sector to extend trade                      
 investment and joint ventures with India. Three documents were signed                        
 during the visit, namely, an Agreement on Tourism Co- operation, the                         
 Cultural Exchange Programme (CEP) for 1993-95 and a Protocol on Science                      
 and Technology Co-operation. Other high level visits to the Republic of                      
 Korea included that of Shri Satish Sharma, Minister of State for Petroleum                   
 and Natural Gas, to Seoul on 6 and 7 April 1993 to attract South Korean                      
 participation in the field of oil and natural gas and Shri jagdish Tytler,                   
 Minister of                                                                                  
 -23>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 State for Surface Transport, from 3 to 6 June 1993 for discussions with                      
 the major Korean ship-builders. Exchanges at the official level also took                    
 place. In addition, a Korean National Defence delegation visited India on                    
 a study tour in October 1993, while a Naval training squadron from the                       
 Republic of Korea paid a goodwill visit to Bombay the same month..                           
                                                                                              
 The India-Korea joint Business Council held its annual meeting when the                      
 Prime Minister was in Seoul and undertook to double India-Republic of                        
 Korea trade within three years from the present figure of about US $ 1                       
 billion. Several delegations from India visited Republic of Korea                            
 including those dealing with leather exports, deoiled cakes, jute                            
 manufacture, plastics, cashew and shellac. In turn, South Korea's                            
 businessmen too came on exploratory missions. The Republic of Korea's                        
 participation and presence in Indian off-shore projects continued to                         
 remain substantial. Direct bi-weekly flights between Seoul and Bombay were                   
 begun during the year under review. Co-operation in the cultural field                       
 continued apace with a special interest being shown by South Korean                          
 Buddhist groups for increased interaction with India.                                        
                                                                                              
 Prime Minister, Shri P V Narasimha Rao, addressed a meeting of Indian                        
 Heads of Mission stationed in North East Asia in Seoul in September 1993.                    
 The meeting examined inter alia recent developments in the region as also                    
 security and economic issues in the Asia Pacific.                                            
                                                                                              
 Relations with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea remained                            
 friendly. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea Vice President, Mr Li                    
 Jong Ok, visited India as Special Envoy of the Democratic People's                           
 Republic of Korea President on 25 and 26 March 1993 and met the Prime                        
 Minister, where he explained his country's position on nuclear issue.                        
 Democratic People's Republic of Korea Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs                       
 Song Won Ho also visited India. Shri K P Singh Deo, Minister for                             
 Information & Broadcasting, visited Pyongyang from 14 to 17 June to attend                   
 the COMINAC-IV. From the Democratic People's Republic of Korea a                             
 delegation of the Socialist Democratic Party of Korea led by Chairman, Mr                    
 Kim Byong Sik, visited India and called on the Prime Minister and other                      
 high dignitaries. Contacts at the party to party and people to people                        
 level were also maintained. A Cultural Exchange Programme for 1993-95 was                    
 signed in April 1993.                                                                        
                                                                                              
 The year under review witnessed further consolidation of traditionally                       
 friendly relations between India and Mongolia.                                               
 -24>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Mr J Choinkhor, Deputy Minister for External Relations of Mongolia, paid a                   
 visit to India in February 1993. During the visit, a number of Working                       
 Programmes and Protocols were signed to enhance bilateral co-operation in                    
 the field of science and technology. Government of India also agreed to                      
 make available to Mongolia a line of credit upto an amount of Rs 5 crores                    
 to help set up oil extraction, traditional medicine and mini cement                          
 plants, for which an Agreement was signed between the two countries in                       
 April 1993.                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 Secretary (East) visited Mongolia in June 1993 for bilateral discussions                     
 with his counterpart. He called on the President and Foreign Minister of                     
 Mongolia during the visit.                                                                   
                                                                                              
 Kum Selja, Deputy Minister of Culture, Ministry of Human Resource                            
 Development, visited Mongolia in September 1993 in connection with the                       
 first-ever exhibition of Buddha relics in Ulan Bator which was very                          
 successfully organized by the Government of India.                                           
                                                                                              
 The President of Mongolia will be paying a State visit to India in                           
 February 1994 during which a number of bilateral agreements are expected                     
 to be signed.                                                                                
 -25>                                                                                         
 1993                                                                                         
 4. Central Asia                                                                              
                                                                        Top                   
 INDIA lays great emphasis on the development of her relations                                
 withcountries of Central Asia, with whom she has historical                                  
 associations.As neighbours, the security and stability of Central Asia is                    
 of vital importance to India.                                                                
                                                                                              
 As in 1992-93, the current year was also marked by many high level                           
 exchanges between India and the Central Asian countries which were                           
 undertaken to further develop the multifaceted and mutually beneficial                       
 relationship with these countries. It was decided to open resident                           
 diplomatic missions in the capitals of Kyrghyzstan, Tajikistan and                           
 Turkmenistan in addition to the Embassies in Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan,                      
 which are already functional. The Embassies are expected to open before                      
 the end of 1994. Similarly, Kazakhstan and Kyrghyzstan have opened                           
 resident missions in New Delhi and it is expected that other countries                       
 will do so in the near future. The Ambassador of Kazakhstan presented his                    
 credentials to President on 12 November 1993 and became the first resident                   
 Ambassador from a Central Asian country.                                                     
                                                                                              
 Prime Minister, Shri Narasimha Rao, visited Uzbekistan from 23 to 25 May                     
 1993. During the visit a treaty on the principles of inter-state relations                   
 and co-operation between the two countries was signed by the Prime                           
 Minister and President of Uzbekistan. This agreement sets out the                            
 principles for bilateral relations by promising to develop relations in                      
 political, economic, trade, science & technology, cultural, exchange of                      
 information and other fields. During this visit the Prime Minister                           
 announced the decision to set up an Indian Cultural Centre at Tashkent for                   
 which preparatory work has since been concluded. The Prime Minister                          
 -26>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 also announced the setting up of an India Chair in the World University of                   
 Economics and Diplomacy. He announced a gift of medicines to be used by                      
 the people of the ecologically damaged area near Aral Sea. These medicines                   
 have since been sent. The Prime Minister and the President of Uzbekistan                     
 agreed that programmes supplied to Uzbek TV would be broadcast for viewing                   
 in Uzbekistan. The technical work for reception of these broadcasts is                       
 being conducted at present. The Prime 'Minister agreed to an increase in                     
 the Indian Technical and Economic Co-operation (ITEC) slots available to                     
 Uzbekistan by 50 and also agreed to the extension of second instalment of                    
 credit of US 10 million after the Uzbek side complete the utilisation of                     
 the current line of credit of US $ 10 million for development of capital                     
 projects.                                                                                    
                                                                                              
 The first meeting of the Indo-Uzbek joint Commission was held in New Delhi                   
 on 27 and 28 July 1993. The Indian Co-Chairman was Minister of External                      
 Affairs, Shri Dinesh Singh, and the Uzbek Co-Chairman was Deputy Prime                       
 Minister, Mr T M Miryakubov. The Joint Commission identified areas of                        
 technical co-operation on which follow-up action is being taken up by the                    
 specialised Ministries and Departments of the Government of India.                           
                                                                                              
 President Karimov paid a State visit to India from 3 to 5 January 1994,                      
 this being his first visit to India as President of sovereign Uzbekistan.                    
 An early return visit by President of Uzbekistan to the visit of Prime                       
 Minsiter in May 1993 is a reflection of their reciprocating India's desire                   
 to strengthen bilateral relations with this neighbouring country in a                        
 region of considerable interest to India. President Karimov had                              
 discussions with President, and had two rounds of discussions with Prime                     
 Minister: he also received Commerce Minister and Finance Minister and the                    
 Minister of State for External Affairs. During these high level                              
 interactions, views were exchanged about extending bilateral co-operation                    
 in different sectors. President Karimov Was awarded an honorary degree by                    
 Jawaharlal Nehru University and had an exchange of views with a                              
 representative cross-section of Indian business leaders. The members of                      
 the Uzbek delegation, representing the key Uzbek business and production                     
 establishments, also interacted with various business groups here. During                    
 the visit, President Karimov and Prime Minister signed an agreement on                       
 comprehensive economic co-operation. Besides, the Instruments of                             
 Ratification of the Indo-Uzbek Treaty on Principles of Inter-State                           
 Relations and Co-operation were exchanged and agreements on cultural                         
 co-operation, scientific co-operation, postal co- operation and                              
 co-operation in the telecom sector were signed.                                              
 -27>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 As part of the preparation for the visit of President Karimov and also for                   
 exchange of views on international relations, the Uzbek Foreign Minister,                    
 Mr S Saidkassim, visited India from 1 to 4 December 1993. He had detailed                    
 exchange of views with the Minister of External Affairs. He also called on                   
 Prime Minister, Finance Minister and the Commerce Minister.                                  
                                                                                              
 At an international meet in Tashkent on 12 and 13 January 1994, convened                     
 by the Government of Uzbekistan to seek international assistance to                          
 alleviate the crisis in the social sector in that country, Indian                            
 Government pledged US $ 500,000 in rupee equivalent over the current and                     
 the next financial year.                                                                     
                                                                                              
 Prime Minister visited Kazakhstan on 25 and 26 May 1993. The Prime                           
 Minister announced the setting up of a Cultural Centre at Almaty for which                   
 preparations have since been completed. Prime Minister also announced the                    
 increase in ITEC slots available to Kazakhstan by 50 from the existing                       
 number. He also announced the extension of a second instalment of credit                     
 of US $ 10 million ' to be used by Kazakhstan after the utillsation of the                   
 first instalment of credit for the same amount announced earlier.                            
                                                                                              
 The first meeting of the Indo-Kazakh joint Commision was held in New Delhi                   
 from 21 to 23 July 1993, Shri Balram Jakhar, Minister for Agriculture, was                   
 the Indian Co-Chairman and Mr G A Abilsyitov, Dy Prime Minister and                          
 Minister for Science & New Technologies, was the Kazakh Co- Chairman. The                    
 Joint Commission identified several areas of co-operation which are to be                    
 studied further through exchange of specialist delegations.                                  
                                                                                              
 President Nazarbaev stopped over in Delhi during a visit abroad on 20 July                   
 1993 and had an exchange of views with Prime Minister.                                       
                                                                                              
 The Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of the Republic of Kazakhstan visited                     
 India from 1 to 5 December 1993. In addition to an exchange of views with                    
 the Speaker of the Lok Sabha, the distinguished visitor called on the                        
 President and the Prime Minister.                                                            
                                                                                              
 Foreign Minister, Mr E O Karabaev, of Kyrghyzstan visited India from 4 to                    
 6 August 1993.                                                                               
                                                                                              
 The Prime Minister of Tajikistan, Mr Abdumalik Abdullogjanov Abdullajanov,                   
 visited India from -14 to 18 February 1993. With the                                         
 -28>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 establishment of the resident Indian Mission in the Tajik capital Dushanbe                   
 it is expected that contacts between the two countries will increase                         
 significantly.                                                                               
                                                                                              
 The relations between India and Turkey were strengthened further as a                        
 result of the visit of the President and Smt Vimala Sharma from 16 to 19                     
 July 1993, at the invitation of President of Turkey, Mr Suleyman                             
 Demirel-the first ever visit by President of India. Our two countries,                       
 founded on the principles of secularism and democracy, have friendly                         
 relations with the visit providing opportunity for high level exchange of                    
 views on matters of vital concern to both countries. During his stay,                        
 President had exchanges of views with President Demirel, Prime Minister,                     
 Prof Tansu Ciller, Deputy Prime Minister and other dignitaries; he also                      
 addressed leading businessmen of Turkey in Istanbul and had a free                           
 exchange of views on increasing the bilateral economic co-operation.                         
 Mister of State for External Affairs, Shri R L Bhatia, who was the                           
 Minister-in-waiting, had detailed discussions with the Turkish Foreign                       
 Minister, Mr Hikmet Cetin, on international issues and on closer                             
 collaboration between the two Foreign Ministries. Understanding was                          
 reached between the two sides for closer coordination in international                       
 fora. 'The Indian and Turkish delegations collaborated at the UN on                          
 resolution on terrorism. The Turkish leadership expressed keen interest in                   
 India's economic liberalisation successes with a view to sharing this                        
 experience. During the course of the President's visit, with the exchange                    
 of instruments of ratification, the Indo-Turkish agreement on mutual                         
 assistance in criminal matters and the Indo-Turkish agreement on mutual                      
 judicial assistance in civil and criminal matters came into force. India                     
 took part in the Izmir Trade Fair from 8 to 20 September 1993 and                            
 considered it to be a successful participation.                                              
                                                                                              
 Amongst other important visits, Minister, of State for Defence, Shri                         
 Mallikarjun, paid a visit to Turkey in September 1993. Minister for                          
 Tourism and Civil Aviation, Shri Gulam Nabi Azad, represented India at the                   
 funeral of late President Turgut Ozal in April 1993.                                         
                                                                                              
 President conveyed his congratulations to President Haider Aliyev of                         
 Azerbaijan on his election.                                                                  
                                                                                              
 The Government is opening resident missions in Ashkabad (the capital of                      
 Turkmenistan), Dushanbe (the capital of Tajikistan) and Bishkek (the                         
 capital of Kyrghyzstan) and a Consulate General of India in Istanbul.                        
 Indian Ambassador in Ankara has been concurrently accredited to the                          
 Azerbaijan Republic.                                                                         
 -29>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Kazakhstan has opened its diplomatic mission, headed by an Ambassodar, and                   
 Kyrghyzstan and Uzbekistan have opened their diplomatic missions at the                      
 level of Charge d'Affaires in New Delhi.                                                     
                                                                                              
 Minister of External Affairs, Shri Dinesh Singh, and Minister of State for                   
 External Affairs, Shri Salman Khurshid, had bilateral consultations with                     
 foreign ministers and other senior leaders of the countries of the region                    
 during the United Nations General Assembly.                                                  
 -30>                                                                                         
 1993                                                                                         
 5. The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa                                                      
                                                                        Top                   
 INDIA'S bilateral relations with the Gulf countries are marked by growing                    
 cordiality and friendship. The year 1993-94 saw further development in                       
 India's relations with the Gulf There are an estimated 2 million Indians                     
 resident in the Gulf and inward remittances are of the order of over Rs                      
 7,800 crores annually. The Gulf countries account for approximately                          
 two-thirds of India's oil imports. The Gulf countries thus have a                            
 significant economic profile from India's point of view. By July 1993, the                   
 Gulf countries had invested over Rs 10.4 crores in India. During the year                    
 1992-93 India's total trade with the Gulf region was Rs.16,610 crores of                     
 which about Rs 4,584 crores represented India's exports. India's new trade                   
 policies have led to expansion and diversification in bilateral trade with                   
 countries in the Gulf                                                                        
                                                                                              
 India considers peace, security and stability in the Gulf region as of                       
 great importance and her endeavour has been to further strengthen ties                       
 with each of the Gulf countries. 1993 was marked by further development in                   
 India's relations with the Gulf countries and by a number of important                       
 visits.                                                                                      
                                                                                              
 Shri Shivraj V Patil, the Speaker of Lok Sabha, visited Bahrain in                           
 September 1993.                                                                              
                                                                                              
 An Iraqi delegation led by their Foreign Ministry Permanent Undersecretary                   
 for Political Affairs, Mr Abdul Jabbar Omar al-Douri, paid an official                       
 visit to India in September 1993. This first bilateral talks at                              
 -31>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 such level for over two years was aimed at exchange of views and to                          
 resolve long-pending bilateral economic matters.                                             
                                                                                              
 The Kuwaiti Deputy Premier and Foreign Minister, Mr Sheikh Sabah Al- Ahmed                   
 Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, paid an official visit to India in February 1993 to                       
 thank India for her support to the Kuwaiti cause especially during her                       
 membership of UN Security Council. A Kuwaiti Parliamentary delegation led                    
 by Mr Ahmed Abdul Aziz Al-Sadoun, Speaker of the National Assembly, paid                     
 an official visit in October 1993 at the invitation of the Speaker of Lok                    
 Sabha.                                                                                       
                                                                                              
 The Prime Minister, accompanied by a high level delegation paid an                           
 official visit to the Sultanate of Oman. He was accompanied by Shri R L                      
 Bhatia, Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Kamaluddin Ahmed,                       
 Minister of State for Commerce, and other high ranking officials. Prime                      
 Minister's talks with Sultan Qaboos were held in an Ambience marked with                     
 cordiality and keenness to promote bilateral economic co-operation. During                   
 the visit, three important agreements concerning bilateral economic                          
 co-operation in the areas of trade, hydrocarbons and fertilizers were                        
 signed.                                                                                      
                                                                                              
 Earlier in March 1993, during a visit to Oman by Captain Satish Sharma,                      
 Minister of State for Petroleum and Natural Gas, two Memorandums of                          
 Understanding were signed. These concerned laying a US $ 4.5 billion 1,450                   
 kin sub-sea gas pipeline from Oman to India and the setting up of two oil                    
 refineries in India. Omani Minister of Petroleum and Minerals visited                        
 India in September.                                                                          
                                                                                              
 Shri R L Bhatia, Minister of State for External Affairs, participated in                     
 the inaugural function of INDEXPO and inaugurated India Trade Centre in                      
 Muscat in November 1993.                                                                     
                                                                                              
 The first ever Indo-Omani joint Naval Exercises took place off the coast                     
 of Oman in January 1993. The then Chief of Naval, Staff, Admiral L Ram                       
 Das, visited Oman in May. The Indian Navy has bagged a contract for                          
 hydrographic survey in Oman. Air Vice Marshal Mohammed bin Mahfudh bin                       
 Sa'ad Al Ardi, the Commander of the Royal Air Force of Oman, visited India                   
 in December to hold talks with his Indian counterpart.                                       
                                                                                              
 Shri R L Bhatia, Minister of State for External Affairs visited Oman and                     
 the UAE in May 1993 and held extensive discussion with his counterparts.                     
 Shri N K P Salve, Minister of Power, also visited these                                      
 -32>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 two countries in July to explore private sector and NRI participation in                     
 power projects in India.                                                                     
                                                                                              
 Shri Kamaluddin Ahmed, Minister of State for Commerce, visited Qatar and                     
 the UAE in April to further explore possibilities of increasing India's                      
 trade with these countries.                                                                  
                                                                                              
 A 19-Member Haj delegation led by Shri P M Sayyed, Minister of State for                     
 Home Affairs, visited Saudi Arabia in May 1993.                                              
                                                                                              
 A pattern of bilateral Foreign Office consultations at Secretary level                       
 With the Gulf countries has become a regular feature of Indian diplomacy.                    
 During the year such consultations were held with Bahrain, Iraq, Kuwait,                     
 Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the UAE and Yemen.                                                
                                                                                              
 In December, 3 Indian naval vessels paid three week goodwill visit to                        
 Bahrain, Kuwait and Qatar.                                                                   
                                                                                              
 The Sixth and Seventh Sessions of the Indo-UAE joint Commission were held                    
 in Abu Dhabi in June 1993 and in New Delhi in January 1994 at Foreign                        
 Ministry Secretaries level. The Commission reviewed the bilateral economic                   
 ties.                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 Mr Mohammed Abdulla Ali Al Shami, Yemeni Deputy Minister of Education,                       
 visited India in October. Possibilities of Indian co-operation in the                        
 primary and secondary education under a World Bank assisted project were                     
 discussed. Mr Ahmed Dhiaifullah Al-Ozaib, Permanent Under Secretary for                      
 Political Affairs of the Republic of Yemen, visited India in May 1993 and                    
 held Foreign Office level talks with Secretary in the Ministry.                              
                                                                                              
 While India's bilateral relations with the Gulf countries are problem-                       
 free, domestic developments in India and Pakistan's activism in the                          
 Organization of Islamic Conference (OIC) do sometimes affect their stances                   
 in international forums.                                                                     
                                                                                              
 The Islamic Foreign Minister's Conference and the OIC adopted resolutions                    
 and issued statements concerning Kashmir and Hazratbal incident. These                       
 were appropriately rebutted by the official spokesman.                                       
                                                                                              
 The Special Kuwait Cell is handling the Gulf War claims of Indian                            
 nationals, Indian companies and Government of India. The A, B, C, and D                      
 claims numbering about 1,40,900 till December 1993 valued at $ 1874.5                        
 million and about 100'E'claims of about S 1360 million have                                  
 -33>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 been forwarded to the United Nations Compensation Commission (UNCC),                         
 Geneva.                                                                                      
                                                                                              
 After eliminating the duplicate/ multiple applications and claims found                      
 ineligible, the Ministry is still saddled with about 32,000 A, B, C, and D                   
 claims mainly due to the deficiencies in the claim applications.                             
 Individual letters were sent to these 32,000 claimants asking them to                        
 remove the deficiencies by furnishing full Information as per UNCC                           
 requirements. This was followed up by deputing Ministry of External                          
 Affairs officers to some States, namely, Kerala, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu,                    
 Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh, to educate                      
 the claimants for supplying the missing information. Subsequently, a                         
 public notice was published advising all the defaulters to expedite their                    
 replies to the Special Kuwait Cell.                                                          
                                                                                              
 The UNCC Secretariat notified vide its note verbale of 26 April 1993 that                    
 claims within each category would be processed in the order in which they                    
 were received by it. This procedure of "first come first served" was                         
 considered detrimental to India's interests as she started forwarding her                    
 claims to Geneva later than some countries though the percentage of total                    
 number of claims lodged with the UNCC upto June 1993 by India was                            
 comparatively higher. India therefore suggested to the UNCC that each                        
 batch of claims which UNCC Secretariat processes must comprise a                             
 proportionate number of claims of that category from every concerned,                        
 country. Secretary (West), joint Secretary (SKC) and Director (L&T)                          
 visited Geneva to actively lobby with members of the Governing Council and                   
 despite stiff opposition succeeded in persuading the UNCC to agree to                        
 compose batches of "A" category claims on proportionate basis with some                      
 due weightage to the chronological order of claims.                                          
                                                                                              
 Most of the 126 "E" claims received from Indian companies, on preliminary                    
 scrutiny, were found to be incomplete/defective. The representatives from                    
 about 20 companies were called in February 1993 and advised to improve the                   
 presentation of their claims. In addition, letters were sent to more than                    
 100 companies advising them to resubmit their claims in accordance with                      
 UNCC regulations. In September 1993, an Inter-departmental Committee was                     
 constituted and letters were again sent to 105 Indian Companies requesting                   
 them to send representatives to appear before the Committee; but only 56                     
 companies cared to appear. However, when all efforts of Special Kuwait                       
 Cell failed to get all the claims completed/rectified as per UNCC                            
 requirements, it was decided to forward all the pending "E" claims to the                    
 UNCC.                                                                                        
 -34>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Although acknowledgements to most of the claimants whose claims had been                     
 forwarded to the UNCC were issued by end July 1993, many claimants who had                   
 returned to Kuwait had not received them due to postal delays, change of                     
 address or other reasons. A team of two officers of the Special Kuwait                       
 Cell visited Kuwait from 7 to 12 August 1993 to answer queries from Indian                   
 claimants in Kuwait and inform them about the status                                         
 of their claims.                                                                             
                                                                                              
 The "F" claim of the Government of India is under compilation and is                         
 expected to be finalised soon.                                                               
                                                                                              
 The last date for filing A, B, C & D claims with the UNCC, Geneva was                        
 originally 1 July .1993 which has now been extended to 1 January 1994.                       
 Extended deadlines for filing "E" and "F" claims are 1 April 1994 and 1                      
 May 1994 respectively.                                                                       
                                                                                              
 As regards payment, the UNCC is the sole authority to scrutinise and                         
 evaluate the claims, evolve the payment procedure and deliver the awarded                    
 compensation to the eligible claimants for payment through respective                        
 national governments. For the convenience of the public, it has been                         
 agreed in principle to utilise the services of some nationalised Indian                      
 banks to disburse the compensation as and when received.                                     
                                                                                              
 The efforts initiated in recent years to develop a multi-faceted                             
 relationship of mutual advantage with Iran were pursued with vigour and                      
 purpose. There was a significant step-up in high-level exchanges which                       
 contributed to expansion and diversification of bilateral co-operation in                    
 several areas.                                                                               
                                                                                              
 President, Dr Shanker Dayal Sharma, was in transit in Tehran on 13 July                      
 1993. The opportunity was used for fruitful discussions with the Iranian                     
 President, Mr Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani.                                                      
                                                                                              
 Prime Minister, Shri P V Narasimha Rao, paid an official visit to Iran                       
 from 20 to 23 September 1993 for wide ranging discussions with the Iranian                   
 leadership on bilateral, regional and international issues of mutual                         
 concern. This was the first Prime Ministerial visit from India to Iran                       
 after the Islamic Revolution of 1979, and was characterised by President                     
 Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani as "a turning point" in bilateral relations. A                      
 joint communique was issued and two Memorandums of Understanding, on                         
 Co-operation in Science & Technology, and on Co- operation in Surface                        
 Transport and Transit Facilities, concluded during Prime Minister's visit.                   
 -35>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Several Ministerial level visits also took place during the period under                     
 review: (i) the Union Minister of State for Labour, Shri P A Sangama,                        
 visited Iran from 21 to 23 April 1993; (ii) the Iranian Minister for Heavy                   
 Industries, Mr Nejad Hosseinian, visited India from 16 to 23 April 1993;                     
 (iii) Capt Satish Sharma, Union Minister for Petroleum & Natural Gas,                        
 visited Tehran on 5 and 6 July 1993; (iv) the Iranian Minister for                           
 Co-operation, Mr Gholam Raza Shafiee, visited India from 23 to 28                            
 September 1993; (v) Shri C K Jaffer Sharief, Union Minister for Railways,                    
 visited Iran from 6 to 9 November 1993; and (vi) the Iranian Oil Minister,                   
 Mr Gholam Raza Aqazadeh, visited India from 15 to .18                                        
 November 1993.                                                                               
                                                                                              
 In addition, several delegations were exchanged at the level of senior                       
 officials. The Foreign Offices of the two countries also maintained                          
 regular high-level contact on bilateral, regional and multi-lateral issues                   
 of common concern.                                                                           
                                                                                              
 With the exchange of Ministerial level delegations, co-operation in the                      
 petroleum sector was sought to be expanded beyond India's on-going                           
 purchase of crude petroleum from Iran. Technical studies were initiated to                   
 examine the feasibility of setting up a pipeline to transport Iran's                         
 natural gas to India. It is also envisaged that Indian involvement in                        
 exploration and drilling, as well as in downstream activities in Iran                        
 would be expanded.                                                                           
                                                                                              
 In the steel sector, the public sector Kudremukh Iron Ore Company Ltd                        
 (KIOCL) expanded its iron ore exports to Iran and entered into                               
 arrangements for provision of consultancy services to some steel plants in                   
 Iran. As a result of exchange of senior level delegations, co- operation                     
 in the steel, mining and metullurgy sector is poised for further expansion                   
 and diversification.                                                                         
 A joint venture fertilizer project in the Qeshm Island was the subject of                    
 active discussions in the period under review. It was expected that given                    
 India's large requirements of fertilizer " and Iran's abundant natural gas                   
 reserves, the proposed project would be of considerable mutual benefit.                      
                                                                                              
 Increased inter-Governmental exchanges also facilitated greater                              
 interaction between business and industry of the two countries. Several                      
 Indian businesses actively pursued opportunities in the heavy engineering,                   
 automobiles, machine tools, power and cement sectors in Iran. Indian                         
 -36>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 companies also actively sought contracts in the consultancy and services                     
 sector in Iran.                                                                              
                                                                                              
 During the period under review, India's relations with the countries of                      
 West Asia and North Africa were characterised by a spirit of traditional                     
 understanding and co-operation. Countries like Algeria, Egypt and Tunisia                    
 expressed concern about the growing danger arising out of religious                          
 extremism and terrorism and threat to regional stability. The high level                     
 contacts and exchange of visits contributed to further strengthening of                      
 ties between India and the WANA countries                                                    
                                                                                              
 The signing of the Declaration of Principles between the PLO and Israel,                     
 preceded by the mutual recognition of Israel and the PLO, was a major                        
 breakthrough in the Middle East Peace Process. India welcomed it and hoped                   
 that this notable first step would lead to a comprehensive settlement in                     
 the Middle East which would restore the legitimate rights of the                             
 Palestinian people. India actively participated in the third and fourth                      
 round of the Working Group Meetings of the multilateral track of the                         
 Middle East Peace Process held in April/May and October/November 1993                        
 respectively. India pledged at the Donors Conference in Washington on 1                      
 October 1993 an amount of US $ 1 million for assistance in kind to the                       
 Palestinian people in Gaza and West Bank, offered training slots for the                     
 Palestinian para-medical staff in the occupied territories, proposed to                      
 set up a Technical Training Centre in Gaza/Jericho, and indicated her                        
 willingness to host a Workshop in early 1994 in New Delhi as part of the                     
 on-going activities under the multilateral Working Group on Arms Control                     
 and Regional Security of the Middle East Peace Process.                                      
                                                                                              
 India and Algeria continued to maintain high level contacts. The Minister                    
 of State for External Affairs and Special Envoy of the Prime Minister,                       
 Shri R L Bhatia, visited Algeria on 11 and 12 October 1993. He called on                     
 Mr Ali Kafi, President of the High Committee of State (HCE), and conveyed                    
 an invitation from the Prime Minister for attending the G- 15 Summit in                      
 New Delhi. He briefed President Ali Kafi about Pakistan's continued                          
 support to terrorism in India and interference in India's internal                           
 affairs.                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 The fifth session of the Indo-Algerian joint Commission was held in                          
 Algiers from 5 to 8 June 1993. The Indian delegation was led by Shri                         
 Kamaluddin Ahmed, Minister of State for Commerce and the Algerian                            
 delegation by Mr M Mustafa Mokraoui, Minister of State for                                   
 -37>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Commerce. The joint Commission decisions covered a number of sectors for                     
 bilateral co-operation including trade, agriculture, industry, health,                       
 education and scientific research, transportation and culture.                               
                                                                                              
 A 3-member Algerian agricultural delegation visited India from 30 June to                    
 8 July 1993. Agreed Minutes signed during the visit covered specific areas                   
 of co-operation in the field of agriculture.                                                 
                                                                                              
 An EXIM Bank Line of Credit of US $ 50 million was utilised by Algeria for                   
 import of goods and equipment from India.                                                    
                                                                                              
 India noted with appreciation Algeria's continued constructive and                           
 positive stance on the Kashmir issue specially at the OIC meetings.                          
                                                                                              
 During the Foreign Office level consultation between Secretary (West) and                    
 his counterpart held in Djibouti in September 1993, the two sides                            
 discussed regional and international issues of mutual interest. Djibouti,                    
 which is a current member of the Security Council, OIC and the Arab                          
 League, expressed its desire to work with India in the UN on major                           
 international issues concerning the two countries and the developing                         
 world. Secretary (West) briefed his counterpart about Pakistan's                             
 interference in Kashmir and Punjab. He expressed India's distress at                         
 criticism of India in every OIC meeting and hoped that Djibouti would use                    
 its good offices to stop Pakistan's insidious campaign against India in                      
 OIC forums. The Djibouti side conveyed that it considers the Simla                           
 Agreement as the right forum for solving Indo-Pak differences. Secretary                     
 (West) also called on the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister and                        
 offered India's assistance under ITEC.                                                       
                                                                                              
 Relations between India and Egypt remained close. The Minister of State                      
 for External Affairs, Shri R L Bhatia, paid a visit to Egypt in October                      
 1993 as the Special Envoy of the Prime Minister to convey invitations for                    
 G-15 and Education For All (EFA) Summits to President Mubarak. He also                       
 conveyed congratulatory messages from President, Dr Shanker Dayal Sharma,                    
 to President Mubarak for his re-election for the third consecutive term.                     
 President Mubarak indicated his keenness to strengthen the traditional                       
 relationship existing between the two countries. The Deputy Chairperson of                   
 Rajya Sabha, Dr Najma Heptulla, visited Cairo to attend the Conference "On                   
 the Contribution of Islam to Civilization" in August 1993. She called on                     
 President Mubarak and conveyed a message from President Shanker Dayal                        
 Sharma. The Chief justice of the Supreme Constitutional Court of Egypt, Mr                   
 Awad Mohamed El-Mor, paid a 7-day visit from 11 to 17 April 1993 to India                    
 -38>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 at the invitation of the Chief justice of India. justice Mohamed Said                        
 Ashmawy, Chief justice of the Higher State Security and Criminal Court,                      
 paid a 13-day visit from 4 to 16 December 1993 at the invitation of ICCR                     
 to deliver the Azad Memorial Lecture.                                                        
                                                                                              
 The quantum of bilateral trade for the period April-September 1993 was 20%                   
 higher in dollar terms than that for the same period in 1992. Four Indian                    
 Companies won orders worth US dollars 33.975 million. A breakthrough was                     
 also achieved in the field of industrial collaboration when an Indian                        
 Company signed a joint venture agreement with an Egyptian Company worth US                   
 $ 40 million for production of carbon 'black.                                                
                                                                                              
 Secretary (Culture) accompanied by Director General (ICCR) paid a 5-day                      
 official visit to Egypt for discussing ways and means to implement the                       
 existing provisions of the Cultural Exchange Programme (CEP). He also                        
 inaugurated the new Library in the Maulana Azad Centre for Indian Culture                    
 in Cairo.                                                                                    
                                                                                              
 There has been a number of visits at' official and ministerial levels                        
 between India and Israel. The visit of Israeli Foreign Minister, Mr Shimon                   
 Peres, in May 1993 was the first ever important political visit from that                    
 country to India after the establishment of diplomatic relations in                          
 January 1992. Foreign Minister Peres called on the Prime Minister and the                    
 President and held discussions with Ministers of External Affairs, Human                     
 Resource Development, Finance, Agriculture and Ministers of State for                        
 External Affairs and Commerce. Three Agreements on Science & Technology,                     
 Culture and Tourism, a Memorandum of Understanding on Economic                               
 Co-operation and an Agreed Minutes for consultation between the two                          
 Foreign Offices were signed during the visit. Shri Sharad Pawar, Chief                       
 Minister of Maharashtra, led a high level delegation to the Agricultural                     
 Exhibition (AGRITECH) held in Israel 'in the first week of May 1993. The                     
 Minister of State for Tourism, Smt Sukhbans Kaur, visited Israel in June                     
 1993 and the Agriculture Minister, Shri Balram jakhar, paid a visit to                       
 Israel in July 1993. The Chief Minister of Gujarat, Shri Chimanbhai Patel,                   
 also visited Israel from 5 to 10 September 1993. Consultations at the                        
 Foreign Secretary level were conducted in Tel Aviv in March 1993.                            
                                                                                              
 Agriculture and related areas, water management, solar energy, tourism,                      
 culture and trade have emerged as promising areas for bilateral co-                          
 operation with Israel.                                                                       
 -39>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 An Agreement for co-operation in the field of agriculture was signed                         
 during the visit of Israeli Agriculture Minister to India from 17 to 24                      
 December 1993. The Israeli Airlines EL-AL started its flights to Bombay                      
 from 10 December 1993. An Air Services Agreement is also likely to be                        
 signed during the visit of the Israeli Transport Minister in the first                       
 quarter of 1994.                                                                             
                                                                                              
 India welcomed the signing of Common Agenda for Peace between Jordan and                     
 Israel on 14 September 1993.                                                                 
                                                                                              
 The 6th Session of the Indo-Jordan Trade and Economic joint Committee was                    
 held in New Delhi from 13 to 15 December 1993. The Jordanian delegation                      
 was led by its Secretary-General in the Ministry of Industry and Trade, Mr                   
 Marwan Awad. Both sides felt that considerable scope exists for further                      
 stepping up of export of Indian goods to Jordan like leather, chemicals,                     
 pharmaceuticals, rice, sorgum and soyabean meal. The Indian side responded                   
 favourably to the Jordanian request for preparing a software package for                     
 equipment maintenance and material management system for 4 major plants in                   
 Jordan-Arab Potash Company, Jordan Phosphate Mines Company, Jordan Cement                    
 Company and Jordan Petroleum Refinery Company. Both sides also agreed to a                   
 Round Table meet in Jordan during the second quarter of 1994 to continue                     
 mutual efforts towards broadening of co-operation in various fields such                     
 as industrial joint ventures,' exchange of technical knowhow, training of                    
 scholars, banking services/investment, shipping and transport.                               
                                                                                              
 Relations between India and Lebanon showed signs of considerable                             
 improvement. Secretary (West) visited Lebanon in September 1993. This was                    
 the first-ever consultation at Secretary level after the signing of the                      
 Taif Agreement. Secretary (West) called on the Lebanese Foreign Minister.                    
 Bilateral, regional and multilateral issues of mutual interest were                          
 discussed.                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 Lebanon showed interest in India's participation in the reconstruction of                    
 Lebanon and revamping its transport system, both civil and air.                              
                                                                                              
 A major part of outstanding dues owed to Indian companies by Libya was                       
 recovered in December 1992 and January 1993 through oil payments. Efforts                    
 have continued since then to recover the remaining dues after adjusting                      
 the income-tax liabilities, etc of the Indian companies.                                     
 -40>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 The Foreign Minister and Special Envoy of Col Gadaffi, Mr Omar Mustafa Al                    
 Muntasser, visited India from 29 to 30 April 1993. He called on the                          
 President, the Prime Minister and held discussions with the Minister of                      
 State for External Affairs, Shri R L Bliatia. He briefed the Indian                          
 leadership on the Lockerbie issue, discussed bilateral relations and said                    
 that Libya wanted the Kashmir problem to be resolved through negotiations                    
 between India and Pakistan on the basis of the Simla Agreement. It was                       
 agreed to hold a technical level official meeting prior to the meeting of                    
 the Indo-Libyan joint Commission which last met in New Delhi in July 1986.                   
 This meeting took place in New Delhi from j5 to 17 December 1993.                            
                                                                                              
 Stalemate on the Lockerbie issue continued and Libya remained under UN                       
 sanctions, which have been further strengthened with effect fiom 1                           
 December 1993 with the imposition of additional sanctions which include                      
 freezing of Libyan financial assets abroad and a ban on export of oil                        
 equipment to Libya. India has indicated that she favours continuation of                     
 political dialogue to resolve the dispute and feels that indefinite                          
 continuation or further extension of sanctions is inappropriate to the                       
 issues involved.                                                                             
                                                                                              
 India's Ambassador in Dakar, Senegal, was earlier concurrently accredited                    
 to Mauritania. A decision has now been taken for logistical reasons to                       
 change the concurrent accreditation from the Indian Embassy in Dakar to                      
 the Indian Embassy in Algiers. It is in the process ofbeing implemented.                     
                                                                                              
 India's relations with Morocco received impetus when the Vice President of                   
 India visited Morocco from 30 June to 3 July 1993 in response to an                          
 invitation from the Moroccan Prime Minister. The Vice President was                          
 received in audience by King Hassan II. He handed over an invitation from                    
 the President of India to King Hassan 11 to pay a State visit to India.                      
 Invitations were also extended to the Prime Minister and the Crown Prince                    
 of Morocco to visit India at their convenience. The discussions mainly                       
 focussed on bilateral relations and international issues, in particular,                     
 the situation in Maghreb countries and the Middle East Peace Process. This                   
 was the first high level visit to Morocco since the restoration of                           
 diplomatic relations in 1988. It was described by the Moroccan Prime                         
 Minister as a turning point in Indo-Moroccan relations. Invitations were                     
 also extended to the Ministers of External Trade, Commerce, and Mines by                     
 the Minister of State for Chemicals and Fertilisers, Shri Eduardo Faleiro,                   
 who accompanied the Vice President to Morocco.                                               
 -41>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 India's relations with the PLO continued to be marked by close                               
 understanding and exchange of views. Consultations were held on major                        
 developments concerning the Middle East Peace Process (MEPP) and other                       
 issues relevant to each other.                                                               
                                                                                              
 Foreign Minister Faroukh Kaddoumi paid a visit to India in April 1993 as                     
 Chairman Arafat's Special Envoy to brief the Prime Minister on expulsion                     
 of 415 Palestinians by the Israeli authorities as well as the outcome of                     
 rounds of discussions of the bilateral track of the Middle East Peace                        
 Process which were held in Washington. India expressed her continuing and                    
 deep concern at the expulsion and urged the Government of Israel to                          
 withdraw the expulsion order and to implement Resolution 799 of the                          
 Security Council which was piloted by India as the then President of the                     
 Security Council. Shri R L Bhatia, Minister of State for External Affairs,                   
 visited Tunis in May 1993 as the Prime Minister's Special Envoy to brief                     
 Chairman Arafat on issues concerning India and the PLO and to reassure                       
 India's continued support to the Palestinian cause.                                          
                                                                                              
 In a message issued on the occasion of the Observance of the International                   
 Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian people, Prime Minister reiterated                     
 India's continued support for the Palestinian cause. The External Affairs                    
 Minister in his speech during the function organized to observe the                          
 Palestine Day indicated India's resolve to continue to extend moral,                         
 material and technical assistance to the Palestinian people.                                 
                                                                                              
 With regard to Saharwi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR), Indiajoined others                   
 in the Fourth Committee of the UN in a consensus statement which                             
 authorised the UN Secretary General to continue the dialogue between                         
 Polisario and Morocco for finding an amicable settlement to the Western                      
 Sahara Question.                                                                             
                                                                                              
 In response to a request from the UN, India sent approximately 5000 troops                   
 to Somalia to join UNOSOM-11. Earher, India had sent two naval ships to                      
 assist UNITAF operations in Somalia. The role of the Indian troops has won                   
 praise from the UN as well as the local population. India has also decided                   
 to distribute relief supplies worth Rs 5 lakhs through the Indian                            
 contingent stationed in Somalia.                                                             
                                                                                              
 Both India and Syria made efforts towards strengthening of bilateral                         
 relations between the two countries. In this context, Secretary (West)                       
 visited Syria in September 1993 for conducting Foreign Office level                          
 -42>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 dialogue. Syria indicated that it is against mixing religion with politics                   
 and would not like fora such as OIC to be utilised to discuss bilateral                      
 issues. It expressed its opposition in principle to tabling of various                       
 Resolutions on Jammu & Kashmir by Pakistan in OIC and other international                    
 organizations.                                                                               
                                                                                              
 A 3-member Syrian delegation led by the Vice Minister of Petroleum and                       
 Mineral Resources, Mr Issa Ibrahim, visited India during October 1993.                       
 Possibilities of further expanding bilateral co-operation in various                         
 fields were,discussed. The Syrian side expressed its interest to export                      
 yock phosphate to India.                                                                     
                                                                                              
 A Work Plan Agreement (1993-94) for co-operation in the field of                             
 agriculture and allied sectors between the two countries was also signed                     
 in Damascus in September 1993. The Work Plan calls for exchange of germ-                     
 plasma in respect of field of forage crops. India also participated in                       
 specialised international Fair for Textile, Garment and Machinery,                           
 Damascus, in May 1993.                                                                       
                                                                                              
 The largest exhibition of work ofcontemporary Indian painters organized by                   
 the National Gallery of Modern Art in co-operation with the Syrian                           
 Ministry of Culture was opened by the Syrian Minister of Culture, Dr Nazah                   
 Al-Attar, at the Syrian National Museum on 8 December 1993 for a duration                    
 of 3 weeks in which paintings of world-known Indian painters like M F                        
 Hussein, Satish Gujral, Souza and others were exhibited.                                     
                                                                                              
 A Memorandum of Understanding on co-operation in the peaceful application                    
 of remote sensing was signed on 8 December 1993 between the Department of                    
 Space, Government of India, and the General Organization of Remote Sensing                   
 of Syria.                                                                                    
                                                                                              
 Kum Selja, Deputy Minister for Education and Culture, paid an official                       
 visit to Damascus from 22 to 31 December 1993. A Protocol for Cultural                       
 Exchange Programme for the years 1994-96 was signed during the visit.                        
                                                                                              
 His Eminence Dr Sheikh Ahmed Kiftaro, the Grand Mufti of Syria, paid a                       
 visit to India from 17 to 24 January 1994 at the invitation of the Indian                    
 Council for Cultural Relations, New Delhi, under its distinguished                           
 visitors programme. The Grand Mufti called on the President, the External                    
 Affairs Minister, the Deputy Chairman of Ra . ya Sabha and the Minister of                   
 State for External Affairs, Shri R L Bliatia. He also held meetings with                     
 prominent Islamic scholars. He visted the Aligarh                                            
 -43>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Muslim University and met the Vice-Chancellor as well as other senior                        
 Professors.                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 The Sixth Session of the Indo-Tunisian joint Committee was held in Tunis                     
 from 10 to 12 June 1993. The decisions covered a number of areas of                          
 bilateral co-operation including trade and economy, scientific research,                     
 agriculture, culture, tourism and handicrafts. Minister of State for                         
 External Affairs and Special Envoy of Prime Minister, Shri R L Bhatia,                       
 during his visit to Tunis from 26 to 28 May 1993 met the Tunisian acting                     
 Foreign Minister, Mr Sayed Bin Mustafa, and exchanged views on bilateral                     
 relations and international issues of mutual interest.                                       
 -44>                                                                                         
 1993                                                                                         
 6. Africa (South of the Sahara)                                                              
                                                                        Top                   
 AFRICA, like the rest of the world, is in the midst of change, political                     
 as well as economic. The emerging trend towards a democratic and                             
 multi-party system is progressively taking shape although the                                
 transformation is uneven. The reform process in South Africa has now                         
 become irreversible and India looks forward to the formation of a                            
 representative and non-racial Government after the elections in April                        
 1994.                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 India welcomes the move towards multi-party democracy in Africa. In the                      
 first multi-party elections in Kenya, President Daniel T Arap. Moi, was                      
 re-elected. In its transition to multi-party system, several political                       
 parties have been registered with the National Election Commission in                        
 Tanzania where elections are slated for 1995. Prof Zafy Albert was elected                   
 President of Madagascar in February 1993. President Rene was elected in                      
 Seychelles in July 1993 in its first multi-party elections. In Gabon and                     
 Equatorial Guinea elections were held. In Nigeria, the transition however                    
 received a set back. In Mozambique, the peace process is holding and is                      
 moving towards the establishment of a multi-party system. In Angola, the                     
 situation still remains fragile.                                                             
                                                                                              
 Significant changes are being effected in Sub-Saharan Africa.. However, it                   
 is still not free from conflicts and trouble spots. The African                              
 Governments have decided to evolve a mechanism for conflict prevention,                      
 management and resolution under the OAU umbrella. At the mini OAU Summit                     
 in Cairo in December 1993, the actual mechanism including an OAU Peace                       
 Fund was established. The members resolved that the new mechanism should                     
 operate within a framework acceptable to all                                                 
 -45>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 the parties of the conflict. India welcomes this important African                           
 initiative to sort out its own affairs. Such initiatives can have useful                     
 effects over other parts of the world as well.                                               
                                                                                              
 The socio-economic situation in the continent remains in a precarious                        
 state. Poverty, deterioration of terms of trade, plummeting prices of                        
 primary commodities, high external indebtedness -and a resultant reverse                     
 flow of resources have undermined the ability of African countries to face                   
 ecbnomic changes. M6st of the countries had to accept the Structural                         
 AdJustment,Programme as a major means of their economic recovery, even                       
 though the conditionalities involve a lot of sacrifice. The basic                            
 responsibility for development rests with individual countries, yet                          
 regional co-operation is an important factor to strengthen national                          
 efforts. Therefore, economic groupings like ECOWAS, SADC, PTA as also the                    
 recently established COMESA (Common Market for Eastern and Southern                          
 Africa) and the revived East African Community are expected to play a                        
 greater role in the economic integration and develop- rent of Africa.                        
                                                                                              
 These changes taking place in Africa have a bearing on India's relations                     
 with the continent. With the political independence of all African                           
 countries and the prospect of reform within South Africa, the struggle                       
 against colonialism and institutionalised racialism is moving towards a                      
 successful conclusion. In future, new relationship based on concrete                         
 economic, commercial, technological and educational co-operation will                        
 assume enhanced significance. India is ready to co-operate in the setting                    
 up of mutually beneficial projects. India is also ready to assist them in                    
 their human resource development.                                                            
                                                                                              
 India attaches special significance to her relations with Africa. She has                    
 had close political relations with the countries of Africa and is now in                     
 the process of concretising that close relationship into mutually                            
 beneficial economic co-operation.puring 1993, India had intense                              
 interaction with countries in Southern Africa, Eastern Africd, Western                       
 Africa as also countries of the Indian Ocean. From Southern Africa- there                    
 were State visits from Zambia and Zimbabwe. From Eastern Africa there was                    
 the State visit from Tanzania. Similarly from Western Africa, India had                      
 the first ever State visit from Burkina Faso. From the Indian Ocean area                     
 came President Cassim Uteem of Mauritius. In addition, there was also                        
 intensified interaction with countries of Southern Africa. Mr R F Botha,                     
 Foreign Minister of South Africa, visited India in November. From Eastern                    
 Africa India received the First Deputy Prime Minister.of Uganda.                             
 -46>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 A major development in India's relations with South Africa was the                           
 restoration of diplomatic and consular relations on 22 November 1993                         
 (which were severed way back in 1954 on account of the apartheid policies                    
 pursued by the Government of South Africa). Protocols to this effect were                    
 signed during the visit to India of South African Foreign Minister, Mr R F                   
 Botha, on 21 and 22 November 1993. Trade links were earlier restored on 25                   
 September 1993 in response to the progress in Sofith Africa towards the                      
 establishment of transitional mechanisms to oversee the first multi-racial                   
 elections scheduled for April 1994. Shipping and air links were also                         
 restored. Indian Cultural Centre in Johannesburg, which was set up in May                    
 1993, has now been upgraded into a Consulate General. The South African                      
 Representative Office in New Delhi has been upgraded into a full-fledged                     
 Embassy.                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 While the foundation has been laid, further progress in bilateral                            
 relations is expected to come into full play once the new government comes                   
 to power on the basis of 27 April 1994 elections. South Africa is seen as                    
 an important market and gateway to other neighbouring African countries.                     
 It has the infrastructure to, service the entire Sub-Saharan Africa and                      
 provides a mid-way base for trade with Latin America. The presence of more                   
 than a million strong Indian ethnic community in South Africa provides a                     
 continuing link between the two countries.                                                   
                                                                                              
 While further strengthening the traditional relations with ANC, India was                    
 able to establish contact with the South African Government as also                          
 various other parties. The centenary of Mahatma Gandhi's arrival in South                    
 Africa was celebrated which happily coincides with the dismantling of the                    
 structure of apartheid in that country.                                                      
                                                                                              
 The success of the negotiating process in South Africa has led to the                        
 establishment of the Transitional Executive Council (TEC) and the adoption                   
 of the draft Interim Constitution. These represent important steps forward                   
 in the evolution of a democratic and non-racial South Africa. India views                    
 that the political process in South Africa has now become irreversible.                      
                                                                                              
 Despite the postponement of the G-15 Summit, President Mugabe of Zimbabwe                    
 decided to stick to his programme of visit to India, demonstrating his                       
 commitment to G-15 and South-South co-operation as well as his regard for                    
 India. The visit offered excellent opportunities for exchange of views on                    
 bilateral, international and multilateral issues. Zimbabwe expressed its                     
 keen desire to enhance bilateral co- operation specially in the economic,                    
 'transport and small scale sectors with special emphasis on rural                            
 development.                                                                                 
 -47>                                                                                         
 President Chiluba's visit to India emphasised that Zambia and India                          
 continued to enjoy close relations after political changes in Zambia                         
 following introduction of multi-party democracy. President Chiluba's visit                   
 as well as the joint Commission meeting held in Lusaka clearly underlined                    
 the importance which Zambia attaches to its relations with India, with                       
 special emphasis on co-operation in the field of industry, transport,                        
 human resource development, small scale industries, railways, food                           
 processing and rural development. Shri Salman Khurshid, Minister of State                    
 for External Affairs, led the Indian Delegation to the second Indo-Zambian                   
 joint Commission.                                                                            
                                                                                              
 The UN imposed an embargo on supply of arms and petroleum products against                   
 UNITA in Angola in September. Of late, there have been a series of                           
 meetings between UNITA and MPLA in Lusaka. The situation, however, remains                   
 uncertain.                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 Despite some difficulties in implementation of the peace accord in                           
 Mozambique the situation is settling down. It is expected that the peace                     
 process will hold and elections would take place in October 1994 as                          
 scheduled. India has contributed a contingent of about 900 Indian troops                     
 for UN Peace Keeping Operations in Mozambique (ONUMOZ).                                      
                                                                                              
 India's relations with Namibia and Botswana continued to be intensified in                   
 the economic and commercial fields. The Indian Mission in Malawi was                         
 closed down in 1993 for financial reasons. India maintains cordial and                       
 friendly relations with these countries.                                                     
                                                                                              
 Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Salman Khurshid, visited four                   
 countries of Southern Africa from 11 to 24 January 1994, namely, South                       
 Africa (Durban), Mozambique, Zimbabwe and Botswana. In Durban, the                           
 Minister of State for External Affairs met leaders of all major parties                      
 across the political spectrum of South Africa including the ruling                           
 National Party, ANC, Inkatha and the Natal Indian Congress. The meetings                     
 helped in strengthening existing ties and in establishing new links with                     
 various parties at a time when the country's first ever multi-racial                         
 elections are round the corner in April 1994. He also delivered a keynote                    
 address 'at a function well attended by members of Indian community to                       
 mark Swami Vivekananda's birthday on 14 January. Minister of State for                       
 External Affairs also met members of the business                                            
 -48>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 community of Durban and expressed confidence that economic relations                         
 between the two countries would grow.                                                        
                                                                                              
 In his discussions with the leaders of Mozambique, the focus was 'on the                     
 peace process there and India's assistance in the forthcoming multiparty                     
 elections and in national reconstruction. Both the sides stressed the need                   
 to tap and maximise benefits from the prevailing business climate in the                     
 two countries characterised by economic liberalisation. Three ambulances                     
 donated by India to Mozambique were also handed over. Co- operation in the                   
 health sector was also explored.                                                             
                                                                                              
 Minister of State for External Affairs visited and addressed the Indian                      
 contingent at the United Nations Observer Mission in Mozambique.                             
                                                                                              
 During his visit to Zimbabwe, meetings with the Zimbabwean leadership                        
 focussed on bilateral ties as well as on the international situation                         
 particularly in the context of recent developments in Southern Africa. The                   
 Zimbabwean side expressed interest in intensified co-operation with India                    
 in the field of small scale industies. The two sides reiterated the                          
 importance of greater interaction between the respective business                            
 communities to take advantage of economic liberalisation measures in both                    
 the countries with a view to increasing trade and setting up joint                           
 ventures etc. The Zimbabwean side also sought India's assistance in                          
 setting up projects in the agriculture and allied sector.                                    
                                                                                              
 At various meetings with his counterparts in Botswana, talks focussed on                     
 ways and means to strengthen and diversify bilateral relations, and the                      
 role of the Southern African Development Community (SADC).                                   
                                                                                              
 Overall, the visit was successful as it helped strengthen and renew                          
 contacts with the leadership of four important countries of the Southern                     
 African region.                                                                              
                                                                                              
 President Cassem Uteem of Mauritius visited India in July 1993. This was                     
 his first official visit abroad after taking over as President of                            
 Mauritius. There were also exchanges of a number of visits at ministerial                    
 level reflecting India's close relationship with Mauritius.                                  
                                                                                              
 India's relationship with Mauritius has been further strengthened iii the                    
 commercial, economic and cultural fields. There have been high level                         
 exchanges of business delegations as also a further increase in trade                        
 between the two countries. A number of joint ventures in diverse fields                      
 also appear to be on the anvil. The Fourth World Hindi Conference                            
 -49>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 was successfully held in Mauritius in December 1993 further strengthening                    
 linguistic ties between the two countries. The Indo- Mauritius joint                         
 Commission was held in Delhi in January 1994. The Mauritius delegation was                   
 led by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Economic Planning and                       
 Development.                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 Seychelles held its first multi-party elections and President Rene was                       
 re-elected. The Indo-Seychelles joint Commission meeting was held during                     
 1993 and it reviewed various areas of co-operation.                                          
                                                                                              
 President Mwinyi's visit in May 1993, while reaffirming the existing close                   
 and friendly relations between India and Tanzania, offered opportunity to                    
 exchange views at the highest level and gave a concrete thrust to                            
 strengthening of commercial and economic relations, especially in the                        
 field of agriculture, industry and human resource development.                               
                                                                                              
 The visit of Shri Salman Khurshid, Minister of State for External Affairs,                   
 to Kenya in September 1993 offered an opportunity to exchange views with                     
 the Kenyan leadership at the highest level. In view of the drought                           
 situation, it was decided to give to Kenya food aid amounting to Rs 50                       
 lakhs.                                                                                       
                                                                                              
 As a follow up of President Museveni's visit to India in October 1992,                       
 several technical teams visited Uganda for feasibility studies, for                          
 example, in the fields of phosphatic fertilizers, hydro-electric power,                      
 etc to assess the possibility of co-operation in these fields. The visit                     
 of Mr Eriya Kategaya, First Deputy Prime Minister of Uganda, further                         
 emphasised close relations between the two countries.                                        
                                                                                              
 The first meeting of Indo-Ugandan joint Committee was held in Kampala in                     
 January 1994. The meeting reviewed the extent and scope of existing                          
 relations between the two countries and considered several proposals as                      
 well as ways and means to further strengthen bilateral relations.                            
                                                                                              
 Following exchange of visits by Minister of State for External Affairs and                   
 Ethiopian Foreign Minister in 1992, a technical team visited Ethiopia to                     
 assess co-operation in the fields of rural technology particularly                           
 agroindustries, small scale industries and human resource development.                       
                                                                                              
 In Nigeria, the Presidential elections held in June 1993 were annulled.                      
 After a brief interlude by a nominated government, a military government                     
 headed by General Sani Abacha took over the reigns of the country in                         
 -50>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 November 1993. India's economic and commercial relations with Nigeria,                       
 however, continued to show an upward swing.                                                  
                                                                                              
 After a long struggle, Eritrea achieved independence in May 1993. India                      
 immediately recognised the Provisional Government of Eritrea. She has also                   
 signed protocols establishing diplomatic and consular relations with                         
 Eritrea.                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 India had the first ever State visit from Burkina Faso. It was decided to                    
 gift grinding mills, Bajaj three wheelers and a drilling rig to Burkina                      
 Faso which would assist in their development plans and introduce Indian                      
 products to Burkina Faso. It was also decided in principle to establish a                    
 joint Commission.                                                                            
                                                                                              
 Relations with Ghana also were further strengthened resulting in a                           
 substantial increase of exports. India's relations with Western Africa                       
 generally continued to develop satisfactorily.                                               
                                                                                              
 The civil war i ' n Liberia finally came to an end with warring factions                     
 signing a peace accord in July 1993 and setting up of an interim                             
 government. The accord provides for elections in February 1994.                              
                                                                                              
 In Senegal, though President Diouf was re-elected, the deteriorating                         
 economic situation is a cause of concern and was a factor in the inability                   
 of the President to attend the G-15 Summit.                                                  
                                                                                              
 President Felix Houphouet Boigny of Ivory Coast died after being in power                    
 since independence for the last 33 years. He was regarded as a magisterial                   
 figure who spearheaded his country's freedom struggle and proved a                           
 powerful spokesman for Africa.                                                               
                                                                                              
 In the course of the year, India closed down the Mission in Zaire due to                     
 financial considerations, while maintaining traditional friendly                             
 relations.                                                                                   
 -51>                                                                                         
 1993                                                                                         
 7. Europe                                                                                    
                                                                        Top                   
 Eastern Europe                                                                               
                                                                                              
 #INDIA'S relations with countries of the former USSR and Eastern Europe                      
 during 1993-94 were characterised by the continuation of efforts to                          
 reinvigorate the relationships taking into account the changes underway in                   
 the region. The effort to build a new structure of relations was                             
 predicated on the assumption that it is in the interest of all parties                       
 that those elements of the earlier relationship which continue to be                         
 relevant be retained. At the same time, new opportunities to expand and                      
 strengthen ties were taken advantage of and challenges posed by the                          
 transition processes in Eastern Europe met.                                                  
                                                                                              
 The multifaceted changes underway in Russia continued into 1993. Internal                    
 political events were a factor which had to be taken into account by the                     
 entire world. India shares with other major countries the desire that                        
 Russia remain stable and strong even as it continues its transition to                       
 political pluralism and economic reform. Therefore, the political impasse                    
 between the President and the Parliament in the middle of 1993 leading to                    
 armed clashes later aroused concern.                                                         
                                                                                              
 The consolidation of democracy and pluralism among the countries that                        
 emerged from the former USSR and in East Europe was a welcome development.                   
 It was the Indian endeavour to express support for the positive direction                    
 of change. Offers of assistance were made in areas where it was felt that                    
 the Indian experience could be of value to the countries concerned.                          
 Exchanges between political, economic and commercial institutions, the                       
 establishment of new trade arrangements and the offer of training                            
 facilities were relevant in this context.                                                    
 -52>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Political and strategic developments in the region during the year were                      
 significant and are expected to impact seriously on the evolution of                         
 European politics, economic and security structures and on the new                           
 international order. This axiomatically is of substantial concern and                        
 interest to India. Noteworthy among these developments were Russian                          
 foreign policy pronouncements emphasising the legitimacy of its security                     
 interests in the countries which constituted the former USSR. The slow                       
 evolution and expansion of the Commonwealth of Independent States as a                       
 regional organization, t he ratification of the CIS Collective Security                      
 Treaty by its six members, and the undertaking of peace-keeping operations                   
 in, the framework of the CIS is to be noted. The position taken by Russia                    
 that it does not envisage its efforts of peacekeeping in the former USSR                     
 within the framework of the CIS to be replaced by any other organization                     
 has a significant bearing on the emergence of a regional security                            
 mechanism in that part of the world.                                                         
                                                                                              
 The announcement of a new Russian military doctrine in November 1993 was                     
 reflective of the changing internal and regional security perceptions. The                   
 salient features of the new doctrine were:                                                   
                                                                                              
 (a) The sources of military danger are identified as direct threat of                        
 armed aggression against Russia, armed conflicts caused by aggressive                        
 nationalism and religious intolerance, territorial claims by other states,                   
 local wars and armed conflicts proximate to Russia, proliferation of                         
 weapons of mass destruction and their nonsanctioned use, upsetting of                        
 strategic stability, expansion of military alliances damaging to Russian                     
 security, suppression of rights of Russian citizens in foreign states and                    
 attacks on Russian forces and installations abroad.                                          
                                                                                              
 (b) The principal way of ensuring military security of Russia is seen in                     
 the maintenance of stability in regions adjoining Russia, controlling the                    
 proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and promoting co- operation                    
 with foreign states, primarily with CIS members and countries of                             
 Central-East-Europe.                                                                         
                                                                                              
 (c) Local wars and conflicts are regarded as the main threat to stability                    
 and peace and internal conflicts as endangering the vitally important                        
 interests of Russia and liable to be exploited by other States.                              
                                                                                              
 (d) The emphasis in building up the armed forces is on the creation of                       
 mobile forces. This is related to the task of assisting internal security                    
 forces to maintain law and order.                                                            
 -53>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 (e) The stationing of Russian troops and facilities outside its territory                    
 is envisaged, with such troops constituting part of either joint or                          
 Russian grouping.                                                                            
                                                                                              
 (f) The use of nuclear weapons against a non-nuclear state is envisaged in                   
 contingencies where the latter is part of an agreement or alliance with a                    
 nuclear weapon state and commits aggression against Russia or its allies.                    
                                                                                              
 The military doctrine appears to reflect a continued aspiration to retain                    
 Great Power status and a determination to defend basic security interests                    
 as defined by Russia.                                                                        
                                                                                              
 The political changes in Eastern Europe and the Baltics reflected some of                    
 the difficulties in the transition from a socialist system to democratic                     
 pluralism accompanied by free market economics. The accession to the power                   
 of leftist political parties in Lithuania and Poland was indicative of the                   
 need for greater social security at a time of economic hardship. The                         
 growing acceptance of pluralist political processes in the region was a                      
 welcome development in so far as India was concerned.                                        
                                                                                              
 At a strategic level, the proposed eastward expansion of the NATO appeared                   
 to stir a controversy vis-a-vis security concerns expressed by Russia. It                    
 was Russia's position that it would not object to the expansion of NATO                      
 provided this was viewed 'in perspective, aimed at all European                              
 integration, and was not contrary to the interests of other states                           
 including Russia. This led to the US proposal of "Partnership for Peace"                     
 which envisages bilateral NATO agreements with individual countries                          
 providing for joint training, manoeuvre and exercises and exchange of                        
 information but stopping short of extending security guarantees. The                         
 approach to NATO expansion will inevitably have an impact on the evolution                   
 of European security structures and constitutes a matter of global concern                   
 as it could lead to a revival of tension and rivalries which have only                       
 recently abated.                                                                             
                                                                                              
 The NATO Summit in Brussels on 10 and 11 January 1994 addressed the                          
 question of the eastward expansion of the alliance. The declaration issued                   
 at its conclusion specified that the consolidation and preservation                          
 throughout Europe of democratic societies and their freedom from any form                    
 of coercion or intimidation was of direct concern to the NATO. It was                        
 stressed that the Russian Government's firm commitment to democratic and                     
 market reform and to a reformist foreign policy was                                          
 -54>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 important for the security and stability in Europe. The Summit agreed that                   
 the alliance remained open to the membership of other European countries                     
 and adopted the US sponsored Partnership for Peace proposal. This proposal                   
 envisages NATO expansion as an evolutionary process taking into account                      
 political and security developments in the whole of Europe. It invites                       
 States participating in the NACC and other CSCE countries to join the                        
 Partnership for Peace. The criteria for subscribing to the Partnership                       
 include openness in national defence planning and budgeting, ensuring                        
 democratic control of defence forces, and developing co- operative                           
 military relations with NATO. NATO will consult with any active                              
 participant in the Partnership if that partner receives a direct threat to                   
 its territorial integrity, political independence or security. The                           
 potential entrants to the Partnership are required to provide NATO with                      
 presentation documents identifying steps they will take to achieve the                       
 political goals of the Partnership as well as military and other assets                      
 which might be used for Partnership activities. Each subscribing State                       
 will develop with NATO an individual Partnership.                                            
                                                                                              
 The Partnership for Peace-proposal was discussed by President Clinton                        
 during his visit after the NATO Summit to Prague where he met the                            
 Presidents of the Visegard countries. It was also the subject matter of                      
 discussions during his visit to Moscow from 12 to 15 January 1994. The                       
 Russian-US Moscow Declaration on the visit states that the two Presidents                    
 agreed that the concept of the Partnership is an important element of an                     
 emerging new European security architecture. President Yeltsin stated                        
 Russia's intention to participate actively in the Partnership and conclude                   
 substantive agreements opening the way for broad and intensive                               
 co-operation between Russia and NATO as a partner. President Clinton                         
 welcomed the prospect of Russia's active participation in the Partnership.                   
 The two Presidents also agreed on the need to create an inclusive and                        
 non-discriminatory new European security order that is focussed on                           
 practical political and security co-operation.                                               
                                                                                              
 The Russian-American Summit at the Presidential level in January 1994 was                    
 a significant development with respect to the global strategic situation.                    
 At the end of the Summit, the two Presidents issued the Moscow Declaration                   
 as well as a joint Statement on Non-Proliferation of weapons of                              
 mass-destruction and the means to their delivery, a joint Statement on                       
 human rights, a statement on the Middle-East and a Memorandum on                             
 Co-operation in the field of export control. The Moscow Declaration                          
 reaffirmed the fundamental importance of                                                     
 -55>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Russian-US co-operation which was described as a strategic partnership. It                   
 called for enhancement of transparency and responsibility in, the                            
 transfers of conventional arms and sensitive dual use of technology. With                    
 regard to nuclear issues, it supported the early completion of the                           
 Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB) Agreement, for a cut-off of production of                       
 fissible materials and considered new measures to strengthen strategic                       
 stability. In terms of bilateral co-operation, the, declaration reaffirms                    
 support for the rapid growth of bilateral trade and investment as a                          
 special priority. Co-operation in space was described as a key expression                    
 of the relationship. The Russian President affirmed the irreversibility of                   
 the transition to a market economy and emphasised the requirement to                         
 address social needs associated with this transition. From the US side, it                   
 was recognised that social issues could be a new and promising area for                      
 co-operation. On European security, in addition to the Partnership for                       
 Peace proposal, the two Presidents agreed on making the CSCE a key                           
 mechanism for international co-operation in Europe. They spoke of a new                      
 agenda whose priorities were preventive diplomacy, peacekeeping,                             
 protection of human rights and rights of national and other minorities.                      
 They condemned aggressive nationalism, violation of human rights and                         
 religious intolerance of any kind including antisemitism. The two                            
 countries also stated that they would intensify their coordination within                    
 the framework of UN and CSCE to promote conflict resolution on the basis                     
 of respect for the independence, sovereignty and existing borders of the                     
 Former Soviet Union (FSU) States.                                                            
                                                                                              
 The US-Russian joint statement on non-proliferation stressed the resolve                     
 of the two countries to co-operate actively and closely to prevent and                       
 reduce this threat to international security. It called for the indefinite                   
 extension of the NPT and the expeditious conclusion of a CTB agreement. A                    
 verifiable ban on production of fissile materials for nuclear purposes was                   
 deemed important for non-proliferation.                                                      
                                                                                              
 The two countries agreed to review strengthening security assurances to                      
 those states that renounced the possession of nuclear weapons and complied                   
 with their non-proliferation obligation. They also urged effective                           
 implementation of the principle of full scope safeguards as a condition                      
 for nuclear and dual use material export. The two Presidents expressed                       
 their determination to prevent the proliferation of missiles capable of                      
 carrying weapons of mass-destruction. The need for close co- operation to                    
 develop policies on non-proliferation applicable to specific regions was                     
 stated and references made to the situation in the Korean peninsula and in                   
 South Asia. With respect to the latter, both US and Russia expressed                         
 support for efforts to reach agreement on the establishment of a                             
 multilateral forum to consider measures in the field of arms control in                      
 non-proliferation and called on India and Pakistan to join negotiations                      
 and become signatories to the treaty banning nuclear weapon test                             
 explosions, to the convention to ban production of fissile material for                      
 nuclear explosives and to refrain from deploying ballistic missiles                          
 capable of delivering weapons of mass-destruction to each others'                            
 territories.                                                                                 
 -56>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Responding to the joint statement on non-proliferation, spokesman of the                     
 Government of India noted that the basic orientation of the declaration                      
 echoes the objectives emphasised by India in the 1989 Special Session on                     
 Disarmament and the views expressed by the Prime Minister at the special                     
 Summit of the UN Security Council in January 1992. India views the                           
 suggestions in the Declaration in the context of its deep and abiding                        
 commitment to general and complete disarmament particularly nuclear                          
 disarmament. India believes that the objectives of comprehensive test ban,                   
 initially controlling the production and dissemination of fissile material                   
 and ultimately banning its production should be pursued expeditiously                        
 within a specific time frame applicable to all members of the                                
 international community. It is with this purpose in view that India                          
 pursues confidence building measures with its neighbours and has                             
 participated in a series of bilateral discussions with different                             
 countries. It is India's expectation that these efforts would further the                    
 cause in view. As for the suggestion that the Nuclear Non- Proliferation                     
 Treaty should be extended indefinitely and unconditionally in its present                    
 form, India's view that the Treaty in its present form is discriminatory                     
 is well known. Hence, there is need to alter the NPT on non-discriminatory                   
 lines, taking into account international developments over the last three                    
 decades and the imperative necessity for general and complete disarmament                    
 to end all weapons of mass-destruction.                                                      
                                                                                              
 During President Clinton's visit to Moscow, Russia, the US and Ukraine                       
 signed a tripartite agreement for the elimination of nuclear weapons on                      
 the territory of Ukraine. The agreement reaffirmed-.- the non-nuclear                        
 status of Ukraine and provided for the withdrawal of nuclear warheads from                   
 its territory to Russia. Russia and the US jointly guaranteed Ukraine's                      
 security as a non-nuclear State in the context of the processes envisaged                    
 in the agreement.                                                                            
 -57>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 The NATO Summit, the Clinton-Yeltsin meeting and the tripartite agreement                    
 are significant moves in the process of evolution of new European and                        
 Trans Atlantic security structures. The outcome of these efforts will also                   
 have an impact on the process of European integration and other related                      
 issues.                                                                                      
                                                                                              
 A disturbing aspect of the transition processes in Eastern Europe and                        
 former Soviet Union following the end of the Cold War and the dissolution                    
 of the Former Soviet Union is the rise of ethnic nationalism and the                         
 resurfacing of traditional rivalries. The conflicts in Nagorno- Karabakh,                    
 in Abkhazia, in the Trans-Dneister region, in southern Russia and in its                     
 most extreme form in the countries of the former Socialist Federal                           
 Republic of Yugoslavia are a matter of concern for the international                         
 community for their conflagrative potential. India believes that the break                   
 up of the former SFRY is the outcome of an intensely ethnoreligious                          
 exercise compounded by considerations of power politics in the Balkans in                    
 which external powers have had their own defined interest. The handling by                   
 the international community of the consequences of the break up of the                       
 SFRY is a matter of great concern. India has taken the position in favour                    
 of a political solution to the crisis in Bosnia-Herzegovina without resort                   
 to threat of force or violence. India is also committed to the principle                     
 that an eventual settlement has to be patently fair, reasonable and                          
 acceptable to the three. communities concerned. India has consistently and                   
 forcefully condemned atrocities committed in Bosnia-Herzegovina and                          
 believes that practices such as ethnic-cleansing and use of systematic                       
 rape as a political weapon is unacceptable irrespective of the party which                   
 commits them. As regards the several territorial and succession issues                       
 that have arisen following the dissolution of the USSR, it is India's                        
 position that all concerned would work towards an early, peaceful and                        
 mutually acceptable settlement without resort to threats or use of force                     
 or violence. Apart from discussions among concerned parties, it is noted                     
 that the UN and CSCE are involved in the process of bringing about                           
 peaceful settlements. The escalation of the conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh                     
 has been a matter of particular concern and the Government expressed its                     
 position in a statement on 7 September 1993 which recalled the December                      
 1991 Alma Ata Declaration with its provisions of respecting territorial                      
 integrity, inviolability of borders and the rejection of use and threat of                   
 force and economic and other pressures. The Governments of Armenia and                       
 Azerbaijan were urged to resolve their differences through early peaceful                    
 negotiations.                                                                                
 -58>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 The conclusion of agreements with Russia as part of the disaggregation of                    
 relations with the countries of the former Soviet Union was a notable                        
 feature of the development of relations during the year. The Treaty of                       
 Friendship and Co-operation between India and Russia was ratified in                         
 Moscow on 11 October 1993 through an exchange of instruments of                              
 ratification. The Rupee-Rouble Agreement was also ratified through an                        
 exchange of notes between the two Governments in April 1993 and came into                    
 effect on 11 May 1993. An ambitious Indo-Russian Cultural Exchange                           
 Programme for the period 1993-95 was signed in Moscow during the visit of                    
 Secretary, Department of Culture, on 16 September 1993. A Protocol on                        
 Co-operation in Medical Sciences and Public Health was concluded during                      
 the visit to Russia of Secretary, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare,                       
 from 12 to 18 September 1993. A meeting of the ILTP joint Council on                         
 Science & Technology took place in New Delhi in November 1993 along with                     
 the first session of the Indo-Russian Working Group on Science &                             
 Technology. Civil aviation talks between India and the Russian Federation                    
 took place in Moscow on 6 and 7 September 1993. It is expected that talks,                   
 on the conclusion of a Shipping Agreement with Russia would take place in                    
 the near future.                                                                             
                                                                                              
 A visit by the Russian co-chairman of the Inter-governmental Commission to                   
 India at the invitation of his Indian counterpart is scheduled for the                       
 near future. The Commission will review issues of succession as a result                     
 of the dissolution of the former Soviet Union and define new growth areas                    
 in the bilateral relationship. On the economic side, notable developments                    
 in 1993 were the extension of a swing credit of Rs 3 billion to Russia by                    
 India and the promotion of direct ties between the business and industry                     
 sectors of the two countries.                                                                
                                                                                              
 The Russian Minister of Internal Affairs, General V F Yerin, visited India                   
 from 16 to 20 October 1993. He held discussions with the Home Minister and                   
 signed an Agreement on Co-operation between the Russian Ministry of                          
 Interior and India's Ministry of Home Affairs. This framework agreement                      
 deals with combating terrorism, trafficking in illegal narcotics and                         
 international crime.                                                                         
                                                                                              
 The Minister for Civil Aviation and Tourism, Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad,                          
 visited Russia from 5 to 8 September 1993 and held discussions on the                        
 possibilities of expanding tourism between the two countries.                                
                                                                                              
 Official bilateral talks took place in Moscow during the visit of Foreign                    
 Secretary from 10 to 12 October 1993. Foreign Secretary met First                            
 -59                                                                                          
                                                                                              
 Deputy Prime Minister Shumeiko, First Deputy Defence Minister Kakoshin and                   
 Deputy Foreign Minister Lavrov. The development of bilateral relations and                   
 concrete steps to be taken to expand co-operation in various fields                          
 including defence were discussed during the visit. Regional concerns and                     
 positions on important international issues were also covered during the                     
 official discussion.                                                                         
                                                                                              
 A significant development, in Indo-Russian relations during the year was                     
 the decision of the Russian Government, conveyed on 16 July 1993, to                         
 invoke the force majeure clause to state that Glavkosmos found itself in a                   
 situation of not being able to fulfil all its obligations under the                          
 January 1991 agreement with ISRO on the development of cryogenic stage for                   
 GSLV. Russia justified its decision on the grounds that some elements of                     
 the contract were inconsistent with the new Russian export control regime                    
 with respect to technologies, materials and equipment dealing with rocket                    
 engines. The Government of India's regret at this decision was stated by                     
 official spokesman on 17 July 1993. Further consultations between ISRO and                   
 Glavkosmos were held in India in December 1993.                                              
                                                                                              
 The President of India, Dr S D Sharma, paid a State visit to Ukraine from                    
 13 to 16 July 1993. He held talks with President Kravchuk on the                             
 development of bilateral relations and exchanged views on regional and                       
 international issues. President received Prime Minister Kuchma, Deputy                       
 Prime Minister Zhulinsky, Foreign Minister Zlenko and Foreign Economic                       
 Relations Minister Gertz during the visit. He addressed the people of                        
 Ukraine on national television and was conferred an honorary doctorate by                    
 the University of Kiev.                                                                      
                                                                                              
 The development of relations with Ukraine during the year was encouraging                    
 reflecting the potential for further growth. Exchanges in the field of                       
 trade and commerce continued to expand. A long term programme of                             
 co-operation in science & technology was signed during the visit of                          
 Secretary, Department of Science & Technology to Kiev on 7 June 1993.                        
 Secretary, Ministry of Surface Transport visited Kiev on 11 and 12 October                   
 1993 and held discussions on the conclusion of a shipping agreement. The                     
 early conclusion of an Agreement on the establishment of an                                  
 Inter-governmental Commission, a Protocol on Foreign Office Consultations,                   
 an Agreement on Double Taxation Avoidance, a Technical and Economic                          
 Co-operation Agreement and Agreement on Civil Aviation is envisaged with                     
 Ukraine.                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 The Chairman of the Belarus Council of Ministers,. Mr V F Kebich, visited                    
 India from 12 to 15 May 1993 leading a high level delegation. Seven                          
 agreements which constitute the framework for the bilateral relationship                     
 were signed during the visit: a Declaration of Principles and Directions                     
 for Co-operation; an Agreement for Co-operation in the field of Science &                    
 Technology; an Agreement on Co-operation in the spheres of Culture, Arts,                    
 Education, Mass Media, Sports and Tourism; an Agreement on Co-operation in                   
 Tourism; a Trade and Economic Co-operation Agreement; i Memorandum of                        
 Understanding on Defence related Technical Co-operation and an Agreement                     
 on Visa-free Travel of Diplomatic/Official Passport Holders.                                 
 -60>                                                                                         
 Taking note of the considerable interaction between India and Belarus when                   
 the latter was a constituent of the USSR, it is India's expectation that                     
 the bilateral co-operation particularly in the economic, commercial and                      
 science & technology fields is likely to expand in the years to come.                        
 Agreements on the establishment of an Inter-governmental Commission and                      
 Double Taxation Avoidance are likely to be concluded shortly. A joint                        
 Business Council is also in the process of creation.                                         
                                                                                              
 The President of Moldova, Mr M I Snegur, paid a State visit to India from                    
 17 to 19 March 1993. The Moldovan President called on President and held                     
 talks with Prime Minister. A Declaration on Principles and Directions of                     
 Co-operation, a Protocol on Foreign Office Consultation, a Technical and                     
 Economic Co-operation Agreement, a Cultural Agreement, a Science &                           
 Technology Co-operation Agreement and a Trade and Economic Co- operation                     
 Agreement were signed during the visit. External Affairs Minister,                           
 Commerce Minister and Defence Secretary called on President Snegur while                     
 the accompanying Moldovan Ministers held discussions with the Indian                         
 Ministers of Health & Family Welfare and Agriculture.                                        
                                                                                              
 A Moldovan trade delegation led by Deputy Prime Minister Mihai Coscodan                      
 visited India from 13 September to 2 October 1993. The delegation called                     
 on the Minister of Human Resource Development and held meetings with the                     
 Indo-CIS Chamber of Commerce. The accompanying Deputy Foreign Minister                       
 reviewed the development of bilateral relations with the Ministry of                         
 External Affairs.                                                                            
                                                                                              
 India announced the gifting of medicines of Rs 50 lakhs each to Ukraine,                     
 Belarus and Moldova during the year. The medicines to Ukraine and Belarus                    
 were to be used by those affected by the Chernobyl nuclear accident.                         
 -61>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Deputy Foreign Minister Navasardyan of Armenia visited India from 10 to 12                   
 March 1993 and held discussions with Secretary (West). He also called on                     
 External Affairs Minister, Foreign Secretary and Defence Secretary. During                   
 the visit an Agreement on Trade and Economic Co-operation and a Protocol                     
 on Foreign Office Consultations were signed.                                                 
                                                                                              
 An Indian official delegation visited Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia from                     
 24 June to 2 July 1993. It held discussions with senior officials and                        
 Ministers in the three countries and initialled a Trade and Economic Co-                     
 operation Agreement with Estonia and Latvia and signed it with Lithuania.                    
 Memorandums of Understanding on counter trade were also initialled with                      
 Estonia and Latvia.                                                                          
                                                                                              
 Estonian Foreign Minister, Mr Trivimi Velliste paid a visit to India from                    
 14 to 17 October 1993. He held talks with External Affairs Minister and                      
 called on President and Prime Minister. He also met the Commerce Minister                    
 and Minister for Human Resource Development. Secretary (West) called on                      
 the Minister and discussed bilateral and international issues of mutual                      
 interest. During the visit, a Declaration on Principles and Directions of                    
 Co-operation, an Agreement on Trade and Economic Co- operation, an                           
 Agreement on Technical and Economic Co-operation and a Cultural,                             
 Educational and Scientific Co-operation Agreement were signed. Indian                        
 interest in expanding trade, economic and cultural ties with the Baltics                     
 and exploring their role as transit points with respect to regional                          
 commerce was conveyed.                                                                       
                                                                                              
 The Cultural Exchange Programme for 1993-95 with Poland was renewed in                       
 June 1993 in Warsaw. the Krakow University organized an international                        
 conference on Sanskrit and related studies to commemorate the centenary of                   
 its Sanskrit Chair. On the commercial side, the Indo-Polish joint Business                   
 Council held its meeting in Warsaw in October 1993.                                          
                                                                                              
 The Foreign Minister of the Czech Republic, Mr Josef Zieleniec, visited                      
 India on 21 June 1993. He held discussions with External Affairs Minister                    
 and Minister of State for External Affairs. The visiting Minister called                     
 on the President. The Czech Minister for Industry and Trade signed an                        
 Agreement on Trade and Economic Co-operation during his visit to India in                    
 March 1993. He had meetings with Commerce Minister and Ministers of State                    
 for Petroleum & Natural Gas and Steel. A significant development in the                      
 commercial field was the awarding of the IOC Kandla-Bhatinda pipeline                        
 contract to the Czech company, Skoda Export.                                                 
 -62>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 The President of the Czech Republic, Mr Vaclav Havel, paid a State visit                     
 to India from 7 to 11 February 1994. The President was accompanied by                        
 Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister, and the Foreign Minis ' ter of                   
 the Czech Republic. President Havel received the 1993 Indira Gandhi Prize                    
 for Peace, Disarmament and Development.                                                      
                                                                                              
 The Slovak Minister of Economy, Mr J Kubecha, visited India in May 1993                      
 and signed an Agreement on Trade and Economic Co-operation. He called on                     
 Commerce Minister, Railway Minister and Ministers of State for Steel,                        
 Defence and Industry.                                                                        
                                                                                              
 The President of India, Dr S D Sharma, visited Hungary from 20 to' 22 July                   
 1993. President had extended discussions with President Arpad Goncz and                      
 received the Foreign Minister and Minister for International Economic                        
 Relations. He was presented with the Golden Key to the City of Budapest.                     
                                                                                              
 Minister of State for Defence, Shri Mallikarjun, led a delegation to                         
 Hungary in October 1993 to discuss further prospects for co-operation in                     
 defence between the two coutries.                                                            
                                                                                              
 The 9th Session of the Indo-Hungarian joint Commission was held in October                   
 1993 in Budapest. A meeting of the joint Business Council also took place                    
 at the same time.                                                                            
                                                                                              
 The 'Days of Indian Culture' was celebrated in Hungary in April 1993 with                    
 facets of culture portrayed through dance and music performances, film                       
 festivals, exhibitions of bronzes and odhnis, a book exhibition and a                        
 writers workshop.                                                                            
                                                                                              
 An Indian Parliamentary delegation led by the Speaker of Lok Sabha visited                   
 Romania from 4 to 9 June 1993. The delegation met the Speaker of the                         
 Romanian Chamber of Deputies and the Chairman of the Senate as well as the                   
 President and Prime Minister of Romania. A Romanian Parliamentary                            
 delegation led by the Vice President of the Senate, Mr D I Taracila, paid                    
 a return visit to India from 5 to 11 August 1993.                                            
                                                                                              
 Bilateral official talks were held in New Delhi during the visit of the                      
 Romanian State Secretary G Tinca. In addition to the talks with the Indian                   
 delegation led by Secretary (West), the State Secretary called on External                   
 Affairs Minister and Minister of State for External Affairs. A Protocol on                   
 Foreign Office Consultations was signed during the visit. A Romanian                         
 Ministry of Defence Delegation visited India in October 1993 for                             
 discussions on possible co-operation arrangements.                                           
 -63>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Bilateral agreements signed with Romania during the year included an                         
 Agreement on Science & Technology Co-operation in October 1993 and an Air                    
 Services Agreement in December 1993. , The traditionally friendly                            
 relations with Bulgaria were strengthened by the visit of the Indian                         
 Parliamentary delegation led by the Speaker of Lok Sabha from 9 to 15 June                   
 1993. The delegation was received by the President of Bulgaria.                              
                                                                                              
 A Memorandum of Understanding on Defence Co-operation was signed during                      
 the visit of Minister of State for Defence, Shri Mallikarjun, to Bulgaria                    
 from 13 to 15 July 1993. Bilateral consultations between the Foreign                         
 Ministries of the two countries was held in New Delhi on 28 and 29                           
 September 1993. The Indian delegation was led by Secretary (West) and the                    
 Bulgarian by Deputy Foreign Minister Ikonomov.                                               
                                                                                              
 The Indo-Bulgarian joint Commission met in Sofia from 1 to 3 February                        
 1994. Agriculture Minister, who is the Indian Co-chairman of the joint                       
 Commission, led the Indian delegation. The joint Commission reviewed the                     
 state of bilateral co-operation in the context of the changes which have                     
 taken place since its last meeting in 1988.                                                  
                                                                                              
 India has not recognised any of the republics of the former Socialist                        
 Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY) as successor state. India continues                    
 to scrupulously implement sanctions under the relevant UN Security Council                   
 Resolution on former SFRY/FRY.                                                               
                                                                                              
 The FRY Foreign Minister, Mr V Jovanovic, paid an official visit to India                    
 on 29 and 30 November 1993 and held discussions with External Affairs                        
 Minister. He called on President, Prime Minister, the Speaker and Commerce                   
 Minister. The talks focussed on the continuing crisis in the countries of                    
 the former SFRY. Government of India stated its position that the                            
 development of normal relations with FRY would have to await a political                     
 settlement of the crisis and the lifting of UN sanctions.                                    
                                                                                              
 India provided humanitarian relief worth Rs 10 lakhs in medical supplies                     
 to the ICRC in Yugoslavia in June 1993.                                                      
 -64>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Economic Relations of                      
 Slovenia, Dr D Kracun, visited India in December 1993. An Agreement on                       
 Trade and Economic Co-operation and a Memorandum of Understanding on                         
 Science & Technology were signed during the visit.                                           
 Western Europe                                                                               
                                                                        Top                   
 Despite problems and delays, progress towards the European Union continued                   
 apace. The Maastricht Treaty came into force on 1 November 1993, thereby                     
 creating an entity committed to a Monetary Union, a Common Foreign and                       
 Security Policy and greater coordination in internal affairs. In order to                    
 interact more effectively with the European Union (EU), steps were taken                     
 to institutionalise multi-sectoral co-operation between India and the EU.                    
 A new Third Generation Indo-EU Co-operation Agreement on Partnership and                     
 Development was signed on 20 December 1993, providing for substantially                      
 enhanced levels of co-operation in economic, scientific, technical and                       
 agricultural fields. The Agreement was designed to build up India's                          
 economic capability to interact more effectively with the EU. A joint                        
 Statement on Political Dialogue between India and the EU was also issued                     
 on 20 December 1993, institutionalising dialogue at ministerial level                        
 between India and the EU Troika and affirming their mutual resolve to                        
 reinforce and intensify Indo-EU relations. The Co-operation Agreement and                    
 joint Statement symbolised the high importance attached by both sides to                     
 seek a substantial enhancement and expansion of mutually beneficial                          
 co-operation between the European Union and India. They also reflected the                   
 EU's recognition of the fact that India's economic reforms, along-with a                     
 shared commitment to democratic principles, provided the underpinnings of                    
 a close relationship with vast future potential.                                             
                                                                                              
 While upgrading links with the EU, concerted efforts were also undertaken                    
 by the Ministry to strengthen bilateral relations with countries in                          
 Western Europe, particularly in the areas of trade, investment, technology                   
 transfer and joint ventures.                                                                 
                                                                                              
 As a result of initiatives taken by the Ministry to intensify contacts at                    
 various levels and to promote bilateral relations with all the key                           
 partners in Western Europe, considerable success was achieved in                             
 projecting developments in India in their proper perspective as well as                      
 India's regional concerns. India was thereby able to ensure that there was                   
 no setback to her expanding relations with Western Europe in the key areas                   
 of trade and investment. Vigorous efforts were also undertaken to counter                    
 Pakistani propaganda on alleged human rights violations in Jammu &                           
 Kashmir, while projecting India's concerns regarding crossborder support                     
 for terrorism in Jammu & Kashmir and Punjab. In general, in the statements                   
 of the European Union as well as those of individual West European                           
 countries, there was widespread appreciation of India's secular and                          
 democratic traditions as well as ample recognition of the vast potential                     
 for enhancement of economic relations.                                                       
 -65>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Indian Missions in Western Europe also continued to be engaged in                            
 projecting India's economic reforms, commitment to democracy and the rule                    
 of law and her concerns related to terrorism, while at the same time                         
 addressing concerns voiced in European public, press and parliamentary                       
 opinion on a variety of areas ranging from the environment to human rights                   
 and non-proliferation.                                                                       
                                                                                              
 The visit of British Prime Minister, Mr John Major, in January 1993 was an                   
 important milestone in Indo-British relations, signifying the desire of                      
 both countries to carry forward their relations and co-operation in a                        
 modern context, taking full advantage of shared historical contacts and                      
 affinities. An industry-led Indo-British Partnership Initiative (IBPI) was                   
 launched during Mr Major's visit. During the course of 1993, IBPI achieved                   
 considerable success in promoting India as an attractive investment                          
 destination in the UK and projecting the UK as a suitable partner for                        
 joint ventures and technology transfer. Foreign direct investment                            
 approvals from the UK registered a sharp rise in 1993, as did bilateral                      
 trade.                                                                                       
                                                                                              
 The tempo of high level interaction, which has paid rich dividends to                        
 Indo-UK relations in recent years, was maintained during 1993. The Vice                      
 President visited the UK in May 1993. This was followed by a visit by the                    
 President in July 1993 and by the Minister of External Affairs in August                     
 1993. The British Foreign Secretary, Mr Douglas Hurd, visited India on 15                    
 and 16 November 1993. Instruments of Ratification of the Indo-UK                             
 Extradition Treaty were exchanged, bringing it into immediate effect. This                   
 step symbolised the continuing resolve of the two countries to stand                         
 together in the defence of democratic values against the menace of                           
 terrorism. Foreign Secretary level talks with the UK were held in July                       
 1993, Secretary level talks in April 1993 and the Second Round of                            
 bilateral talks on Disarmament, Non-Proliferation and International                          
 Security Issues in December 1993. These exchanges raised mutual                              
 understanding on issues of interest and concern to both countries to                         
 qualitatively higher levels. On issues such as Kashmir and human rights,                     
 the UK continued to follow a constructive and balanced approach which                        
 showed sensitivity towards India's concerns.                                                 
 -66>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 The forward momentum imparted by Chancellor Kohl's visit in February 1993                    
 was also maintained in Indo-German relations. Germany, India's leading                       
 economic partner in the EU, attached new importance to relations with                        
 India in the context of its increasing focus on Asia, given the shared                       
 democratic values and prospects for wider co-operation opened up by                          
 India's economic reforms. A German Parliamentary Delegation led by Dr Rita                   
 Sussemuth, the President of the Bundestag, visited India on 8 and 9                          
 October 1993. It was agreed that Parliamentary visits and contacts between                   
 the two countries should be further expanded. The Second Meeting of the                      
 Indo-German Consultative Group (IGCG) was held in New Delhi on 9 and 10                      
 October 1993. The IGCG, comprising of eminent personalities from both                        
 countries, submitted a number of recommendations to the two Governments to                   
 strengthen bilateral co-operation in the political, media, cultural,                         
 science & technology and economic fields. A bilateral dialogue was                           
 initiated with Germany on multilateral issues, including disarmament.                        
                                                                                              
 At the invitation of Chancellor Kohl, Prime Minister paid a return visit                     
 to Germany from 2 to 5 February 1994. Prospects for enhancing bilateral                      
 relations and evolving a long-term Indo-German partnership were given a                      
 further strong impetus by the visit. An Indo-German Economic Conference                      
 held during the visit also provided further momentum to bilateral economic                   
 relations in the areas of investment, technology transfer and joint                          
 ventures. Germany's new "Concept on Asia" policy identified India as an                      
 Asian country with which Germany desires closer political and economic                       
 links.                                                                                       
                                                                                              
 The President of Ireland paid a State visit to India from 26 September to                    
 3 October 1993, marking the beginning of a new phase in Indo-Irish                           
 relations. A Communique signed during the visit provided for annual                          
 consultations between the Foreign Offices of the two countries. An Irish                     
 business delegation also visited India during the visit of the Irish                         
 President, and an agreement on expanding commercial and economic relations                   
 was concluded between the Confederation of Indian Industry and the Irish                     
 Trade Board.                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 King Carl XVI Gustaf of Sweden, accompanied by Queen Silvia, paid a State                    
 visit to India from 10 to 18 October 1993, The visit marked the first high                   
 level exchange between the two countries in five years.                                      
 -67>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 The Swedish Royal Couple was accompanied by Foreign Minister Margaretha of                   
 Ugglas, Telecommunications Minister Mats Odell and a high ranking business                   
 delegation. As a result of interaction between the Swedish business                          
 delegation and their Indian counterparts, prospects for enhancing                            
 bilateral economic and 'commercial relations were given a strong impulse.                    
                                                                                              
 The Prime Minister of Netherlands, Mr R F M Lubbers, accompanied by                          
 Foreign Minister Peter Kooijmans and a 21-member high-level business                         
 delegation, visited India from 26 to 28 October 1993. The main focus of                      
 the visit was on intensification of ecoriomic relations. The Dutch Prime                     
 Minister and accompanying businessmen welcomed the liberalisation and                        
 de-regulation of the Indian economy and conveyed their serious intent to                     
 expand Dutch presence in the Indian market by exploiting new opportunities                   
 opened up by India's economic reforms., Relations with Italy continued to                    
 expand during the year, with India's exports continuing to increase                          
 resulting in a substantial trade balance in India's favour. The first                        
 meeting of the Indo-Italian Industrial Forum (IIIF), set up to promote                       
 interaction between business representatives and increased awareness of                      
 opportunities, was held in Venice on 8 June 1993. A large number of                          
 businessmen, bankers and industrialists from both countries participated.                    
 Finance Minister, Dr Manmohan Singh, addressed the IIIF at its inaugural                     
 session. Other ministerial visits exchanged during the year included those                   
 of the Italian Minister for Foreign Trade, Senator Claudio Vitalone, in                      
 February 1993, Defence Minister Fabio Fabbri in September 1993 and Foreign                   
 Minister Beniamino Andreatta in January 1994.                                                
                                                                                              
 The Danish Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Business Affairs, Mrs                      
 Mimi Jakobsen, as well as Finance Minister, Mr Lykketoft, visited India in                   
 January 1994 accompanying a high level Danish business delegation. The                       
 visit signified the increasing interest among countries of Western Europe                    
 in business and investment opportunities in India aroused by India's                         
 economic liberalisation programme.                                                           
                                                                                              
 During the year, Foreign Secretary level consultations were held with the                    
 UK, Germany, France, Spain, Greece and Cyprus.                                               
 -68>                                                                                         
 1993                                                                                         
 8. The Americas                                                                              
                                                                        Top                   
 North America                                                                                
                                                                                              
 INDO-US relations have been marked by dichotomous trends during 1993. On                     
 the one hand were the more positive and tangible aspects underpinned by                      
 the fact that encouraging results were seen in the domain of commercial                      
 and economic interaction between the two countries. The US remained the                      
 single largest country for bilateral trade, the single most important                        
 source of direct foreign investment and an important source of high                          
 technology imports. On the other hand fundamental differences persisted in                   
 areas such as human rights, non-proliferation and trade policy.                              
                                                                                              
 The first high-level contact with the Clinton Administration was initiated                   
 by the Foreign Secretary's visit to Washington for bilateral consultations                   
 from 25 to 27 August 1993, at the invitation of his counterpart, the US                      
 Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs. Discussions were                             
 indicative of the mutual desire to hold substantive and actionoriented                       
 dialogue on all issues of concern to the two countries.                                      
                                                                                              
 A notable feature in Indo-US relations relates to trade and investment.                      
 Trends in bilateral trade for 1993 indicate that total trade turnover is                     
 set to reach US S 7 billion as against US $ 5.69 billion during 1992. US                     
 investments in India during the year registered a quantum jump (approved                     
 investment amounted to Rs 3209 crores during the period January--October                     
 1993) and exceeded the cumulative US investment in India from 1947 to                        
 mid-1991 (Rs 2416 crores).                                                                   
                                                                                              
 A high-powered FICCI delegation led by the Organization's President                          
 visited USA under a US Aid Project from 21 June to 1 July 1993. The                          
 Indo-US joint Business Council (JBC) held its 16th meeting in Delhi on 9                     
 and 10 November 1993.                                                                        
 -69>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Bilateral negotiations were successful in narrowing the gap on the issues                    
 of copyrights, trade marks and entry of US motion pictures, though                           
 differences on the issue of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) continued                     
 in the area of patents, especially in food, pharmaceutical and chemical                      
 sectors. With the conclusion of the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade                      
 negotiations, a framework has been accepted multilaterally to resolve                        
 these issues.                                                                                
                                                                                              
 The US showed an increasing tendency to link technology transfers to                         
 non-proliferation objectives and to deny exports of dual-use items and                       
 technologies to India. India and the US are currently considering a new                      
 draft agreement on science and technology and a bilateral review of the                      
 Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), which was signed in 1984, is also                         
 expected to take place in 1994.                                                              
                                                                                              
 Differences with respect to the approaches to achieve non-proliferation                      
 persist. While the US seeks universal and indefinite extension of the NPT,                   
 India's long-standing position has been that this treaty is discriminatory                   
 in character and the issue of non-proliferation can only be addressed                        
 through measures which are comprehensive, universal, non- discriminatory                     
 and verifiable.                                                                              
                                                                                              
 US policy on non-proliferation seeks to cap, roll back and eventually'                       
 eliminate the nuclear capabilities of India and Pakistan. Some emerging                      
 elements of US policy are indicative of being more accommodative towards                     
 Pakistan. The discussion draft of the Foreign Assistance Act submitted by                    
 the US Government to the US Congress contained provisions, subsequently                      
 withdrawan, which could have led to the repeal of the so- called Pressler                    
 Amendment.                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 Three US Senators, Thad Cochran, Larry Pressler and Hank Brown, visited                      
 India from 9 to 13 December 1993 for discussions with Government on                          
 security related issues.                                                                     
                                                                                              
 The Indo-US Agreement for Peaceful Nuclear Co-operation of 1963, under                       
 which the Tarapur Atomic Power Station (TAPS) was set up, expired on 24                      
 October 199.3. India voluntarily extended existing IAEA safeguards on                        
 TAPS, a step that was welcomed by the US. The need that TAPS should                          
 continue to function for its useful life of 10-15 years was appreciated by                   
 the US side and discussions will continue on ways to overcome the problem                    
 of fuel for TAPS.                                                                            
 -70>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 US Government's policy towards the Kashmir issue evolved gradually from                      
 the stance since 1947 to a more recent reiteration that "for more than                       
 four decades the consistent US position has been that the former princely                    
 state of Jammu and Kashmir is disputed territory" and that "the US view is                   
 that negotiations between Governments of India and Pakistan, as envisaged                    
 by Simla Agreement, provide best means for resolving dispute over Kashmir.                   
 As a practical matter, US believes this process of bilateral negotiation                     
 needs to take into account wishes of Kashmiri people". President Clinton's                   
 remark in his speech to the 48th UN General Assembly equating Kashmir with                   
 Angola and the Caucasus as a place where bloody, ethnic, religious and                       
 civil wars rage, also pointed to the increasingly higher profile being                       
 imparted by the US to the Kashmir issue in the international arena.                          
                                                                                              
 India made known her position during exchanges that she would not brook                      
 any outside interference from any quarter over Kashmir and will only                         
 discuss the Kashmir issue bilaterally with Pakistan within the framework                     
 of Simla Agreement.                                                                          
                                                                                              
 Despite overwhelming evidence of Pakistan's continuing support to                            
 terrorism in India, the US Government announced in July 1993 that listing                    
 of Pakistan as a state sponsor of terrorism was not warranted.                               
                                                                                              
 Bilateral ties continued to be vitiated over the issue of alleged human                      
 rights violations by Indian security forces in Kashmir and Punjab due to                     
 the anti-Indian propaganda and lobbying by "Khalistan" and pro-pak,                          
 Kashmiri groups. President Clinton's letters of 27 December 1993 to the                      
 anti-Indian Kashmir American Council and to Congressman Gary Condit on the                   
 Punjab issue are cases in point. The US President's formulations came in                     
 the wake of a series of negative pronouncements by US officials on issues                    
 such as Kashmir, human rights and Punjab. Government has reiterated that                     
 India's commitment to human rights and democracy is axiomatic to India's                     
 existence and no external prescriptions would be accepted in this regard.                    
 The Government has also conveyed that such official pronouncements by the                    
 US Government, including at the highest level, cannot but have a negative                    
 impact on Indo-US bilateral relations. Government of India expressed the                     
 hope that the US, as another democracy, would make more positive moves in                    
 the context of bilateral relations.                                                          
 -71>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 India has always maintained that her system of Parliamentary democracy                       
 offers constitutional remedies against human rights abuses, which are also                   
 safeguarded by the free press and an independent judiciary in India. The                     
 National Human Rights Commission has been set up as an additional                            
 mechanism and contacts have been established with international human                        
 rights organizations such as Amnesty International and the International                     
 Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).                                                           
                                                                                              
 Indian and US Armed Forces continued limited interaction in the fields of                    
 training, seminars and joint exercises. The fourth Indo-US Strategic                         
 Symposium was held in Jaipur from 20 to 23 September 1993. Indo-US co-                       
 operation on the Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) project continues under the                     
 aegis of the MOU implemented by means of a special Agreement.                                
                                                                                              
 The fourth meeting of Indo-US joint Working Group (JWG) on Narcotics was                     
 held in February 1993 in Washington. Narcotics control has become an                         
 important issue in bilateral relations. The bilateral discussions sought                     
 to ensure the continuation of the preferential access arrangements that                      
 India has for licit opium to the US market and ways and means to combat                      
 trafficking in illegal drugs.                                                                
                                                                                              
 A delegation comprising of seven American judges from the US Supreme Court                   
 and Circuit Courts and five lawyers visited India from 24 January to 4                       
 February 1994.                                                                               
                                                                                              
 The existing bilateral Textile Agreement between India and the US expired                    
 on 31 December 1993. The matter of extending the arrangements under this                     
 Agreement is Presently being considered by both countries.                                   
                                                                                              
 Fundamental differences notwithstanding, Government accord high priority                     
 to the improvement of relations with the US. Government has pursued a                        
 policy of dialogue to promote, in a substantive manner, areas of mutual                      
 benefit such as trade and investment while persisting with the on-going                      
 efforts to narrow down existing differences of perception over the issue                     
 of human rights, non-proliferation and trade practices.                                      
                                                                                              
 Based on shared historical ties of the Commonwealth, Indo-Canadian                           
 relations have traditionally been warm and friendly. Both countries share                    
 common features of being multi-racial, multi-ethnic societies with                           
 Westminster style democratic systems of Government.                                          
 -72>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 The economic liberalisation underway in India has been welcomed by Canada.                   
 Indo-Canadian trade jumped to C$ 788.4 million in 1992 mainly on account                     
 of large wheat imports by India. In the first 8 months of 1993, India's                      
 exports to Canada increased by 23.8% to reach C$ 232.86 million while                        
 imports plummeted by about 30% to reach C$ 180.877 million. There is also                    
 considerable potential for joint ventures and technical collaboration                        
 between the two countries.                                                                   
                                                                                              
 India his expressed concern over the fact that extremist elements among                      
 the Sikhs in Canada interact with their counterparts in India and are an                     
 important source of financial and other assistance for their violent                         
 activities. These groups also indulge in anti-Indian propaganda. In                          
 Canada's liberal polity there is a degree of indulgence and freedom of                       
 expression. India has continued to stress concern over the fact that                         
 extremist elements continue to use Canadian soil for sponsoring acts of                      
 terrorism against India. Pakistan has continued to act as the meeting                        
 ground and facilitator between extremist elements from Canada and India.                     
 India has also conveyed concern about some Canadian politicians making                       
 political capital out of the problems in Punjab in the name of human                         
 rights for garnering support from their Punjab-origin constituents.                          
                                                                                              
 India and Canada are currently negotiating a Treaty on Mutual Assistance                     
 in Criminal Matters. The blowing up of Air India's Kanishka aircraft in                      
 1985 resulted in greater Canadian interest in the area of security co-                       
 operation. This sense of urgency was lacking earlier despite repeated                        
 Indian requests that extremist groups were active in Canada and were                         
 promoting terrorism in Punjab. The Indo-Canadian Extradition Treaty signed                   
 in October 1987 marked the culmination of closer co-operation to combat                      
 terrorism.                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 Bilateral visits during the year included the visit to Canada of Shri                        
 Kamal Nath, Minister of State for Environment and Forests, to attend the                     
 9th Executive Committee Meeting of the Multilateral Fund for the                             
 Implementation of the Montreal Protocol from 8 to 10 March 1993. Mr                          
 Charles Joseph Joe) Clark, the then Minister for Constitutional Affairs,                     
 visited India from 16 to 19 March 1993. A three-member delegation led by                     
 the Assistant Deputy Minister for Political and International Security                       
 Issues, Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade, visited                       
 Delhi on 22 and 23 April 1993 for bilateral discussions. Shri Jagdish                        
 Tytler, Minister of State for Surface Transport, visited Canada from 7 to                    
 11 June 1993. Director General, Asia Pacific Bureau, Canadian Foreign                        
 Office held discussions with Ministry of External Affairs officials in                       
 Delhi on 26 November 1993 on bilateral and multilateral issues of concern                    
 to both sides.                                                                               
 -73>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 The Indo-Canada Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on Textiles expired in                     
 end 1993. It was extended by mutual agreement uptill 31 January 1994                         
 pending negotiations for the signing of a new MOU.                                           
                                                                                              
 The North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), a trade-bloc bringing                       
 together the advanced economies of the USA and Canada with the developing                    
 one of Mexico, had a rough passage through the US Congress, which finally                    
 approved the Agreement in November 1993. The Agreement will be implemented                   
 once it has been ratified by Canada and Mexico.                                              
                                                                                              
 NAFTA opens the door to great increases in trade and investment flows                        
 between the participating countries through the elimination of trade                         
 barriers and the facilitation of cross-border movement of goods and                          
 services. NAFTA brings together a market of approximately 360 million                        
 consumers and trade and investment, flows which are already of the order                     
 of US $ 500 billion.                                                                         
                                                                                              
 The implications of NAFTA for India are mainly in the areas of its trade                     
 displacing effect, its provision of a fillip to investment in Mexico and                     
 its strengthening of global trends towards regional and sub-regional                         
 economic groupings.                                                                          
 Central and South America and the Caribbean                                                  
                                                                        Top                   
 Latin America and the Caribbean region consists of more than 35 countries                    
 and territories. It has a population of about 450 million. Almost all the                    
 countries in the region, including Cuba, have liberalised their economies,                   
 inter-alia, by privatising Government undertakings and facilitating                          
 foreign investment. The results of economic restructuring have been                          
 generally positive although social conditions in many countries have                         
 deteriorated. The democratic process which began about four years back                       
 seems to have firmed up, with representative democracies throughout the                      
 region, except Cuba and Haiti. Regional organizations such as the Rio                        
 Group and OAS have played a pivotal role in ensuring democratisation.                        
                                                                                              
 Another noticeable trend in the area is the growing tendency towards                         
 closer economic integration. Caricom, Andean Group, Mercosur, NAFTA, etc                     
 are being given added importance and relied upon as means of promoting                       
 free trade among the member States, besides arriving at consensus on                         
 various issues. Therefore, there prevails a very favourable atmosphere for                   
 India to react more vigorously with the countries of the LAC region.                         
 -74>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 India maintains 12 Missions in the region. As a measure of economy, the                      
 Embassy in Colombia was closed down during the year. However, there are                      
 proposals to strengthen commercial wings in a select number of Indian                        
 Missions in the region, in view of increased prospects of commercial and                     
 technical exchanges between India and the countries concerned.                               
                                                                                              
 The official visit of the Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri                       
 Salman Khurshid, with,a business delegation, to six of the LAC region                        
 countries in September 1993, followed by visit to Guyana and Cuba in                         
 November 1993, and that of Secretary (East) in the Ministry of External                      
 Affairs to Peru, Venezuela and Guyana constituted major steps towards                        
 intensification of India's ties with the area, particularly with regard to                   
 trade and joint ventures. India's exports to the region meanwhile                            
 continued to grow steadily. Exports during 1992-93 stood. at Rs 356                          
 crores, compared to Rs 305 crores in 1991-92. Exports from India were                        
 merely Rs 118 crores in 1988-89. During the first six months of the                          
 current year, total exports increased to Rs 381 crores from Rs 216 crores                    
 during the same period last year., Trade balance, however, still remains                     
 against India. As a result of Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri                   
 Salman Khurshid's visit and several visits by Indian business delegations                    
 and holding of buyer-seller meets, trade is bound to be boosted up                           
 further, as specific measures identified for the purpose get implemented.                    
                                                                                              
 Parliamentary delegations from several countries of the region                               
 participated in the Inter-Parliamentary Union Conference held in New Delhi                   
 early in the year.                                                                           
                                                                                              
 Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Salman Khurshid, visited                        
 Argentina and had fruitful discussions with the leaders of the Argentina                     
 Government and private sector. Agreements on issue of long-term visas to                     
 each other's businessmen and on bilateral political consultations were                       
 signed. The Minister also inaugurated the Office of Indo-Argentine Chamber                   
 of Commerce meant to devote itself to bilateral trade promotion, including                   
 presentation of Argentina by it in the India International Trade Fair                        
 1994. Argentina showed interest in co-operating in high-tech areas such as                   
 space, satellite communications and defence-related computer software. The                   
 level of the joint Trade Committee was raised to joint Commission. During                    
 the year, a buyer-seller meet by Apparel Export Promotion Council was held                   
 and action was initiated to focus on promoting identified products in the                    
 Argentine markets, besides joint ventures.                                                   
 -75> India's interaction with Brazil was reflected in (a) policy level                       
 consultations in New Delhi with' the Brazilian Under Secretary General of                    
 Foreign Affairs and (b) visit by Shri Salman Khurshid, Minister of State                     
 for External Affairs, to Brazil (Brasilia, Rio and Sao Paulo), both in                       
 September 1993. During Shri Salman Khurshid's visit, an agreement for                        
 co-operation in railways was signed and several measures to boost trade                      
 and commercial exchanges were identified for implementation. An Indian                       
 pharmaceutical company opened its office in Sao Paulo to augment its                         
 product exports to Latin America. The Brazilian side showed keen desire to                   
 collaborate closely with India at the UN and to seek co-operation in                         
 space, telecommunication, etc. It was agreed to consider setting up a                        
 joint Commission between the two countries.                                                  
                                                                                              
 With a spectacular growth registered by the Chilean economy in recent                        
 years, the already existing friendly relations between the two countries                     
 were given a more substantive turn towards enhancing interaction in trade,                   
 technology and joint ventures, having regard to the complementarities                        
 existing between India and Chile. Official discussions focussed on these                     
 lines during Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Salman                             
 Khurshid's visit to Santiago in September 1993. The Chilean Foreign                          
 Minister's visit to New Delhi for the G-15 Summit subsequently was                           
 utilised for discussing bilateral issues of mutual concern. A cultural                       
 agreement between the two countries was concluded.                                           
                                                                                              
 The Deputy Foreign Minister of Cuba, Mr Mario Rodriquez's visit to New                       
 Delhi, followed by Shri Salman Khurshid's visit to Havana in November                        
 1993, enabled both sides to discuss new areas of economic and technical                      
 co-operation, besides allowing discussions on ways in which past debts                       
 from India could be liquidated. Fisheries, tourism, agricultural                             
 machinery, pharmaceuticals and auto-sector were some of the areas agreed                     
 to be pursued for mutual co-operation. India decided to increase technical                   
 assistance to Cuba under the ITEC Programme. The next meeting of the joint                   
 Commission was slated to be conveyed early next year.                                        
 -76>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 The last general elections (1992) in Guyana brought to power President                       
 Jagan and his party (PPP), for the first time. A Special Envoy of                            
 President Jagan was sent to New Delhi to discuss an increased level of                       
 economic and technical assistance from India. President jagan, at the                        
 invitation of the Prime Minister, visited India from 24 to 31 December                       
 1993. He was accompanied by a high-level delegation, consisting among                        
 others, of the Foreign Minister, Mr Clement Rohee. He held wide-ranging                      
 talks with the Prime Minister, besides calling on the President. India                       
 agreed to extend a government line of credit and an EXIM Bank loan for the                   
 rehabilitation of the sugar industry. Government of India also agreed to                     
 send experts in small scale industries, rice cultivation, etc and to gift                    
 a pilot project to Guyana. India would also continue with the existing                       
 assistance being given under the Indian Technical and Economic                               
 Co-operation Programme (ITEC). During the visit of President Jagan, the                      
 following agreements were signed :                                                           
                                                                                              
 (a) on co-operation between Council of Scientific and Industrial Research                    
 of India and Institute of Applied Science and Technology of Guyana;                          
                                                                                              
 (b) waiver of visa requirements for holders of diplomatic and official                       
 passports; and                                                                               
                                                                                              
 (c) a Cultural Exchange Programme.                                                           
                                                                                              
 An informal meeting of India-Guyana joint Business Council also took place                   
 during the visit of President Jagan.                                                         
                                                                                              
 Mexico emerged as India's leading trade and economic partner in the                          
 region, with promising start in investment in each other's country. From                     
 India, Ministers of State for Steel, Welfare and External Affairs, visited                   
 Mexico during the year. The Fisheries Minister of Mexico, on the other                       
 hand, visited India. Another event of significance was the second session                    
 of the Indo-Mexican joint Commission held in New Delhi in November 1993,                     
 after a considerable gap. Bhartiya Vidya Bhawan set up its Mexico Branch                     
 in September 1993 which is expected to further promote the cultural                          
 relations between the two countries. Mexico acquired importance for India                    
 because its membership of the North American Free Trade Agreement with USA                   
 and Canada. With this in view, Indian industrialists and EPCs were                           
 encouraged to visit Mexico for greater interaction with their Mexican                        
 counterparts. A number of agreements were finalised for formal signing at                    
 the time of the proposed visit of the Mexican President. The postponed                       
 visit is likely to take place early next year when these agreements may be                   
 signed.                                                                                      
 -77>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Salman Khurshid, visited Peru                   
 briefly and handed over Prime Minister's formal invitation to the                            
 President of Peru for the G-15 Summit. He also held discussions on                           
 bilateral relations with his counterpart in the Peruvian Foreign Office.                     
 Secretary (East) also visited Lima for annual political consultations.                       
 Efforts 'were made to ensure better utilisation of the EXIM Bank credit to                   
 the Andean Group countries. Ashok Leyland achieved a breakthrough by                         
 contracting to supply a number of its buses to a Peruvian company.                           
                                                                                              
 Bilateral relations with Suriname were strengthened. The Surinamese Public                   
 Works Minister visited New Delhi and finalised with BEML a contract worth                    
 Rs 5 crores for purchase of earth-moving equipment. The Speaker of the                       
 National Assembly paid a bilateral visit to India when substantive                           
 discussions for enhancing relations in different areas were held during                      
 his meetings with the President, Prime Minister, External Affairs Minister                   
 and several public and private sector undertakings. Proposals to organize                    
 the first meeting of the Joint Commission and an official visit of the                       
 Surinamese Vice President to India were pursued further.                                     
                                                                                              
 Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Salman Khurshid, visited                        
 Venezuela in September 1993 and had detailed talks with leaders of the                       
 Government and business on increasing economic and commercial co-                            
 operation in diamond mining, agriculture and tourism. It was also decided                    
 to have formal linkage between the apex trade bodies and to constitute a                     
 joint trade and economic committee between India and Venezuela.                              
 -78>                                                                                         
 1993                                                                                         
 9. United Nations and International Conferences                                              
                                                                        Top                   
 INDIA played a significant role in the continuing evolution of the United                    
 Nations in the post-Cold War, era. A reinvigorated UN with a more focussed                   
 agenda has been increasingly perceived as having moved to centrestage and                    
 as having assumed an increasingly significant role in directly or                            
 indirectly shaping events the world over. Acting in the conviction that                      
 the principles of the United Nations Charter have stood the test of time                     
 for nearly half a century, India succeeded in moderating the enthusiasm on                   
 the part of certain countries to extend the jurisdiction and the authority                   
 of the UN into new areas of activity. At the same time, India helped the                     
 restructuring process with a view to making the Organization responsive to                   
 the challenges and demands of the times.                                                     
                                                                                              
 Human Rights issues remained on the top of the international agenda. In                      
 addition to the Agenda for Peace and the Restructuring of the UN, the UN                     
 also focussed on issues such as environment, peace-keeping and                               
 preparations for major international conferences like the Conference on                      
 Population and Development (Cairo 1994), the World Summit on Social                          
 Development (Copenhagen 1995) and the International Conference on Women                      
 (Beijing 1995).                                                                              
                                                                                              
 The most important negotiations in the UN during the current year were on                    
 the Secretary General's proposals in "An Agenda for Peace" submitted at                      
 the request of the Security Council Summit of 1991. The new horizons in                      
 preventive diplomacy, peace-making, peace-keeping and peace-building                         
 envisaged in the Report went beyond the traditional role of the UN in                        
 these areas. India, together with a large number of other Non-Aligned                        
 countries, ensured that these proposals were tempered to the extent                          
 necessary in order to safeguard the principles such as national                              
 sovereignty, territorial integrity and domestic jurisdiction of States                       
 which have suitably been reflected in the resolution. While the enhanced                     
 role of the UN in the domain of preventive diplomacy etc was acknowledged,                   
 it was stressed that this should be on a case by case basis and with the                     
 consent of the State(s) concerned. Sufficient safeguards were included in                    
 the relevant resolution to take care of the interests of the vast majority                   
 of member States.                                                                            
 -79>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 The peace-keeping activities of the UN witnessed a dramatic increase                         
 during the year in terms not only of size but also of complexity. As a                       
 member of the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations, India                           
 contributed actively to the discussions on peace-keeping and ensured that                    
 these operations did not become a means for intervention. Her efforts                        
 resulted in a clear recognition that peace-keeping operations should                         
 observe the principles of UN Charter and follow the scheme envisaged for                     
 them in Charter provisions. The importance of command and control by the                     
 United Nations of peace-keeping operations was emphasised and effective                      
 participation by troop contributing countries in decision making was                         
 achieved.                                                                                    
                                                                                              
 The United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) successfully                   
 completed its task with the holding of elections. India has contributed to                   
 this successful operation by providing about 1300 troops of all ranks,                       
 which included an Infantry Battalion, Field Ambulance, an Engineers Team,                    
 Military Observers, Military Police and Staff Officers & Clerks. India                       
 also contributed around 400 civilian Police Monitors for this operation.                     
 The Special Representative of UNSG for UNTAC formally acknowledged and                       
 appreciated the conduct and performance of Indian troops. .                                  
                                                                                              
 The year also witnessed the United Nations operations in Somalia                             
 (UNOSOM-II). This had been preceded by the establishment of the United                       
 Task Force (UNITAF) by a Security Council Resolution and where USA took                      
 the primary responsibility for establishing a secured environment in                         
 Somalia. India joined the international effort and contributed two naval                     
 vessels: one Corvette and one Landed Ship Tank (LST). At the request of                      
 the United Nations, India also contributed a Brigade for UNOSOM-II of                        
 about 5000 men of all ranks. The contingent consists of 3 infantry                           
 Battalions, a Mechanised Infantry Battalion (less one company), an                           
 Armoured Squadron, an Engineer Company, Air Force Missile Directorate and                    
 support elements. UNOSOM-II is the first UN operation under Chapter VII of                   
 the Charter for peace enforcement. 29 countries have contributed 29,284                      
 troops for UNOSOM-II. However, some of these countries have announced                        
 withdrawal of their contingents.                                                             
 -80> India also contributed troops for the UN operations in Mozambique                       
 (ONUMOZ), numbering about 973 men of all ranks. Military observers were                      
 also deputed to the UN operations in Liberia, Angola etc.                                    
                                                                                              
 Of about 80,000 civilian and military personnel that now serve in 17 UN                      
 Peace-keeping Operations across the world, India has provided around 6,000                   
 personnel. The cost of peace-keeping missions is expected to rise from $                     
 1.4 billion in 1992 to an estimated $ 3.6 billion by the end of 1993,                        
 which is an indication of the increased involvement of UN in peace-keeping                   
 operations. India has been making a mandatory contribution to the UN                         
 Peace-keeping Budget and has continued her tradition of consistently and                     
 substantially contributing, both in terms of personnel and financial                         
 obligation, to the UN's effort in peace-keeping.                                             
                                                                                              
 India participated actively in the discussions among the various                             
 delegations during the 48th General Assembly on the reform of the Security                   
 Council including its expansion. India started the process of informal                       
 discussions at the start of the Session and participated in all the                          
 subsequent drafting exercises which finally led to the adoption of a                         
 General Assembly Resolution in December 1993. This resolution set up a                       
 working group under the Chairmanship of the President of the General                         
 Assembly to consider all aspects of the question of equitable                                
 representation in and the reform of the Council. The working group is to                     
 commence its work by the end of January 1994 and is to submit its report                     
 to the General Assembly by the end of 1994.                                                  
                                                                                              
 Earlier, in pursuance of Resolution 47/62, India forwarded her written                       
 comments to the UN Secretary General on the question of "equitable                           
 representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council".                   
 Responses from 65 other member States were also received by the Secretary                    
 General. Most member States have supported the need for Security Council's                   
 expansion in the light of changed circumstances including a large increase                   
 in the membership of the UN which now stands at 184 as compared to 51 when                   
 it was established in 1945.                                                                  
 -81>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 India was also instrumental in securing an enhanced role for the General                     
 Assembly in the negotiations leading to the revitalisation of its work.                      
 Apart from reducing the number of Main Committees by merging the Special                     
 Political Committee with the Fourth, the relevant resolution emphasised                      
 the strengthening of co-operation and coordination among the principal                       
 organs of the UN and an effective role for the General Assembly in                           
 accordance with the UN Charter.                                                              
                                                                                              
 India, being the Rapporteur for the Special Committee against Apartheid,                     
 played an important role in the functioning of the Committee. India also                     
 chaired the drafting group for the Annual Report of the Special Committee                    
 against Apartheid. In the latter capacity, India was able to ensure that                     
 the Annual Report of the Special Committee further dilutes its rhetoric                      
 and addresses itself to the practical and realistic issues of encouraging                    
 the peaceful political processes in South Africa towards establishment of                    
 a united democratic and non-racial South Africa. As a result of India's                      
 efforts, balanced and realistic resolutions were worked out. ' Emphasis                      
 was put on the positive developments such as the emergence of several                        
 democratic structures including the International Investive Council, the                     
 Electoral Bill and other developments like the announcement of the first                     
 non-racial elections on 27 April 1994 for the establishment of an interim                    
 government.                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 India continued her principled support for resolutions on the Middle East                    
 in the 48th UNGA. India. supported the resolutions on Middle East Peace                      
 Process, Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan. India also supported seven                          
 resolutions dealing with the work of the UN Relief and Works Agency which                    
 included resolutions on Palestine refugees, return of population and                         
 refugees displaced since 1967, etc. As a member of the Committee on the                      
 inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, India contributed towards                      
 formulation of balanced resolutions.                                                         
                                                                                              
 The Co-ordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement in New York was                         
 extremely active during the year in pursuance of the decision taken at the                   
 Jakarta Summit. The Coordinating Bureau set up Working Groups to deal with                   
 the restructuring of the UN, human rights, Somalia and peace- keeping.,                      
 India participated actively in these groups.                                                 
 Disarmament and International Security                                                       
                                                                        Top                   
 The period under review witnessed some remarkable developments in the                        
 field of disarmament. With the end of the Cold War, positive developments                    
 took place in a number of areas in which initiatives had been announced by                   
 India decades ago. India continued to play a leading role in the various                     
 multilateral disarmament fora-the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, the                   
 UN Disarmament Commission and the First Committee of the UN General                          
 Assembly.                                                                                    
 -82> In January 1993, the Chemical Weapons Convention was opened for                         
 signature. India, along with 131 countries, became an original signatory                     
 to this Convention. India had played a key role in the successful                            
 conclusion of the negotiations that have resulted in a unique multilateral                   
 disarmament agreement, which is comprehensive and non- discriminatory. Its                   
 universality is evident in the fact that there are today more than 150                       
 signatories to the Chemical Weapons Convention. The Indian delegation,                       
 supported by experts, are currently engaged in preparatory processes to                      
 ensure that the Convention enters into force in early 1995.                                  
                                                                                              
 India's approach on the subject of nuclear disarmament continues to be                       
 guided by the philosophy that a commitment to the elimination of nuclear                     
 weapons in a time-bound, manner is essential. In this context, India has                     
 called for a ban on testing of nuclear weapons, a freeze in the production                   
 of fissile materials for nuclear weapons purposes, a convention                              
 prohibiting the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons and multilateral                     
 negotiations involving all nuclear weapon states aimed at reducing and                       
 then eliminating nuclear weapons under an international verification                         
 regime.                                                                                      
                                                                                              
 Positive developments have been registered in some of these areas. With                      
 the change in position among nuclear weapon states, for the first time the                   
 UN General Assembly was able to adopt a consensus resolution urging                          
 negotiations to be undertaken by the Conference on Disarmament for a                         
 universal treaty banning all nuclear weapon tests and explosions. 152                        
 countries including India co-sponsored the resolution. Positive                              
 development was also registered on the subject of a ban on production of                     
 fissile materials intended for nuclear weapons and explosive devices. A                      
 resolution calling for negotiations for such a convention that would be                      
 multilateral and non-discriminatory, co-sponsored by 27 countries                            
 including India, was adopted by consensus. It is hoped that these                            
 negotiations can commence shortly.                                                           
                                                                                              
 India also tabled resolutions on the subject of a Convention on the                          
 prohibition of use and threat of use of Nuclear Weapons. Unfortunately, a                    
 number of nuclear weapon states and their allies continue to oppose this                     
 initiative though more than 125 countries supported it in the UN General                     
 Assembly. Another initiative by India is aimed at stemming the qualitative                   
 arms race by promoting greater sensitisation to the role of scientific                       
 research and development in the field of designing new weapon systems.                       
 India had brought this item on the international agenda in 1988 and has                      
 played a key role in the on-going deliberations on this subject in the UN                    
 Disarmament Commission.                                                                      
 -83> A beginning was made in the development of norms of transparency with                   
 the coming into being of the UN Arms Register. The first report by the UN                    
 Secretary General for 1992 indicates that more than 80 countries,                            
 including India, have given information on their arms imports and exports                    
 in an attempt to build confidence and in turn encourage restraint by                         
 nations, thus reducing misunderstandings and misperceptions. India had                       
 played an important role in the development of this Register.                                
                                                                                              
 In keeping with her efforts to promote peace and security, India played a                    
 constructive role through her participation in regional security                             
 initiatives and dialogues such as those conducted by the UN Regional                         
 Centre in Kathmandu and the initiative launched by President Nazarbaev of                    
 Kazakhstan. Bilateral dialogues on disarmament, non-proliferation and                        
 security-related issues were held with the US, UK, Japan, Germany, France                    
 and Russia. These dialogues are aimed at developing a better understanding                   
 of each other's security concerns in the context of the changing                             
 international security environment. During these dialogues, India has                        
 projected that her security concerns cannot be addressed in the narrow                       
 framework of India-Pakistan but a regional security paradigm must be                         
 developed that can adequately address the security concerns of the states                    
 belonging to the Asia and Pacific regions.                                                   
                                                                                              
 The General Assembly adopted a resolution on Indian Ocean as a Zone of                       
 Peace. The resolution recalled the declaration of the Indian Ocean as a                      
 Zone of Peace of December 1971. It also requested the Ad Hoc Committee to                    
 continue consideration of new alternate approaches. It called upon the                       
 Permanent Members of the Security Council and the major maritime users of                    
 the Indian Ocean to participate in the work of the Ad Hoc Committee. It                      
 invited the member States to submit to the Secretary General by 31 May                       
 1994, their views on new alternate approaches. The Secretary General will                    
 submit a report by 30 June 1994.                                                             
                                                                                              
 The question of Antarctica once again came up in the General Assembly. As                    
 during the last Session, the two traditional resolutions on the subject                      
 were combined into one resolution. India did not participate in the vote                     
 on the resolution along with the other Antarctica Treaty Parties.                            
 -84>                                                                                         
 Human Rights                                                                                 
                                                                        Top                   
 Increasing importance being attached to the question of promotion and                        
 protection of human rights manifested in the World Conference on Human                       
 Rights in Vienna from 14 to 22 June 1993. India was active both in the                       
 preparatory phase of the Conference and at the Conference. The Conference                    
 was preceded by four meetings of the Preparatory Committee and three                         
 regional meetings including the Asian regional meeting in Bangkok. A high                    
 level Indian delegation, led by Finance Minister, Dr Manmohan Singh,                         
 participated in the World Conference.                                                        
                                                                                              
 The World Conference on Human Rights at Vienna reaffirmed the commitment                     
 to the purposes and principles contained in the Charter of the United                        
 Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. At the end of the                     
 Conference, the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action was adopted.                      
 Its significant features are as follows:                                                     
                                                                                              
 (a) The World Conference recognised acts, methods and practices of                           
 terrorism as activities aimed at destruction of human rights, fundamental                    
 freedoms and democracy, threatening territorial integrity and security of                    
 States, and destabilising legitimately constituted governments. The Vienna                   
 Declaration called upon the international community to take the necessary                    
 steps to enhance co-operation to prevent and combat terrorism.                               
                                                                                              
 (b) It reaffirmed the right to development as a universal and inalienable                    
 right and an integral part of fundamental human rights.                                      
                                                                                              
 (c) The Vienna Declaration called for 48th Session of the UNGA to begin                      
 consideration of the proposal for creation of the post of High                               
 Commissioner for Human Rights.                                                               
                                                                                              
 Pakistan's attempt to introduce a country-specific resolution against                        
 India on the situation in Jammu & Kashmir, coupled with sustained                            
 propaganda on human rights violations in Jammu & Kashmir, dominated the                      
 meetings of the Commission on Human Rights in Geneva and the Third                           
 Committee in New York. Kashmir was raised by Pakistan in all possible                        
 forums, including the Security Council, but on account of the efforts made                   
 by India, at headquarters as well as in Missions abroad, no resolution was                   
 tabled. A vast majority of the States urged direct dialogue between India                    
 and Pakistan and refused to take sides on the issue. Pakistan also raised                    
 the Kashmir issue in meetings of other UN bodies and agencies including                      
 ECOSOC, UNESCO, ILO and UNDP.                                                                
 -85>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 The unanimous adoption of a resolution on terrorism as an obstacle to                        
 human rights at the 48th UNGA, co-sponsored by India, was another                            
 achievement of Indian diplomacy during the year. The resolution                              
 unequivocally condemned acts, methods and practice of terrorism as                           
 activities aimed at the destruction of human rights and fundamental                          
 freedoms and democracy, threatening territorial integrity and security of                    
 States and destabilising legitimately constituted governments. It called                     
 upon all States to take effective measures and prevent, combat and                           
 eliminate terrorism. Pakistan's efforts to amend the resolution to exclude                   
 the struggle for self-determination from terrorism found no support in the                   
 Committee. Earlier, the Commission on Human Rights and the Sub-Commission                    
 on the Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities also                        
 adopted resolutions against. Terrorism. The resolutions reflect growing                      
 awareness of terrorism as a violation of human rights.                                       
                                                                                              
 India succeeded in shelving a proposal made by Liechtenstein for self-                       
 determination through autonomy because of its implications on multiethnic                    
 societies such as India.                                                                     
                                                                                              
 India also played a prominent role in the negotiations on the mandate of                     
 the post of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and ensured that his                      
 mandate would not be intrusive, but would respect the UN Charter and the                     
 sovereignty, territorial integrity and domestic jurisdiction of States.                      
                                                                                              
 India acceded to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the                           
 Convention on Elimination of Discrimination against Women during 1993.                       
 Economic, Social and Humanitarian Issues                                                     
                                                                        Top                   
 India maintained her active role in the Economic and Social Council, the                     
 governing councils of specialised agencies, various environmental forums                     
 and the Second Committee. India has sought to ensure that the                                
 developmental issues were given due emphasis in the activities of the                        
 United Nations, and that the United Nations' "Agenda for Development" is                     
 not overlooked in the current emphasis on security issues and intrusive                      
 diplomacy under the guise of the so-called "Agenda for Peace".                               
 -86>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 A Meeting of the High Level Segment of the ECOSOC was held in June-July                      
 1993. The Meeting focussed on the forthcoming Summit on Social                               
 Development, important developments in the world economy and international                   
 economic co-operation, and coordination of the policies and activities of                    
 the specialised agencies of the United Nations. Agreement was reached on                     
 the restructuring of the ECOSOC and the composition of the Executive                         
 Boards of operational activities in a manner that safeguards the interests                   
 of the developing countries. With regard to the Secretary General's                          
 proposals for integrated offices, India played a major role in ensuring                      
 that the execution of operational activities would remain the national                       
 responsibility and that disbursement of developmental resources was not                      
 made conditional on political or any other extraneous considerations.                        
                                                                                              
 While the work of the Second Committee continued to focus on the                             
 traditional issues such as debt, the financing of development, transfer of                   
 resources, poverty and human development, there was an increased emphasis                    
 on issues pertaining to the environmental, social and humanitarian                           
 concerns.                                                                                    
                                                                                              
 During the year, India actively participated in activities connected with                    
 the implementation of the agreements reached at the UN Conference on                         
 Environment and Development in 1992 and related follow-up action. The                        
 specific areas of activity are given below:                                                  
                                                                                              
 (a) India is an elected member of the Commission on Sustainable                              
 Development (CSD) which has been set up as a 53-member functional                            
 commission of the ECOSOC. CSD held its first substantive session from 14                     
 to 25 June 1993. The Indian delegation was led by the Minister of State                      
 for Environment and Forests, Shri Kamal Nath. It adopted a thematic                          
 programme of work for the next three years. It has also laid down                            
 guidelines for the organizing of information to be supplied by Governments                   
 on the plans and reports of implementation of Agenda 21 including problems                   
 faced over such matters as transfer of financial resources and technology.                   
 The CSD also seeks to set up two open-ended expert groups on the transfer                    
 of technology and transfer of financial resources for the implementation                     
 of Agenda 21. A high level advisory board on sustainable development was                     
 also set up. justice R S Pathak of India is a member of this Board.                          
                                                                                              
 (b) In pursuance of Resolution 47/188, work has begun on the elabora- tion                   
 of an international convention to combat desertification in those                            
 countries experiencing serious drought and/or desertification,                               
 particularly in Africa. India participated in the first two sessions of                      
 the inter-governmental negotiating committee.                                                
 -87>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 (c) The UN Conference on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish                    
 Stocks was held in July 1993. This Conference was aimed at promoting the                     
 effective implementation of the UN Convention of the Law of the Sea on                       
 such Fish Stocks. This would need to be done through setting up of                           
 conservation and management measures and through co- operation between                       
 coastal States and distant water fishing States. India participated in                       
 this Conference as an important coastal State.                                               
                                                                                              
 (d) The Inter-governmental Negotiating Committee on the Framework                            
 Convention on Climate Change (INC-FCCC) held its Eighth Session in August                    
 1993. The meeting was preparatory in nature in view of the first                             
 Conference of Parties (COP) to be held in early 1995. This meeting was                       
 useful in clarifying certain issues and. concepts in the Convention. India                   
 worked actively to strengthen the provisions of the Convention relating in                   
 particular to policy guidelines, Joint implementation and incremental                        
 costs.                                                                                       
                                                                                              
 (e) The Inter-governmental Committee on Convention on Biodiversity (ICCBD)                   
 held its first session to prepare for the Conference of Parties (COP),                       
 expected to be held at the end of 1994. India was elected to the Bureau of                   
 the ICCBD. As Chairman of the Asian Group, India ensured that the                            
 essential provisions of the Convention were enforced.                                        
                                                                                              
 (f) There were also inter-governmental meetings during the year under                        
 review of the World Climate Programme (organized by World Meteorological                     
 Organization), Inter-governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and Basel                   
 Convention on Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes. India                             
 participated actively in these meetings.                                                     
                                                                                              
 (g) India attended the meetings held during the year on possible                             
 restructuring of the Global Environmental Facility (GEF) to reflect the                      
 concerns of the developing countries. After the last round held in                           
 Cartagena, no agreement emerged on the issue.                                                
                                                                                              
 Consistent with the United Nations' renewed emphasis on social and                           
 humanitarian issues, a number of new initiatives and programmes were                         
 undertaken during the year under review. Preparations for a number of                        
 important global summits were taken on hand. These include: (i) The                          
 International Conference on Population and Development (ICPD), which is                      
 scheduled to be held in Cairo in 1994, will be the third in a series of UN                   
 sponsored global population conferences. Earlier conferences were held in                    
 Bucharest (1974) and Mexico City (1984).                                                     
 -88>                                                                                         
 The second meeting of the ICPD Preparatory Commission was held during                        
 1993. In addition, Indonesia, as Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement,                       
 constituted a meeting of Ministers of Non-Aligned member States in order                     
 to prepare the NAM position in advance of the Cairo Ministerial Meeting.                     
                                                                                              
 India has participated actively in all the preparatory meetings for the                      
 ICPD 1994. She has sought to evolve a global consensus on the need to                        
 limit the population growth rates and to obtain commensurate resources                       
 from the donor community in order to meet targeted reductions in                             
 population growth rates. India has sought, furthermore, to ensure that the                   
 emphasis on population and development is not diluted.                                       
                                                                                              
 (ii) The World Summit on Social Development is to be convened in                             
 Copenhagen in 1995. The Social Development Summit will focus on means and                    
 methodology necessary to promote human centered development. Important                       
 aspects of the work programme pertain to integration of socially                             
 disadvantaged groups into the economic mainstream, improving literacy and                    
 human skills necessary for gainful economic employment, and economic                         
 productivity through enhanced skills, training and wider employment                          
 opportunities.                                                                               
                                                                                              
 India has considerable experience in issues that would be dealt within the                   
 purview of the Social Development Summit. Government of India is in the                      
 process of constituting the National Committee for India which would                         
 coordinate inputs and prepare the national report for India in respect of                    
 the forthcoming Summit.                                                                      
                                                                                              
 (iii) The World Conference on Women is another important international                       
 meeting scheduled to be held in Beijing in 1995., The aim of the meeting                     
 is to focus world attention on women's issues, particularly the need to                      
 raise the status of women in society. The empowerment and equal dignity of                   
 women in the society has been a long cherished objective of Indian                           
 domestic policy and she has been playing an active role in the                               
 preparations for the World Women's Conference. A large number of                             
 non-governmental organizations who are active in this field are working                      
 along with official agencies and concerned government departments.                           
 -89>                                                                                         
 Administrative and Budgetary Issues                                                          
                                                                        Top                   
 India participated actively in the work of the Fifth Committee. Since her                    
 election to the Board of Auditors, India made efforts to ensure that the                     
 role of the Board was strengthened and that necessary resources were                         
 provided to it. India's efforts in the budgetary process were to ensure                      
 that the priority activities of the. Organization, including economic                        
 development, were provided with adequate resources. During the discussions                   
 on the scale of assessments for contributions to the regular budget, India                   
 made every effort to modify the scale methodology so that it reflected                       
 'the capacity to pay' of Member States.                                                      
 Elections And Appointments                                                                   
                                                                        Top                   
 India was elected to the following bodies during 1993 by                                     
 election/consensus:                                                                          
                                                                                              
 1 World Food Council                                                                         
 2 International Maritime Council                                                             
                                                                                              
 3 World Tourism Organization                                                                 
                                                                                              
 4 UNESCO Executive Board                                                                     
                                                                                              
 5 UNESCO Inter-governmental Bodies:                                                          
                                                                                              
 (i) IIP (Inter-governmental. Informatics Programme)                                          
                                                                                              
 (ii) IPDC (International Programme for the Development of communications)                    
                                                                                              
 6 Commission on Sustainable Development                                                      
                                                                                              
 7 Expert Committee on Natural Resources                                                      
                                                                                              
 8 Programme Committee of FAO                                                                 
                                                                                              
 9 FAO Council                                                                                
                                                                                              
 10 Chairman, Committee on Programme and Coordination                                         
                                                                                              
 11 Industrial Development Board of UNIDO                                                     
                                                                                              
 12 Programme and Budget Committee of UNIDO.                                                  
                                                                                              
 Activities of the Non-Aligned Movement                                                       
                                                                        Top                   
 The Coordinating Bureau of NAM met in New York from time to time and                         
 played an active role in contributing to discussions and resolutions in                      
 the General Assembly and other bodies of UN on various matters of interest                   
 to the Non-Aligned members. The Ministerial Meeting of the NAM was held in                   
 New York on 4 October 1993. Shri S Khurshid, Minister of State for                           
 External Affairs, attended the Meeting.                                                      
 -90>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 The continued relevance and importance of NAM in global affairs was                          
 evident from the new applications for joining the movement in 1993.                          
 Thailand And Honduras were admitted as new members. Macedonia and Slovakia                   
 were admitted as guests. Kyrghyzstan was admitted as an observer.                            
                                                                                              
 The NAM Coordinating Bureau had set up working groups to deal with the                       
 restructuring of UN, human rights, Somalia and peace-keeping. NAM had                        
 contributed to the UN resolutions on the Agenda for Peace and                                
 revitalisation of the UN General Assembly and in the discussions on South                    
 Africa and Palestine issues. NAM had advocated that UN should pay more                       
 attention to the promotion of economic and social development. The NAM                       
 Ministerial Meeting emphasised the importance of reviving the North- South                   
 dialogue.                                                                                    
                                                                                              
 Two Ministerial Meetings were convened during the year by Indonesia as                       
 Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement. The Standing Ministerial Committee                     
 (SMC) meeting held in Bali in May 1993, emphasised the importance of                         
 reviving the North-South dialogue. In November 1993, the NAM Ministerial                     
 Meeting on Population was held to forge a common position among NAM member                   
 States in advance of the International Conference on Population and                          
 Development scheduled for 1994. The NAM Meeting of Population Ministers                      
 revealed the considerable consensus and broad unanimity that exists in NAM                   
 member States on the need to curb population growth rates.                                   
                                                                                              
 India had taken initiatives and played a key role within the NAM in                          
 evolving a constructive and balanced approach to the various issues and                      
 particularly in the case of sensitive issues such as human rights.                           
 Commonwealth                                                                                 
                                                                        Top                   
 The Summit meeting of Commonwealth Heads of Government (CHOGM) was held at                   
 Limassol, Cyprus from 21 to 215 October 1993. 47 countries participated,                     
 of which 36 were represented by Heads of State or Government. The Indian                     
 delegation was led by Finance Minister, Dr Manmohan Singh.                                   
                                                                                              
 The Indian delegation participated actively in the Cyprus CHOGM and                          
 contributed to its major decisions and outcome. India's conviction that                      
 the Commonwealth should concentrate on expanding co-operation in areas of                    
 social and economic development and refrain from involvement in                              
 controversial or divisive issues that would have a detrimental I , Impact                    
 on the Commonwealth as a whole was reaffirmed. The Cyprus Communique                         
 preserved the balance struck at the Harare CHOGM in October 1991 between                     
 Commonwealth activities in the field of social and economic development                      
 and the promotion of its fundamental political values. At the behest of                      
 the Indian delegation, the Communique recognised terrorism as one of the                     
 most pernicious threats to stability and human rights. The results of the                    
 Cyprus CHOGM also reflected a greater desire on the part of Commonwealth                     
 member States to take the lead in setting the priorities and agenda of                       
 this voluntary association of sovereign states.                                              
 -91>                                                                                         
 Conferences                                                                                  
                                                                        Top                   
 Protocol-Conference Cell of the Ministry of External Affairs is                              
 responsible for providing logistical support and managerial assistance in                    
 the organization of international conferences convened by the Ministry as                    
 also certain others organized by other 'Ministries/Departments of                            
 Government of India. In this financial year till date the following                          
 international conferences/ meetings, etc were organized:                                     
                                                                                              
 (i) The former Tanzanian President Julius Nyrere's visit from 27 March to                    
 1 April 1993.                                                                                
                                                                                              
 (ii) The meeting of Personal Representatives. of Heads of State/                             
 Government of G-15 countries which was held in New Delhi on 18 and 19                        
 April 1993.                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 (iii) Indo-Nepal Border Talks, held from 26 to 29 April 1993, the                            
 logistical arrangements for which were taken care of by this Cell.                           
                                                                                              
 (iv) The logistical support for the talks on India-Hong Kong Extradition                     
 Arrangements, held in New Delhi from 13 to 16 july 1993, was provided.                       
                                                                                              
 (v) The Seminar on Business Opportunities for Indian Companies in Sub-                       
 Saharan Africa held in New Delhi on 23 and 24 july 19931.                                    
                                                                                              
 (vi) The Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources was assisted in                         
 convening the meeting on the G-15 Project on Solar Energy Applications, in                   
 New Delhi from 27 September to 1 October 1993.                                               
 -92>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 (vii) Assistance for organizing the 4th Indira Gandhi Conference in New                      
 Delhi from 19 to 23 November 1993 was provided.                                              
                                                                                              
 (viii) The Association of Indian Diplomats was helped in organizing the                      
 Indira Gandhi Memorial Lecture which was held on 26 November 1993.                           
                                                                                              
 (ix) A major conference for which extensive arrangements were made was the                   
 fourth Summit Level Meeting of Heads of State/ Government of G-15                            
 countries which was to be held from 13 to 15 December 1993. The Summit was                   
 postponed; however, the G-15 Conference was held at Personal                                 
 Representatives and Ministerial Level from 8 to 11 December 1993.                            
                                                                                              
 (x) The Ministry of Human Resource Development was helped in organizing                      
 the Education for All Summit (E-9) in New Delhi on 1.6 December 1993.                        
 International Law: Developments and Activities                                               
                                                                        Top                   
 At the 48th Session of the United Nations General Assembly, the Sixth                        
 (Legal) Committee considered 14 agenda items during its deliberations from                   
 24 September to 26 November 1993. The main agenda items related to the                       
 work of the International Law Commission (ILC), the United Nations                           
 Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), the Special Committee on                   
 the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of                    
 the Organization, measures to eliminate international terrorism, draft                       
 convention on jurisdictional immunities of States and their property,                        
 responsibility for attacks on United Nations and associated personnel, the                   
 United Nations Decade of International Law and the question of seeking an                    
 advisory opinion of the International Court of justice on abductions                         
 abroad.                                                                                      
                                                                                              
 The Indian delegation participated actively in the Committee's                               
 deliberations, including its consultations on several matters and                            
 commented on the progress made by the ILC at its 45th Session particularly                   
 on the question of preparation of a draft statute for an international                       
 criminal court, international rivers, State responsibility and the                           
 question of international liability for injurious consequences arising out                   
 of activities not prohibited by international law. Further, on India's                       
 initiative, the General Assembly decided to seek the views of Member                         
 States on practical measures to eliminate acts of terrorism, on ways and                     
 means of enhancing the role of the United Nations and the relevant                           
 Specialised Agencies in combating international terrorism' and on ways to                    
 consider this question within the Sixth Committee.                                           
 -93>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 The United Nations Commission on International Trade Law held its 26th                       
 session. in Vienna from 5 to 23 July 1993 and adopted the Model Law on                       
 Procurement for Submission to the United National General Assembly (UNGA).                   
 The Model Law would serve as a model for national legislation on                             
 Government purchasing of goods dealing with procedures to be followed by                     
 various government agencies in their procurement practices. The Model Law                    
 is intended to be a codification of sound public procurement rules of                        
 goods by ensuring transparency, competition and objectivity. Its model                       
 nature means that it could be used as a guideline by countries that are                      
 yet to establish legislation in the field of procurement or it could be                      
 used to measure the adequacy of existing legislation.                                        
                                                                                              
 The Legal Sub-Committee of the UN Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer                        
 Space (COPUOS) met at New York from 22 March to 8 April 1993. The meeting                    
 discussed, in addition to the general legal issues of peaceful uses of                       
 outer space and disarmament, other specific issues relating to some                          
 matters of continuing interest like the geostationary satellite orbit, the                   
 definition and delimitation of outer space, and the exploration and                          
 exploitation of outer space for peaceful purposes, taking into account the                   
 needs and interests of the developing countries. The discussion on the                       
 principles governing the use of nuclear powered sources in outer space                       
 focussed on the need to review the principles adopted by the UN General                      
 Assembly in 1992.                                                                            
                                                                                              
 The UN Conference on Straddling and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, held at                    
 New York from 12 to 30 July 1993, was the first major conference convened                    
 by the United Nations in the area of the Law of the Sea after the third                      
 United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS III) which                           
 resulted in the adoption of the United Nations Convention on the Law of                      
 the Sea, 1982. The central issues before the conference related to the                       
 balancing of the interests of coastal States and the distant water fishing                   
 nations with due regard to the principles of conservation and equitable                      
 utilisation of the highly migratory fish and taking into account the                         
 Sovereign Rights of Coastal States in their exclusive economic zones.                        
 Another important issue discussed was the prevention of reflagging of                        
 fishing vessels on high seas to avoid responsibility and liability under                     
 the flag-State jurisdiction upon violation of conservation measures. The                     
 next session will be held in March 1994.                                                     
 -94>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 The claims of Indian nationals and corporations who were adversely                           
 affected by the Iraq-Kuwait conflict were presented by Government of India                   
 to the United Nations Compensation Commission (UNCC). The Governing                          
 Council of the UNCC held two sessions during the year at which several                       
 legal and policy issues concerning the handling of the claims were                           
 considered. The basic position adopted by the Government of India is to                      
 defend the claims of India as permissible under relevant UN Security                         
 Council Resolutions as well as the mandate of UNCC and further to cover                      
 such claims for settlement by the Commission on a priority basis from the                    
 initial stages.                                                                              
                                                                                              
 The International Institute for the Unification of Private Law (UNIDROIT)                    
 held the fourth session of the Committee of Governmental Experts on the                      
 International Protection of Cultural Property at Rome from 29 September to                   
 8 October 1993 to consider the text of a draft convention on the                             
 international return of stolen or illegally exported cultural objects. The                   
 Committee made substantial progress on several important issues including                    
 the definition of "cultural property" and special protection for "public                     
 collections".                                                                                
                                                                                              
 The International Conference on Protection of War Victims, sponsored                         
 jointly by the Government of Switzerland and the International Committee                     
 of the Red Cross (ICRC) in Geneva in September 1993, discussed several                       
 legal issues of contemporary importance. The conference reaffirmed faith                     
 in international humanitarian law and adopted a declaration suggesting                       
 measures to promote the same.                                                                
                                                                                              
 The Thirty Second Annual Session of the Asian African Legal Consultative                     
 Committee (AALCC) was held in Kampala from 1 to 6 February 1993. The                         
 Session enabled legal experts of the member States from Asia and Africa as                   
 well as observers from other States and several international                                
 organizations to have an exchange of views on several international legal                    
 issues of contemporary concern such as environment and development, human                    
 rights, the UN Decade of International Law, Status and Treatment of                          
 Refugees, Law of the Sea. Exchange of views also took place on legal                         
 issues concerning International Trade Law being discussed in the UNCITRAL                    
 and other fora. India has been a host of this Committee, so far, which has                   
 been functioning on a temporary basis, its term being renewable once in                      
 every five years. For the first time at Kampala, the Committee decided to                    
 establish a permanent Headquarters and upon an invitation received from                      
 the State of Qatar the same was decided to be established at Doha.                           
 -95>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 As in previous years, the Ministry undertook negotiations and processed                      
 for signature, ratification, and accession several multilateral and                          
 bilateral treaties involving India.                                                          
                                                                                              
 India ' became a party to several multilateral Conventions, for example,                     
 Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against                         
 Women, United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the                         
 Convention Establishing the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency.                        
                                                                                              
 The Indo-UK Extradition Treaty, signed at London on 22 September 1992,                       
 entered into force from 15 November 1993 i e the date of exchange of the                     
 instruments of ratification which took place at New Delhi. To give full                      
 effect to the provisions of this Treaty, the Indian Extradition Act 1962                     
 has been amended, bringing the same into effect in December 1993. A list                     
 of Treaties entered into by India during the year is in Appendix III.                        
 -96>                                                                                         
 1993                                                                                         
 10. Foreign Economic Relations                                                               
                                                                        Top                   
 THE Ministry's role and activities during this period reflected the                          
 increased emphasis placed on the economic objectives and content of                          
 India's diplomatic efforts, both at the bilateral and multilateral levels,                   
 and on its intensification and diversification. Interaction. at the                          
 inter-governmental level was complemented by and provided dynamism through                   
 ensuring active involvement of trade and industry, media and academia in                     
 India as well as in concerned countries.                                                     
                                                                                              
 In the past year, the Ministry's strategy in this regard continued to                        
 evolve in the context of a number of international developments and                          
 domestic imperatives and priorities. The impact of changes in the world                      
 economy on India's increasingly liberalising trade and technology driven                     
 economy was felt with greater effect because of the growing                                  
 interdependence of the issues of trade, money, finance, technology and                       
 services within and across national borders. The strengthening of the                        
 trend towards regional and sub-regional economic co-operation and                            
 integration groupings which exclude India tended to affect her market                        
 access in traditional areas and regions of export interest to India, as                      
 also her prospects of attracting investment flows. The coming into force                     
 of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) among USA, Canada and                     
 Mexico,, and the gradual consolidation of co-operation among the Asia-                       
 Pacific countries in the context of the first APEC Summit in Seattle                         
 symbolised this trend. Although the Uruguay Round for setting up a more                      
 liberalised, rule-based multilateral trading system concluded with a                         
 fundamental restructuring of world trade and economic relations, new                         
 protectionist pressures and discriminatory barriers threatened to appear                     
 on the trade policy horizon in the form of labour and environment-related                    
 conditionalities. The structural changes taking place in Eastern Europe                      
 brought about a consequential adaptation and reorientation of India's                        
 commercial and economic interaction with them. Economic liberalisation in                    
 the developing countries and the impressive economic performance of some                     
 of them provided new avenues for co-operation in trade, investment and                       
 technology, and at the same time put new competitive pressures on India.                     
 Given the criticality of access, transfer and diffusion of technology as                     
 an input for economic growth and development, India had to cope with the                     
 trends towards monopoly controls and restrictive regimes on technology                       
 transfer, particularly those relating to the so-called dual use and                          
 sensitive technology. To meet the objectives of sustainable development,                     
 favourable, including preferential, access to environmentally sound                          
 technologies acquired a new urgency.                                                         
 -97>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Taking into account the constraints and opportunities posed by these                         
 issues and development, India attempted in international organizations                       
 like the UN, its conferences, agencies and regional fora: NAM, CHOGM, G-                     
 77 and most recently the G-15, to activate more focussed and meaningful                      
 North-South dialogue and a new partnership for development which would                       
 make for a greater flow of financial resourcesbilateral and multilateral,                    
 official and private into developing countries like India, a                                 
 growth-oriented solution to her debt problems, better and considerably                       
 enhanced market access for her exports as well as access to critical tools                   
 of competitiveness such as technology, particularly high technology and                      
 global trade and information networks. The Ministry has also used these                      
 fora to coordinate, articulate and pursue India's, interests on emergent                     
 issues in the context of world conferences such as those on environment,                     
 population and social development.                                                           
                                                                                              
 India is the current chairman of the Group of 15 (G-15). This Summit level                   
 Group on South-South consultation, is a compact, trans-regional group of                     
 developing countries that seeks to pursue, on a more realisitic and                          
 implementable basis, the specific goals- of South-South co-operation and                     
 North-South partnership. South-South co-operation is to be made a reality                    
 through identification of complementarities with regard to trade,                            
 technology and investment. 18 co-operative projects, as well as structured                   
 and regular interaction among business communities of the member countries                   
 through the annual G-15 Business Forum, have been created so as to                           
 translate these complementarities into actual transactions. The resultant                    
 capacity building and progress will confirm the viability of South-South                     
 co-operation, thus opening new avenues for development.                                      
 -98>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 India made considerable progress in implementing the projects relating to                    
 Solar Energy Applications and Gene Banks on Medicinal and Aromatic Plants.                   
 Both these projects involve information exchange, technical co- operation                    
 and long term institution building. Preparations are on for the setting up                   
 of a Vocational Training Centre for Africa in Senegal and establishing a                     
 Computer Training,, Facility for G-15 countries in New Delhi. This                           
 Ministry also coordinated and enabled India's participation in and benefit                   
 from projects coordinated by other G-15 countries particularly South                         
 Investment Trade and Technology Data Exchange Centre (SITTDEC) coordinated                   
 by Malaysia, and the Petroleum, Gas and Petrochemicals Design, Execution                     
 and Management project coordinated by Egypt.                                                 
                                                                                              
 The Fourth Summit of G-15 which was scheduled between 13 and 15 December                     
 in New Delhi in 1993 could not be held due to a lack of quorum caused by                     
 an unfortunate coincidence of circumstances which prevented many Heads of                    
 State/Government from attending the Summit. However, the Personal                            
 Representatives of Heads of State/Government and the Foreign Ministers of                    
 G- 15 countries met as scheduled and carried out their preparatory work                      
 for the postponed Summit. A Draft Agenda for the Fourth Summit was                           
 discussed, as were the concepts, message and format of the Draft joint                       
 Communique. The Agenda and the Draft joint Communique are to be fine-                        
 tuned and updated nearer the April Summit. The attempt is to promote                         
 South-South Consultation and North-South Dialogue with a view to                             
 influencing for common benefit,, the evolution of economic, political and                    
 social issues and events impacting on peace and development.                                 
                                                                                              
 India's efforts to establish closer linkages with the regional groupings                     
 in Asia assumed a new dimension with the commencement of sectoral dialogue                   
 partnership with the ASEAN. The first meeting was held in New Delhi in                       
 March 1993, and the first substantive meeting within the framework of the                    
 dialogue was scheduled for January 1994. The sectors identified for                          
 co-operation are' trade, investment and tourism. In order to provide                         
 business underpinning to this dialogue, the Ministry facilitated the                         
 setting up of the India-ASEAN Economic Co-operation Committee as a                           
 counterpart to the ASEAN Chambers of Commerce and Industry.                                  
 -99>                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 The Economic Division continued to act as a catalyst in promoting economic                   
 and commercial interests abroad in the following respects:                                   
                                                                                              
 (1) In concert with Indian Missions abroad, the Division has. been                           
 actively gathering and disseminating information on trade, technology and                    
 investment opportunities in different sectors. In doing so, it seeks to                      
 facilitate an accurate, realistic and reliable assessment of existing                        
 conditions and potential prospects in different countries and regions.                       
 This is done, inter alia, through periodic and special despatches,                           
 conducting market surveys in specific areas and products, assisting in                       
 holding and participating in trade fairs, exhibitions, symposia and                          
 workshops etc.                                                                               
                                                                                              
 (2) It continued to provide backup support with regard to promotion                          
 (including promotion of project exports), coordination (vis-a-vis other                      
 Ministries, Departments, Indian and foreign parties to transactions),                        
 monitoring and follow-up of trade, investment and technology transactions.                   
                                                                                              
 (3) Facilitated removal of irritants and bottlenecks in respect of such                      
 transactions, inter alia, through help in resolving trade disputes and                       
 issues such as those relating to blocked funds in some trading partners.                     
 One of the major functions of the Division is to facilitate visits of the                    
 business delegations from India and to India. Over the year, business                        
 delegations from countries as varied as Burkina Faso, Belarus,                               
 Kyrghyzstan, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan and Israel were assisted through                         
 meetings convened by Indian apex chambers. Business delegations that                         
 accompanied VVIPs were also put in contact with apex chambers in India. In                   
 the first quarter of the year, the Prime Ministers of Spain and UK and the                   
 German Chancellor visited India with business delegations.                                   
                                                                                              
 Indian business delegations mounted by FICCI, FIEO, ASSOCHAM, PHD Chamber                    
 of Commerce and Industry, Gujarat Chamber of Commerce and Industry, AIMO                     
 and OCCI were assisted by the Division through Indian Missions and Posts                     
 abroad to have fruitful and meaningful interactions with their                               
 counterparts in Central Asian States, Europe, USA, Africa and South-East                     
 Asia.                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 The Division's objective was to diversify India's export markets. This was                   
 done, inter alia, through participation in seminars, talks etc. In July                      
 1993, the Division organized a seminar on "Trade, Technology and                             
 Investment in Sub-Saharan Africa" through FIEO. The seminar was attended                     
 by Indian businessmen who had business interests in Africa and also those                    
 who were interested in doing business in Africa. The Heads of Mission of                     
 the African Embassies in New Delhi also actively participated in the                         
 seminar, which evoked enormous response. The action points that resulted                     
 from the seminar were also forwarded to the Ministry of Commerce for their                   
 comments and inputs.                                                                         
 -100>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 In the spirit of South-South co-operation, the Division participated                         
 actively in the Indo-Latin file-sponsored seminar in October 1993. The                       
 Division also coordinated the G-15 Business Forum and Exhibition held from                   
 10 to 15 December 1993. With the postponement of the G-15 Summit,                            
 bilateral business meetings between delegations that came from Malaysia,                     
 Indonesia, Nigeria, Egypt, Zimbabwe, Argentina, Venezuela and Senegal and                    
 India took place.                                                                            
                                                                                              
 The Economic Division was also closely associated with the Joint Business                    
 Council meetings in India and Indonesia, Japan, South Africa, Mauritius,                     
 Sweden, the Czech Republic, Malaysia and several others. The JBC is an                       
 important forum for private businessmen of India and foreign countries to                    
 spell out their requirements and follow up their commercial interests.                       
 There are, at present, nearly 46 JBCs spanning all continents.                               
                                                                                              
 The Economic Division, as a member of the Inter-Ministerial Committee on                     
 Overseas Investments, provides through Indian Missions abroad, important                     
 inputs that are considered by the Committee in deciding on joint venture                     
 applications. The Missions also play an effective role in interceding with                   
 the Government agencies of the host countries when required to solve the                     
 problems of Indian joint ventures.                                                           
                                                                                              
 The Division is a member of the Committee which evaluates the feasibility                    
 study reports prepared by the Department of Science and Technology, the                      
 Telecom Export Promotion Committee, the high level Export Promotion                          
 Committee, ITPO governing body, WAPCOS project exports etc. Through all                      
 such meetings, the Division contributed its share to the Government's                        
 policies and to the nation's export efforts.                                                 
                                                                                              
 The Division kept Indian Missions abroad abreast with the changes in the                     
 Government's policies relating to trade by promptly informing them of such                   
 changes and other relevant details. An Exporter's Directory is prepared,                     
 updated and improved upon on a regular basis, in consultation with trade                     
 and industry in India and Indian Missions abroad.                                            
 -101>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 The Division through the year assisted several Missions in the collection                    
 of information for commercial enquiries from concerned departments and                       
 despatched the same expeditiously to the Missions. Indian businessmen who                    
 sought information about markets/ contacts abroad were also provided the                     
 necessary assistance. The Division also interacted with other Ministries                     
 and agencies in trade dispute matters which were brought to its attention                    
 by Missions abroad. Important tenders, commercial deals etc were also                        
 actively pursued with the concerned Ministries.                                              
                                                                                              
 The Economic Division is the agency which is involved in the execution of                    
 the operation of the Indian Technical and Economic Co-operation (ITEC)                       
 Programme and the Special Commonwealth African Assistance Programme                          
 (SCAAP). These two programmes constitute major instruments for promoting                     
 technical assistance by India to other partner countries in the developing                   
 world in the true spirit of South-South co-operation.                                        
                                                                                              
 The year witnessed a significant increase in the scope and extent. of                        
 activities covered under the ITEC in terms of increased geographical                         
 coverage as well as the areas in which technical training is imparted in                     
 Indian civilian institutions. Apart from traditional areas like rural                        
 development, small scale industries, banking etc, greater emphasis is                        
 being given to areas like electronics, computers, foreign trade, diplomacy                   
 etc. Efforts are also afoot to streamline the ITEC programme and to bring                    
 about a greater harmonisation between the activities under the programme                     
 and the pursuit of India's economic and commercial interests abroad.                         
 Following the coverage of ITEC to all the successor States of the former                     
 USSR, greater focus is being imparted to the newly emergent Republics of                     
 Central Asia. Special cources in Banking, Foreign Trade, Diplomacy and                       
 Hotel Management were held for Central Asian Republics and Russia during                     
 the year. A Plan of Action for intensifying coverage of ITEC to Central                      
 Asian Republics (CAR) for the period 1993-94 to 1996-97 has been                             
 formulated. Under this, each year, apart from executing a few projects in                    
 each of the CAR, it is also planned to undertake feasibility studies,                        
 consultancy services on specific areas/projects of interest to India and                     
 to give more slots for training in Indian civilian institutions.                             
                                                                                              
 During 1993-94, around 700 nominees from partner countries have availed of                   
 training in Indian civilian institutions under ITEC/SCAAP in areas ranging                   
 from small scale industries, computer training, management, diplomacy,                       
 foreign trade etc.                                                                           
 -102>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 Nearly 450 military personnel from about 20 countries have availed of                        
 training facilities in Indian Defence Institutions including National                        
 Defence College (NDC) in New Delhi and the Defence Services Staff College                    
 in Wellington (Tamil Nadu).                                                                  
                                                                                              
 Among the projects which were executed or are nearing completion during                      
 this year are a hand-tool design centre in the Philippines and the 7th.                      
 and final phase of an ambitious project for the restoration of the famous                    
 Angkor Vat temples in Cambodia. Among the projects under execution are a                     
 Multipurpose Training Centre in the small scale sector in Vietnam, a                         
 Vocational Training Centre in Mongolia, a Solar Photovoltaic Plant in                        
 Oman, a Common Facilities Centre in Palestine (in the context of Indian                      
 support to the Middle East Peace Process), a Remote Sensing Centre in                        
 Mauritius and various other projects in Asia and Africa.                                     
                                                                                              
 During 1993-94, around 30 experts were sent to various developing                            
 countries to assist the latter in areas as varied as agriculture,                            
 education, engineering, medicine, taxation, etc.                                             
                                                                                              
 Study visits from partner countries to India organized under the ITEC are                    
 aimed at familiarising the former of India's capabilities in select areas,                   
 to facilitate finalising concrete areas of co-operation. Among the study                     
 visits undertaken in 1993-94 are those from Ghana, South Africa, Zimbabwe                    
 in 1993; visits from Egypt, Seychelles and Central America are also                          
 planned to be held in the course of the year.                                                
                                                                                              
 During the year, a 3-member team of evaluators has undertaken a                              
 comprehensive review of the ITEC programme and the entire gamut of                           
 activities covered by the same. The recommendations of the team are varied                   
 and wide-ranging, including improvement of the terms and conditions under                    
 which foreign nominees avail of training programmes in India, deputation                     
 of Indian experts abroad, prioritising the areas in which assistance is                      
 sought to be extended etc. The recommendations are aimed at increasing the                   
 efficacy of ITEC as an instrument in promoting India's overall economic                      
 and commercial interests abroad, particularly in the light of the on-going                   
 reforms in the Indian economy. The recommendations of the evaluation team                    
 are under examination. Meanwhile, action has already been initiated to                       
 implement some of the recommendations; ie, grading Indian civilian                           
 training institutions (where training is imparted) on the basis of a                         
 careful evaluation of the course content and accommodation facilities,                       
 prioritising the areas where assistance is sought to be given on the basis                   
 of the specific requirements of partner countries and improving the terms                    
 and conditions under which training is imparted in Indian civilian                           
 training institutions.                                                                       
 -103>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 Among the countries for which emergency relief assistance has been                           
 extended in 1993-94 are Grenada, Sierra Leone, Tanzania, Belarus, Jordan,                    
 Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan, Tajikistan, Kyrghyzstan, Eritrea, Mongolia,                        
 Ukraine, Azerbaijan, Uzbekistan, Kenya and Liberia.                                          
 -104>                                                                                        
 1993                                                                                         
 11. Trade and Investment Promotion                                                           
                                                                        Top                   
 MINISTRY of External Affairs has always accorded high priority to                            
 promoting India's economic and commercial interests abroad. Following the                    
 announcement of India's new economic policies and the emphasis placed on                     
 increasing exports and foreign investment and progressively integrating                      
 the Indian economy with global economy, the Ministry has further                             
 intensified its economic and trade promotion efforts.                                        
                                                                                              
 India's new economic policies encourage increased interlinkages with the                     
 world economy and give the opportunity and the flexibility to deal                           
 effectively with the challenges of a new and more complex world order and                    
 the emergence of a true global economy-a world in which radical economic                     
 changes have taken place on an unprecedented scale and in which decisions                    
 concerning production, distribution, capital and technology flows are                        
 increasingly being taken not on a national but on a global basis. MEA                        
 fully recognises that India can ignore these developments only at the risk                   
 of marginalisation in the world order and that it is imperative to manage                    
 India's economic priorities in an integrated manner.                                         
                                                                                              
 Towards this, end, Ministry of External Affairs has been active in                           
 coordinating with its Missions and Posts on the various promotional                          
 measures that need to be undertaken and in providing full support to these                   
 initiatives. These efforts are especially focussed on those countries                        
 where the potential for increasing, trade and investment flows is the                        
 highest: a list of such target countries has been drawn up for the                           
 purpose.                                                                                     
 -105>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 In this process, it has been liaising closely with the other Ministries                      
 involved such as Finance, Industry and Commerce.                                             
                                                                                              
 Each of the Ministry's 140 Embassies/Posts abroad have arrangements for                      
 doing commercial and economic work. These arrangements have been                             
 progressively strengthened; priority has been given to providing Economic                    
 and Commercial Wings with the necessary infrastructure and back up support                   
 to aid them in the efficient execution of their responsibilities. Officers                   
 posted to Missions as Commercial Representatives undergo intensive                           
 training; refresher courses are also arranged from time to time.                             
                                                                                              
 Specific details of trade and investment promotion undertaken by Ministry                    
 of External Affairs both at Headquarters and through its Missions and                        
 Posts abroad in the year under review are as follows:                                        
 Trade Promotion                                                                              
                                                                        Top                   
 Missions and Posts were fully engaged in the aggressive drive to promote                     
 exports within the broad approach chalked out by the Ministry of Commerce                    
 in respect of thrust areas and "extreme focus" products. In addition to                      
 day to day functions such answering trade enquiries from Indian exporters                    
 and local importers, liaising with incoming exporters' delegations,                          
 attending to trade complaints and commercial disputes, coordinating                          
 participation in local trade fairs and interacting with local chambers of                    
 commerce and trade associations, Missions have made special efforts to                       
 organize seminars and workshops and encourage exchange of delegations in                     
 the thrust areas.                                                                            
                                                                                              
 In the period under review, as part of a pro-active campaign to reach out                    
 to exporters and inform them of the rules and procedures of doing business                   
 with various foreign countries, Missions were asked to prepare detailed                      
 handbooks for exporters wishing to do business in their areas. These                         
 handbooks have been re-printed by apex Chambers of Commerce and                              
 distributed to exporters on request.                                                         
                                                                                              
 As part of the same approach, several Missions and Posts have converted                      
 specific areas in their premises into "business centres" where Indian                        
 exporters may access commercial and economic information with the                            
 Embassies and use the premises for business meetings.                                        
 -106>                                                                                        
 Investment Promotion                                                                         
                                                                        Top                   
 Following the decision by Government of India to entrust the work relating                   
 to investment promotion abroad to Indian Embassies and Posts, Ministry of                    
 External Affairs has designated an officer in each Mission abroad to                         
 handle investment work. Missions have built up a wide network of contacts                    
 with local Chambers of Commerce, business communities, economic                              
 journalists and other opinion makers in order to keep them appraised of                      
 the Government of India's new economic policies and its progressive                          
 evolution towards even further liberalisation.                                               
                                                                                              
 A large number of high level seminars have been organized in important                       
 business centres in Europe, Japan, South-East Asia and USA to project                        
 India as an investment destination and to create greater awareness of                        
 business opportunities in India. Speakers at such seminars have included                     
 Ministers/senior Government officials, representatives of Reserve Bank of                    
 India and leading financial institutions, management consultants, tax                        
 experts and captains of Indian industry. In the period under review, major                   
 seminars were organized in several cities of the USA, Japan, Germany, UK,                    
 Italy and Australia. Among other countries that received special attention                   
 were Singapore, Malaysia, Korea and UAE. A special effort was made to                        
 attract British investment through the Indo-British Partnership                              
 Initiative, involving close co-operation between the two Governments as                      
 well as trade and industry in the two countries.                                             
                                                                                              
 Special emphasis was placed on a sector-specific approach in Missions                        
 investment promotion efforts. In Germany, for instance, a series of                          
 seminars were arranged in March 1993 focussing specifically on the                           
 software industry; in Japan, seminars were organized on castings and                         
 forgings and auto components, to name only two sectors. Another seminar in                   
 Singapore in May 1993 concentrated on investment opportunities in the                        
 Indian capital market. A similar sectoral approach has been followed in                      
 other countries as well such as USA and Australia.                                           
                                                                                              
 Speaking engagements before business audiences have been arranged wherever                   
 possible when Ministers/officials from economic Ministries visited a                         
 particular country. For instance, the visit of the Finance Minister to the                   
 USA in October 1993 in connection with World Bank meetings was utilised                      
 for arranging his interaction with opinion makers in key economic                            
 journals, important members of the corporate business community and think                    
 tanks in Washington and New York.                                                            
 -107>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 Apex industry organizations are being increasingly co-opted into the                         
 Government's efforts to attract foreign investment. Overseas visits by                       
 business delegations are in particular, being used to project India as an                    
 attractive destination; apex chambers have, in collaboration with their                      
 overseas counterparts and with the active participation of the local                         
 Missions, organized several promotional events.                                              
                                                                                              
 A number of Missions have started bringing out economic newsletters and                      
 bulletins focussing on the new economic policies and aimed at generating                     
 greater awareness about business opportunities in India. Some of these                       
 publications are in the local language; they are all distributed to a                        
 carefully targeted audience. The High Commission of India in Singapore has                   
 taken the initiative of sending out its weekly economic bulletin on                          
 electronic mail to major local business entities; other Missions have also                   
 been asked to look at the possibilities of doing something similar in                        
 their areas.                                                                                 
 Back-up Support to Missions and Posts                                                        
                                                                        Top                   
 The Ministry of External Affairs provides comprehensive back-up support to                   
 its Missions and Posts in their on-going efforts to ensure the widest                        
 possible dissemination of information about the new economic policies.                       
                                                                                              
 Missions and Posts are being kept regularly and, in case of target                           
 Missions, instantly informed by fax about important changes in economic                      
 policies and procedures so that they in turn can keep business, industry                     
 and other sections of targeted audiences in host countries suitably                          
 informed. Arrangements have also been made with Indian Chambers of                           
 Commerce to keep Missions regularly informed about the evolving economic                     
 scene and other economic issues.                                                             
                                                                                              
 Special importance has been given to. developing publicity material aimed                    
 at projecting India as an investment destination. The first such publicity                   
 kit prepared in October 1991 comprised a set of brochures and a floppy                       
 diskette entitled "Doing Business with India,"; the diskette provides                        
 detailed information on investment related policies and procedures in an                     
 user-friendly manner. In addition, two slide packages have been prepared                     
 in collaboration with CII and ASSOCHAM to assist Missions in projecting                      
 the new economic policies. To supplement this material in industrialised                     
 countries, a special computer-aided visual package has been prepared in                      
 collaboration with the Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of                       
 India (ICICI). In August 1993, a set of 7 brochures detailing various                        
 aspects of Doing Business in India such as Trade, Investment and Tax                         
 policies, the size of the market and how to establish a business presence                    
 in the country were published by the Economic Coordination Unit of the                       
 Ministry and over 10,000 copies distributed through Missions and Posts                       
 abroad. This material has received widespread appreciation and is also                       
 being used by other Ministries of Government of India for distribution to                    
 foreign investors.                                                                           
 -108>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 Attention has also been paid to reaching out to business journalists in                      
 target countries and arranging their visits to India in order to catalyse                    
 favourable coverage of the economic reform programme in the local media of                   
 these countries.                                                                             
                                                                                              
 1993 highlighted a growing trend for visiting Heads of State and                             
 Government to bring along with them high level industrial delegations for                    
 the purpose of interactions with Government as well as industry on the                       
 Indian side. Ministry of External Affairs utilised this opportunity to                       
 organize Round Table interactions of the visiting industrial delegations                     
 with a panel of Secretaries from Ministries relating to their areas of                       
 interest. Such interactions were organized during the visits of British                      
 Prime Minister John Major, German Chancellor Kohl, the King of Sweden,                       
 Dutch Prime Minister Lubbers and Malaysian Prime Minister Dr Mahathir                        
 Mohammad. They have been found by visiting industrialists to be extremely                    
 useful in receiving first hand briefings and clarifications on India's new                   
 industrial policies. Further, the format in which these delegations are                      
 allowed the opportunity to interact at one point with several decision                       
 makers in Government of India has spoken for itself in conveying the                         
 Government's commitment to welcoming foreign investment and the                              
 genuineness of its desire to hear the foreign investors' point of view.                      
 World Economic Forum                                                                         
                                                                        Top                   
 India was represented at the 1994 Annual Meeting of the World Economic                       
 Forum (WEF) at Davos by a delegation headed by the Prime Minister, and                       
 including Commerce Minister, Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Chief Minister of                        
 Maharashtra, Shri Sharad Pawar, Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister,                   
 Finance Secretary and several other senior officials of Goverment of India                   
 and major industralists.                                                                     
                                                                                              
 The 1994 meeting had as its theme "Redefinning the Basic Assumptions about                   
 the Great Challenges Facing Mankind". At the request of WEF Prime Minister                   
 addressed the valedictory session as the final speaker on 1 February 1994.                   
 In addition, India was one of the seven countries chosen for a special                       
 country specific session, where Prime Minister, Commerce Minister and                        
 Government officials answered questions from a packed audience on India's                    
 economic reforms and new business opportunities.                                             
 -109>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 The importance given to India at Davos and the high degree of interest                       
 expressed by the members of the international corporate community present                    
 are indicative of increasing foreign interest in India as an investment                      
 destination and the growing conviction that the reforms are here to stay                     
 and will be carried forward. The "India session" at the Annual Meeting of                    
 1994 was attended by over 130 delegates, much more than the number of                        
 delegates who attended a similar session in 1992.                                            
 -110>                                                                                        
 1993                                                                                         
 12. Policy Planning and Research                                                             
                                                                        Top                   
 THE Policy Planning and Research Division prepared briefs and back- ground                   
 notes on issues concerning India's foreign policy in the rapidly changing                    
 international scenario. It continued its co-operation with the sponsors of                   
 Seminars and Conferences on international issues for extending partial                       
 financial assistance. This facilitated the organization of seminars and                      
 symposia by a number of institutions in different parts of India. It                         
 extended such assistance to 15 Seminars Conferences during the period                        
 under review on subjects covering challenges to India's foreign policy,                      
 regional security perspectives, geo-political parameters of South-Eastern                    
 Indian Ocean, peaceful uses of nuclear energy, China and South Asia in the                   
 post-cold war world, South- South co-operation and G- 15 Summit, etc. It                     
 also extended financial support to scholars and academic institutions for                    
 studies and research projects on subjects relevant to this Ministry.                         
                                                                                              
 The Division assisted the territorial Divisions as well as Indian Missions                   
 abroad on issues relating to India's international boundary or whenever                      
 any specific information or documents on international relations were                        
 required.                                                                                    
                                                                                              
 The Division examined maps printed in foreign publications (both official                    
 and private), which incorrectly depicted international boundaries of                         
 India, in consultation with the concerned territorial Divisions. It also                     
 took up the matter with the concerned publishers through Indian Missions                     
 abroad for necessary corrective measures.                                                    
                                                                                              
 The Division continued to coordinate the Ministry's approval to new Survey                   
 of India maps depicting international boundaries of India. It also                           
 coordinated with the Survey of India and the Ministry of Defence for the                     
 supply of restricted map-sheets to various Government or semi- Government                    
 agencies for use in their official work.                                                     
 -111>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 The Division handled the requests from research scholars for access to the                   
 closed records of the Ministry in the National Archives of India relating                    
 to the restricted areas as laid down in the Access Rules in consultation                     
 with the concerned territorial Divisions. It also scrutinised excerpts of                    
 the closed period records taken by research scholars for clearance in                        
 consultation with the concerned territorial Divisions.                                       
                                                                                              
 An important task of the Division is to edit and coordinate the printing                     
 of the Annual Report of the Ministry prepared on the basis of the material                   
 sent by the various Divisions.                                                               
                                                                                              
 The Printing of Old Records (POR) Unit, attached to this Division, is                        
 entrusted with the task of editing and printing selected old policy files                    
 of the Ministry. It also undertook review/weeding of old files of the                        
 Record Management Section of the Ministry as well as of Indian Missions                      
 abroad referred to it by them. Similarly, the Unit reviewed the old closed                   
 records kept in the National Archives of India. The Research Section of                      
 the Division continued to coordinate the distribution of periodical                          
 reports from Indian Missions abroad.                                                         
                                                                                              
 To support the research efforts, a library equipped with modern facilities                   
 and large resource material is maintained with over one hundred thousand                     
 books and documents in its collection. The Library subscribes to 600                         
 periodical titles. The library is equipped with an in- house computer                        
 system with 12 terminals, two of which support data entry and retrieval in                   
 Indian languages; a microfilm/fiche reader printer and a plain paper                         
 photocopier. A Laser Printer with DTP software is also available and is                      
 being utilised for producing documents of the Division.                                      
                                                                                              
 Documentation/Bibliographic Services as well as other library operations                     
 and services were computerised using an integrated software package                          
 developed in India. Information about books and selected periodical                          
 articles received in the Library since 1986 is available on-line through                     
 each terminal. All new documents received in the Library-books, maps,                        
 microforms, selected articles from periodicals etc-are being fed into the                    
 in-house computer system to create a database on foreign affairs. Using                      
 this database, the Library provides Current Awareness Service and                            
 Bibliographical Services. In addition, the Library regularly issued a                        
 monthly Chronicle of Events, a Foreign Affairs Documentation Bulletin and                    
 an annotated monthly list of Recent Additions to the Library.                                
 -112>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 Library users including Research Scholars can access on-line computer-                       
 based information held in the Library in different databases through the                     
 Foreign Affairs Information Retrieval System (FAIRS). Photocopying and                       
 Computer Print-out facilities are also available to all Library users                        
 including Research Scholars.                                                                 
                                                                                              
 The Policy Planning & Research Division has embarked upon the collection                     
 of information on Indian Scholars and Mediapersons specialising in                           
 international affairs as well as Scholars and Mediapersons from selected                     
 foreign countries specialising on India/South Asia. This database has been                   
 computerised in the Library.                                                                 
                                                                                              
 The Division has commenced publication of India's bilateral treaties and                     
 agreements with foreign countries signed after Independence. The first                       
 three volumes of the publication covering the period from August 1947 to                     
 December 1960 were published, in January 1994. The publication is expected                   
 to fulfil a long-felt need of scholars of international relations and                        
 serve as useful reference material.                                                          
 -113>                                                                                        
 1993                                                                                         
 13. External Publicity                                                                       
                                                                        Top                   
 THE External Publicity Division (XP Division) has been entrusted with the                    
 responsibility of projecting India's views and concerns on national and                      
 international issues, and acquainting audiences abroad with developments                     
 in India in the political, economic, social and cultural spheres, with                       
 particular reference to all issues that have a connection with the foreign                   
 policy of India.                                                                             
                                                                                              
 There are two broad streams in XP Division's work: the first is the on-                      
 going work of projecting India on the world stage, which is basically done                   
 by providing Indian Missions abroad with adequate and appropriate                            
 publicity material of various kinds and supporting their information                         
 efforts. This on-going work includes organizing the media element of                         
 Indian VVIP visits abroad as well as foreign VVIPs who visit India,                          
 hosting journalists and other persons from abroad, monitoring the world                      
 media, preparing print as well as audio visual publicity material, etc.                      
 The second stream is the special efforts that need to be mounted for                         
 meeting the requirements of the publicity fall-out from major events,                        
 countering anti-India propaganda, etc.                                                       
                                                                                              
 During the year under review, the XP Division was actively engaged in                        
 discharging its responsibility of projecting India's position on various                     
 issues and developments in India as well as countering propaganda directed                   
 against India. Simultaneously, due emphasis was given to dissemination of                    
 credible information relating to the positive aspects of India's economic,                   
 scientific and technological progress and underlining the sustained march                    
 of Indian democracy. A thrust was given to the wide publicity on the new                     
 policy initiative undertaken by the present Government, particularly, the                    
 drive for economic liberalisation including the country's concerted                          
 efforts to attract foreign investment.                                                       
 -114>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 The XP Division continued to assist Indian Missions/Posts abroad with                        
 publicity material in different languages for distribution to local                          
 dignitaries, prominent persons, opinion makers and academic institutions,                    
 etc. These publications have been especially designed with the objective                     
 of acquainting foreign audiences with the multi-faceted nature of the                        
 Indian polity and the sustained progress of independent India.                               
                                                                                              
 False and malicious propaganda relating to human rights, the situation in                    
 Punjab and Kashmir and other incidents such as Ayodhya, bomb blasts in                       
 Bombay, communal riots in India, the Hazratbal incident, etc, were                           
 focussed upon by certain countries such as Pakistan.                                         
                                                                                              
 While developments in Jammu & Kashmir have figured prominently in the                        
 international media, the focus has been on activities of terrorists as                       
 well as allegations of excesses by security forces and violations of human                   
 rights, the latter being the subject of an intensive propaganda effort by                    
 Pakistan.                                                                                    
                                                                                              
 To counter such disinformation a number of specific and important steps                      
 have been taken.                                                                             
                                                                                              
 The basic aim of the efforts being made by the Ministry of External                          
 Affairs to counter the anti-Indian allegations are:                                          
                                                                                              
 (i) To try to put the overall situation in the proper perspective;                           
                                                                                              
 (ii) To rebut specific allegations by providing correct factual position.                    
 A substantial amount of material including pictorial descriptions, video                     
 films, pamphlets, has been compiled and disseminated to all our Missions                     
 so that they could utilise this effectively for briefing Governments of                      
 their accreditation, opinion makers, media personnel, officials and                          
 politicians. The material has highlighted the truth behind the situation                     
 in Kashmir and Punjab as well as Pakistan's aiding and abetting of                           
 terrorism in these States. Other material include facts about human rights                   
 violations, factual position with regard to the special legislation passed                   
 in India to deal with abnormal situations created by secessionist                            
 movements and terrorists, such as the TADA, the Armed Forces Special                         
 Powers Act, etc. Material has also been widely distributed regarding                         
 Pakistan's links with narco terrorism, its training camps for terrorists                     
 as well as material which pinpoints the activities of terrorists in these                    
 States in exhaustive detail. Amnesty International's comprehensive report                    
 on India has been examined with other concerned Departments of the                           
 Government of India and a comprehensive rebuttal prepared, giving the                        
 factual position which proved very effective in blunting adverse criticism                   
 and exposing the grossly exaggerated picture of human rights allegations                     
 apart from showing that it is the terrorists, armed and trained and                          
 financed by Pakistan, who are violating the fundamental human- right to                      
 life, by killing innocent people.                                                            
 -115>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 "India Perspectives", the monthly magazine which is published by the XP                      
 Division, is now brought out in 10 languages and has emerged as a major                      
 component in the Ministry's publicity efforts. The magazine has widened                      
 its readership and feedback from Indian Missions has been most                               
 encouraging. At present, 50,000 copies are printed and sent out to Indian                    
 Missions abroad for further redistribution.                                                  
                                                                                              
 The Division continued to regularly brief the foreign and Indian Press                       
 about India's policy on various issues. Government's swift response, as                      
 well as material outlining facts and all steps taken to counter communal                     
 forces, were disseminated to all the Missions abroad in order to enable                      
 them to present India's point of view to foreign officials, foreign                          
 governments as well as Media, opinion makers and others. During the period                   
 under review almost daily press briefings were held for the Media and                        
 press releases issued. In all, more than 490 Official Spokesman's                            
 statements/press releases were issued.                                                       
                                                                                              
 As part of its regular programme of inviting foreign journalists on                          
 familiarisation visits, XP Division hosted 40 journalists from 19                            
 different countries during the period and made a further commitment to                       
 visits of 17 more foreign journalists from 10 other countries. The                           
 countries include the Philippines, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Oman, Nepal,                      
 Ukraine, Republic of Korea, Bangladesh, Austria, Sri Lanka, UAE, Pakistan,                   
 Greece, Tunisia, Thailand, Kenya, Syria, Namibia and Sweden. In addition,                    
 reputed economic journalists from select target countries such as Britain,                   
 Germany, France, Japan, Russia and South Africa visited India, in                            
 pursuance of Prime Minister's directive of inviting such journalists to                      
 enable them to have first hand information about economic liberalisation                     
 in India. Some of these visits coincided with the India Engineering Trade                    
 Fair and the India International Trade Fair. The outcome of these visits                     
 reflects a considerable degree of success achieved in generating goodwill                    
 and promoting the cause of favourable projection of India's views and                        
 concerns on international issues.                                                            
 -116>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 The XP Division looked after logistics/media arrangements for VVIP visits                    
 abroad. During the period under review, the Division has handled media                       
 arrangements and logistics for journalists accompanying the President to                     
 Ukraine, UK, Turkey, Greece and Hungary, the Vice President to UK, Morocco                   
 and Vietnam and the Prime Minister to Thailand, Bangladesh, Uzbekistan,                      
 Kazakhstan, Oman, China, Republic, of Korea, Bhutan and Iran.                                
                                                                                              
 The Division facilitated media arrangements for the foreign journalists                      
 accompanying the VVIPs on their visits to India. A Liaison Officer from                      
 XPR Section was attached with each visiting delegation. The Following                        
 VVIPs visited India during the period:                                                       
                                                                                              
 King of Bhutan, Prime Minister of UK, President of Sri Lanka, Prime                          
 Minister of Spain, German Chancellor, President of Moldova, President of                     
 Mauritius, King and Queen of Nepal, President of Tanzania, Prime Minister                    
 of Belarus, President of Burkina, Faso, President of Nauru, President of                     
 Ireland, President of Zambia, King & Queen of Sweden, Prime Minister of                      
 Netherlands, Chairman of National Committee of Chinese People's Political                    
 Consultative Conference.                                                                     
                                                                                              
 XPR Section also arranged the media coverage for the incoming visits of                      
 ten Foreign Ministers and Deputy Prime Ministers from different countries.                   
                                                                                              
 XPR Section also processed documentary proposals from foreign TV producers                   
 for clearance and this involved references to various departments agencies                   
 in the Government of India. A total of 189 proposals were processed during                   
 the period. In addition, 109 foreign journalists were accredited and                         
 provided other miscellaneous press facilities.                                               
                                                                                              
 Information and publicity activity through the audio-visual media were                       
 substantially expanded during the year. Approximately 50 documentaries on                    
 various aspects of India were acquired from various sources besides                          
 Doordarshan and Films Division for distribution to Missions Posts in the                     
 appropriate colour systems for non-commercial presentation. Approximately                    
 15 of these were acquired in the 16 or 35 mm film formats also. Missions                     
 were also requested to promote films of outstanding quality commercially                     
 as, information or entertainment software.                                                   
 -117>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 Under the XP Division's film production programme, a film on investment                      
 opportunities opened up by the economic reforms in India was produced and                    
 circulated to all Missions and Posts. This film as wen as some other films                   
 from the XP Division catalogue were telecast in approximately 40 countries                   
 world-wide notably on the occasion of the Independence Day 1993. French                      
 and German versions of an earlier production "Continuity in Change" were                     
 also produced.                                                                               
                                                                                              
 The XP Division runs an active film programme through Indian Missionse                       
 Posts abroad. Approximately 150-200 Indian feature films from XP Division                    
 and from the Directorate of Film Festivals were presented at nearly 40                       
 film events/festivals organized in this manner. The XP Division has also                     
 had a role in the organization of the India International Film Festival                      
 1994 (IFFI 1994), the Bombay International Documentary and Short Film                        
 Festival 1994, and the International Children's Festival at Udaipur in                       
 October 1993.                                                                                
                                                                                              
 The XP Division processes the hardware audio-visual requirements of                          
 Missions/Posts. Twelve Missions were sanctioned satellite dish antennae                      
 for reception of satellite TV, requirements of 16 Missions for TV/VCRs                       
 were met as also the requirements of 3 Missions for film projectors. On                      
 the organizational front, the entire inventory of feature films,                             
 documentary films, video programmes, photographs and transparencies were                     
 computerised.                                                                                
                                                                                              
 On the photo publicity side, 12,000 photographs mostly from Photo                            
 Division, 5,000 transparencies, and 1,300 posters acquired from                              
 independent sources were circulated/distributed to Missions. Aproximately                    
 250 new transparencies were acquired.                                                        
                                                                                              
 A Special Unit has been set up to strengthen India's external publicity                      
 efforts and to coordinate the external publicity efforts amongst the                         
 various Ministries of the Government of India.                                               
 -118>                                                                                        
 1993                                                                                         
 14. Protocol                                                                                 
                                                                        Top                   
 DURING the year 1993-94, Heads of Diplomatic Mission of the following                        
 eighteen countries left India on completion of their assignments:-                           
                                                                                              
 1 Ghana                                                                                      
 2 Slovakia                                                                                   
 3 Germany                                                                                    
 4 Tanzania                                                                                   
 5 Greece                                                                                     
 6 USA                                                                                        
 7 Cyprus                                                                                     
 8 Austria                                                                                    
 9 Brunei                                                                                     
 10 Japan                                                                                     
 11 Mauritius                                                                                 
 12 Colombia                                                                                  
 13 Libya                                                                                     
 14 Thailand                                                                                  
 15 Korea (DPR)                                                                               
 16 Bhutan                                                                                    
 17 Philippines                                                                               
 18 Argentina                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 During the same period, Heads of Diplomatic Mission of the following                         
 sixteen countries presented their credentials to the President of India:-                    
                                                                                              
 1 New Zealand                                                                                
 2 Bulgaria                                                                                   
 -119>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 3 Chile                                                                                      
 4 Poland                                                                                     
 5 Indonesia                                                                                  
 6 Qatar                                                                                      
 7 Austria                                                                                    
 8 Japan                                                                                      
 9 Cuba                                                                                       
 10 Colombia                                                                                  
 11 Greece                                                                                    
 12 Laos                                                                                      
 13 Kazakhstan                                                                                
 14 Cyprus                                                                                    
 15 Portugal                                                                                  
 16 Germany                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 During the period under review, the following countries opened their                         
 'Resident Missions' in New Delhi:-                                                           
                                                                                              
 1 Ukraine                                                                                    
 2 Uzbekistan                                                                                 
 3 Kazakhstan                                                                                 
 4 South Africa                                                                               
                                                                                              
 A list containing names of foreign dignitaries who visited India and a                       
 list containing information about visits by Indian VVIPs to foreign                          
 countries during the year are at Appendices XIII and XIV.                                    
 -120>                                                                                        
 1993                                                                                         
 15. Passport and Consular Services and Indians Overseas                                      
                                                                        Top                   
 THE main areas of focus during 1993 were reduction in the backlog and time                   
 taken in the issue of passports, simplification of procedures, upgradation                   
 of facilities and a long term review of all aspects of passport issue.                       
                                                                                              
 The pendency, which had peaked at over 12 lakhs in May 1992 and was                          
 approximately 11.4 lakhs at the start of January 1993, was reduced to                        
 around 5.3 lakhs as on 31 December 1993.                                                     
                                                                                              
 The output of the Passport Offices increased further during 1993 with the                    
 issue of over 27 lakh fresh passports. This figure represents an increase                    
 of about 21 per cent over the output in 1992 which itself was an increase                    
 of 46.4 per cent over the 1991 output. Detailed input and output figures                     
 regarding fresh passports and miscellaneous services are at Appendix IV.                     
                                                                                              
 The factors that contributed to this increase included a stable supply of                    
 an adequate number of passport booklets, some increase in staff, the                         
 introduction of an incentive system geared to enhance the output from all                    
 personnel and a ma or overall effort.                                                        
                                                                                              
 The Passport (Amendment) Act 1993 came into effect on 1 July 1993. Major                     
 features of the Act include provisions to enable the Government to fix the                   
 fee based on the cost of production and preparation of passports and to                      
 increase the penalties for violations of the Act. Consequent to the Act                      
 coming into force, passport fees were rationalised and revised with effect                   
 from 10 July 1993 in a manner by which what was in effect a subsidy to                       
 passport holders from the rest of the public was put to an end. It is                        
 Government's policy to provide passport services on a noprofit basis.                        
 -121>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 Further systematisation and streamlining of procedures resulted in                           
 operational measures in the following areas                                                  
                                                                                              
 (1) Specific instructions for students studying in hostels or away from                      
 home were drawn up, by which minors below 15 years of age would have the                     
 option of applying at the Passport Office covering either their                              
 parents/permanent address or present place of residence while all others                     
 would need to apply at their place of normal residence for the major part                    
 of the year.                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 (2) After a thorough examination of the operation of the system of                           
 recruitment of labourers for Saudi Arabia, the procedure for issuing                         
 passports on priority on grounds of employment was clearly laid down in a                    
 manner to ensure that, no genuine case with a specific visa or demand                        
 letter would be denied a passport on the basis of authentic documentation.                   
                                                                                              
 (3) With the resumption of diplomatic relations with South Africa, the                       
 erstwhile restriction on travel to South Africa on passports of Indian                       
 nationals stands deleted. Passport Offices are to provide this service                       
 free and as a matter of course Immigration check points have also been                       
 advised that the limiting endorsement with regard to South Africa, if                        
 found on a passport, is to be treated as deleted.                                            
                                                                                              
 (4) In order to keep the public informed about the position in the                           
 processing of applications, Passport Offices now issue a weekly press                        
 release indicating the application date covered in the previous week on a                    
 first-come-first-served basis where the application is complete in all                       
 respects. This has helped to give the public an idea of when their cases                     
 are likely to be processed. It has also helped individuals to bring to the                   
 attention of the Passport Officers and the Ministry those cases which                        
 might have not been processed for various reasons such as incomplete                         
 documentation and enabled appropriate necessary action.                                      
                                                                                              
 (5) An officer of the CPV Division meets members of the public every day                     
 to hear complaints and resolve problems.                                                     
 -122>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 (6) Letters of complaint received by the CPV Division are entered into a                     
 computer database and followed up at various levels as a result of which                     
 several cases have been resolved. Complaints against staff are                               
 investigated and where it is established that action is called for, the                      
 official is proceeded against either departmentally or by the CBI.                           
                                                                                              
 (7) In order to facilitate travel where the renewal of a passport issued                     
 at another office requires verification of the particulars from the                          
 original issuing office, all passport issuing authorities can on                             
 application renew a passport for a period of one year pending verification                   
 of the document.                                                                             
                                                                                              
 (8) With the stabilisation in the supply of passport booklets, applicants                    
 wishing to have an additional booklet instead of visa sheets may now be                      
 issued an additional booklet as per their preference.                                        
                                                                                              
 (9) A `jumbo' passport booklet with an increased number of pages for the                     
 frequent traveller is to be introduced. A proto-type has been developed                      
 and is presently undergoing testing for introduction once found                              
 acceptable.                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 The Ministry worked in close consultation with various law enforcement                       
 agencies on matters concerning passport fraud. An inter-ministerial group                    
 has completed work on the format and features of machine readable                            
 passports and visas in terms of international standards and the Government                   
 of India's requirements. Proto-types are now to be produced by India                         
 Security Press (ISP) (Nasik) for testing before acceptance and                               
 introduction.                                                                                
                                                                                              
 As part of the on-going work to place the cadre management of the Central                    
 Passport Organization on a stable basis, 110 promotions and 416                              
 confirmations were effected during the year. A majority of the 400 newly                     
 created posts were filled up through promotions and nominations forwarded                    
 by the Staff Selection Committee. Vacancies at lower levels resulting from                   
 promotions are now in the process of being filled up as per prescribed                       
 procedures.                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 The Passport Offices at Calcutta, Chandigarh, jalandhar, Kozhikode,                          
 Lucknow, Madras, Patna and Tiruchirapalli were inspected during the year                     
 and specific operational problems identified and addressed.                                  
                                                                                              
 Regional Passport Office (RPO) (Bombay) suffered a serious setback with                      
 one of the blasts of 12 March 1993 occurring close to its premises,                          
 causing considerable damage. The office was however operational on the                       
 first working day after the blast with the Regional Passport Officer and                     
 his staff ensuring that services to the public were not disrupted in any                     
 major way.                                                                                   
 -123>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 Government took steps to identify alternate premises for several Passport                    
 Offices and to upgrade facilities wherever possible in existing offices.                     
 New and more spacious premises for the Regional Passport Office (Delhi)                      
 have been got ready at Bhikaji Cama Place. Completion formalities are now                    
 awaited in order to enable the office to shift. Construction of new office                   
 space at Cochin and Kozhikode is nearing completion. Proposals regarding                     
 Ahmedabad, Bhubaneswar, Hyderabad, Lucknow and Panaji are at various                         
 stages of processing. An overall package to upgrade office equipment and                     
 fittings has resulted in most Passport Offices now having fax machines,                      
 franking machines, photocopiers and electronic typewriters in addition to                    
 whenever necessary, public address systems and generator sets (to ensure                     
 availability of electricity during power cuts to run the laminating                          
 machines so as not to delay the issue of passports). Computer installation                   
 at Regional Passport Office (Bombay) which got delayed owing to the bomb                     
 blast, has been completed and is being operationalised. Site preparation                     
 at the CPV Division is presently going on.                                                   
                                                                                              
 Security of Passport Offices is an area that has required greater                            
 attention. Whenever necessary, arrangements by the State Government were                     
 supplemented with the hiring of private security agencies. This has so far                   
 been done in Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Cochin, Kozhikode, Lucknow and Madras.                    
                                                                                              
 Consular work with regard to Indian nationals abroad continued to be an                      
 area requiring constant attention particularly in regions where there is a                   
 high concentration of labour. Assistance provided to Indians included                        
 repatriation of destitute Indians, using the Missions' good offices to                       
 settle differences with local employers, tracking cases of Indians under                     
 trial in foreign countries, visiting Indians in jails, assisting with                        
 formalities for Indians who died abroad including either the performance                     
 of last rites in the country concerned or the return of the bod y to                         
 India, follow-up with the next of kin regarding necessary documentation                      
 and dues and so on.                                                                          
                                                                                              
 Figures regarding various categories of cases where consular services were                   
 provided in India and abroad may be seen at Appendix VI.                                     
 -124>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 The subject of foreigners in Indian prisons came in for specific attention                   
 during the year. An agreement for the transfer of convicted prisoners has                    
 been initialled with Spain. Similar agreements are under consideration                       
 with some other countries.                                                                   
                                                                                              
 Fees for consular services such as authentication of documents, rendered                     
 by Missions and Posts abroad were last revised on I November 1985. Due to                    
 a steep rise in costs, fees for consular services were revised with effect                   
 from 1 December 1993.                                                                        
                                                                                              
 There are approximately 13 million overseas Indians including Indian                         
 citizens and persons of Indian origin and descent who have adopted the                       
 citizenship of other countries. While the welfare of Indian citizens                         
 remains the prime responsibility of the Government of India, the close                       
 links of the entire overseas Indian community with India were sought to be                   
 strengthened further in both the cultural and economic fields. Indian                        
 Missions abroad interacted closely with overseas Indians for this purpose.                   
 -125>                                                                                        
 1993                                                                                         
 16. Administration and Organization                                                          
                                                                        Top                   
 SHRI Dinesh Singh continued to hold charge as Minister of External Affairs                   
 with Shri R L Bhatia and Shri Salman Khurshid as Ministers of State for                      
 External Affairs, during the year 1993-94.                                                   
                                                                                              
 During the year reported upon, a new Mission was opened in Brunei on 18                      
 May 1993 and an Indian Cultural Centre was opened in Johannesburg (South                     
 Africa) on 24 May 1993. In addition, the Government proposes to open 6 new                   
 Missions/Posts shortly in Ashkabad (Turkmenistan), Dushanbe (Tajikistan),                    
 Bishkek (Kyrghyzstan), Istanbul (Turkey) and Durban and Pretoria (South                      
 Africa). This is being done in accordance with policy directions given by                    
 the Government, to safeguard India's economic and political interests in                     
 the post cold war global scenario. The Mission in Kabul was re-opened on                     
 25 September 1993.                                                                           
                                                                                              
 Separately, and as a measure of economy, the Embassies in Malawi, Colombia                   
 and Zaire were closed down.                                                                  
                                                                                              
 The Ministry, therefore, has now 140 Resident Missions/Posts abroad                          
 including Indian Cultural Centre in Johannesburg and 3 special Missions.                     
 The Indian Cultural Centre in Johannesburg has recently been upgraded to                     
 Consulate General of India.                                                                  
                                                                                              
 In order to streamline the work at headquarters and to meet the changing                     
 functional requirements, two new units have been set up in the Ministry to                   
 deal with international economic co-operation and disarmament.                               
                                                                                              
 The total strength of IFS and IFS(B) at Headquarters and Indian Missions                     
 and Posts abroad is 3484. This includes certain posts borne on the budget                    
 of Ministry of Commerce but excludes ex-cadred posts and those held in                       
 abeyance. In addition, 11 posts are held by ex-cadre Heads of Mission. The                   
 cadre-wise strength is at Appendix VIII. The list of officers qualified in                   
 various foreign languages is at Appendix IX. The statement showing the                       
 number of appointments (both by direct recruitment and promotion) made in                    
 various groups in the Ministry and reserved vacancies filled by Scheduled                    
 Castes/ Scheduled Tribes during the year 1992 is at Appendix X.                              
 -126>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 In pursuance of the directive of the Standing Committee of the Parliament,                   
 the Ministry intensified efforts to purchase and construct office and                        
 residential accommodation for Indian Missions abroad, keeping in view                        
 functional requirements, condition of the real estate market in various                      
 countries and availability of funds. A plot of land was purchased in                         
 Lucknow for construction of a Regional Passport Office-cum- residential                      
 building. An agreement has been signed with Bangladesh to acquire a plot                     
 of land in Dhaka, on exchange basis, for the construction of a                               
 Chancery-cum-residential complex for Indian High Commission. Land has also                   
 been purchased in Delhi to build residential accommodation for officers                      
 and staff of the Ministry.                                                                   
                                                                                              
 Proposals are under active consideration for purchase of properties for                      
 Indian Missions in London, New York, Vladivostok, Dhaka, Almaty and                          
 Regional Passport Office, Hyderabad. The construction work at Papankala                      
 project to provide residential accommodation for Ministry's officials has                    
 begun. The interior work at the new premises for the Regional Passport                       
 Office, Delhi at Bhikaji Cama Place has been completed. The Ministry has                     
 taken various steps to enable the start of construction of a new                             
 headquarters of the Ministry on Maulana Azad Road and the Foreign Service                    
 Institute in JNU Campus.                                                                     
                                                                                              
 The pre-construction work for projects in Riyadh, Abu Dhabi, Islamabad                       
 (Phase--II) and Tashkent is at an advanced stage. The pre-construction                       
 planning for projects in Beijing, Kathmandu, Dhaka, Kiev, Muscat, Port                       
 Louis and Bonn has been initiated.                                                           
                                                                                              
 In order to assess the functioning of Indian Missions abroad, Foreign                        
 Service Inspectors inspected Missions in Abu Dhabi, Almaty, Beijing,                         
 Brunei, Bonn, Buenos Aires, Frankfurt, Islamabad, Karachi, Lima, Manila,                     
 Riyadh, Rome, Shanghai, Tashkent and Ulan Bator.                                             
                                                                                              
 The Ministry provided computers to several more Divisions at Headquarters                    
 and in Missions abroad to further improve their efficiency.                                  
 -127>                                                                                        
 1993                                                                                         
 17. Foreign Service Institute                                                                
                                                                        Top                   
 DURING the year under review, the initiative taken by the Foreign Service                    
 Institute in 1992 in organizing exclusive courses for foreign diplomats,                     
 has found wide and positive response resulting in a large demand for such                    
 courses. Although it has been impossible to cater to the entire demand,                      
 the Foreign Service Institute held the third exclusive Course from 20                        
 September to 30 November 1993. In this programme there were 26 diplomats                     
 from 17 countries. These included diplomats from the Baltic Republics                        
 (Latvia and Lithuania), the Central Asian Republics (Kazakhstan and                          
 Turkmenistan), Armenia, Moldova, Poland and Bulgaria, South Africa (ANC                      
 and PAC), Kiribati, Vietnam, Laos, Syria as well as Nepal, Bhutan, Sri                       
 Lanka and Myanmar.                                                                           
                                                                                              
 The Institute successfully completed in November 1993, the Professional                      
 Course in Diplomacy and International Relations for IFS Probationers of                      
 the 1992 batch. A special feature of their programme this year was the                       
 emphasis on getting to know the country and its institutions. Accordingly,                   
 an all round exposure was organized on defence related matters. The                          
 Probationers spent time with the Army, Air Force and Navy. During their                      
 tour on training they travelled to the Southern States of India, while for                   
 their District Attachment they chose either States in the North, East or                     
 non-home States. For the second successive year, the Probationers were                       
 given an exposure to management issues and the foreign service: this was                     
 organized at the Indian Institute of Management in Bangalore. The                            
 Probationers were also given training in the use of computers and learnt                     
 Hindi in addition to a foreign language.                                                     
 -128>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 The new economic policies of Government were appropriately highlighted in                    
 all courses carried out at the Institute. India's experience in                              
 liberalising the economy and the steps taken by her to encourage flow of                     
 investment and technology were discussed and highlighted especially in the                   
 exclusive course for foreign diplomats and in the IFS Probationers                           
 training programme.                                                                          
                                                                                              
 The Institute's language laboratory was completed this year. It is now                       
 fully operational and has borne fruit. Language courses are available to                     
 all members of the Foreign Service and these are being organized as                          
 required. Likewise, the Institute modernised and upgraded its computer                       
 training equipment and actively continued to provide computer                                
 famillarization training programmes. These programmes are exceedingly                        
 popular and the Institute receives more requests for admission than the                      
 limited capacity available.                                                                  
                                                                                              
 The Institute made special efforts to develop and foster linkages with                       
 similar institutions in other countries. During the year, the Dean visited                   
 Vienna to attend the meeting of the Associations of Directors of                             
 Diplomatic Academies and Institutes of International Relations (ADDAIR),                     
 Budapest for interaction with University of Economic Sciences and New York                   
 to attend the 8th session of the high-level committee and consultations                      
 with UNDP headquarters. Representatives of the Institute visited Botswana                    
 to discuss training requirements for ANC diplomats from South Africa, and                    
 Zimbabwe to attend the inaugural seminar for setting up of an Institute of                   
 International Affairs there. The Zambian authorities made a request to FSI                   
 for technical assistance in developing their training programmes, the                        
 discussions for which are in progress. The German Foundation in                              
 International Development has expressed a desire to establish linkages                       
 with FSI and several Asian, African and European countries have requested                    
 for training.                                                                                
                                                                                              
 Under the Ford Foundation Project, one member of the faculty visited                         
 Washington and successfully completed the MBTI Qualifying Workshop.                          
                                                                                              
 Under the UNDP Project, two Foreign Service officers will be sent abroad                     
 for the academic year 1993--94.                                                              
                                                                                              
 Apart from these special activities, the basic functions of the Foreign                      
 Service Institute continued with the training of officers and members of                     
 staff under different programmes. These included:                                            
 -129>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 (i) "Introduction to India "-Familiarisation Programme for Resident                          
 Diplomats.                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 (ii) Basic Professional Course for IFS (B) personnel being posted abroad.                    
                                                                                              
 (iii) Hand-on Computer Programmes.                                                           
                                                                                              
 (iv) Language Programmes.                                                                    
                                                                                              
 The Institute expanded its activities by arranging special programmes for                    
 non-MEA personnel going on posting to Indian Missions abroad.                                
 -130>                                                                                        
 1993                                                                                         
 18. Implementation of Official Language Policy and Propagation of Hindi                      
 Abroad                                                                                       
                                                                        Top                   
 THE Ministry continued to implement with vigour the Official Language                        
 Policy. Steps were also taken to propagate Hindi abroad. The Hindi                           
 Advisory Committee of the Ministry provided guidance in both these tasks.                    
 The Official Language Implementation Committee, headed by joint Secretary                    
 (Administration), oversaw the day to day implementation of these tasks.                      
                                                                                              
 In general terms, workshops were organized for those having working                          
 knowledge of Hindi, a Hindi module for the Indian Foreign Service                            
 Probationers of the 1992 Batch was organized, Hindi week was observed and                    
 various competitions organized at Headquarters as well as in some Indian                     
 Missions abroad and Passport Offices in India. The Ministry persisted with                   
 its decision not to purchase Roman typewriters.                                              
                                                                                              
 Special emphasis was laid on monitoring the implementation of the Official                   
 Language Policy in the Passport Offices. Officers from Headquarters                          
 inspected Passport Offices from this point of view at Chandigarh and                         
 jalandhar. The Committee of Parliament on Official Language also inspected                   
 the Passport Offices at Bangalore and Bhubaneshwar. This Committee of                        
 Parliament also received the Oral Evidence from a team of officials of the                   
 Ministry headed by the Foreign Secretary.                                                    
                                                                                              
 An encouraging picture emerged from Ministry's efforts to propagate Hindi                    
 abroad. Specifically, sets of standard Hindi literature, Hindi teaching                      
 aids like text books, audio cassettes, charts, dictionaries, etc were                        
 supplied to specific Indian Missions abroad. There were noticeable demands                   
 from institutions in foreign countries for such material. Some Indian                        
 Missions started Hindi classes on the request of local residents. In this                    
 context, the Indian Missions in Mexico, Buenos Aires, Budapest and Ulan                      
 Bator need to be mentioned.                                                                  
 -131>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 The Fourth World Hindi Conference was held from 2 to 4 December 1993 in                      
 Mauritius. Ministry of External Affairs coordinated all Indian assistance                    
 given to the Conference, which included the holding of an exhibition on                      
 Hindi language and literature, despatch of cultural troops, presentation                     
 of books and electronic bilingual typewriters, etc. A high-powered                           
 15-member official delegation, led by Shri Madhukar Rao Chowdhury, Speaker                   
 of Maharashtra Legislative Assembly, participated on behalf of the                           
 Government. Shri Ram Lal Rahi, Deputy Home Minister, was the Deputy Leader                   
 of the Indian delegation. The Conference was attended by scholars, writers                   
 and intellectuals from twenty odd countries.                                                 
                                                                                              
 The Indian Consulate in Kobe and the Embassy in Paramaribo organized Hindi                   
 Essay Competitions for students. The Ministry provided prizes for the                        
 winners.                                                                                     
 -132>                                                                                        
 1993                                                                                         
 19. Cultural Relations                                                                       
                                                                        Top                   
 THE Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) was established in                          
                                                                                              
 April 1950 with the primary objective of establishing, reviving and                          
 strengthening cultural relations and mutual understanding between India                      
 and other countries. The Council has since worked steadfastly towards that                   
 direction.                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 The major activities of the Council include: administration of scholarship                   
 schemes on behalf of Government of India for overseas students and welfare                   
 of overseas students; exchange of scholars, academicians, opinion makers,                    
 artistes and writers; exchange of exhibitions; organization of and                           
 participation in seminars and symposia; exchange of performing arts                          
 groups; establishing and maintaining chairs and professorships for Indian                    
 studies abroad; presentation of books; organizing annual Maulana Azad                        
 Memorial Lectures and Maulana Azad Essay Competitions; providing the                         
 secretariat for the Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International                                 
 Understanding; publications; maintaining Indian cultural centres abroad                      
 and supporting special bilateral programmes.                                                 
                                                                                              
 Scholarships and Welfare of Overseas Students                                                
                                                                                              
 During the year 1993-94, the Council granted scholarships to 647 new                         
 overseas students for graduate and post-graduate courses. The total number                   
 of overseas students under various ICCR scholarships is 1782. Most of the                    
 scholarship holders are from developing countries while there are a few                      
 from developed countries like Japan, France, Germany, Austria and Canada.                    
 -133>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 The Council has decided to institute a new scholarship in the memory of                      
 the late Apa Sahib Pant. The Apa Sahib Pant Memorial. Scholarship will be                    
 awarded annually from the academic year commencing July 1994 for a                           
 meritorious Kenyan student. Apa Sahib was the first Indian Commissioner to                   
 Kenya.                                                                                       
                                                                                              
 At the request of the family of the former Japanese Foreign Minister, the                    
 late Mr Saburo Okita, the Council will administer an annual scholarship in                   
 the memory of Mr Okita for an Indian student to study Indo-Japanese                          
 relations. The scheme would come into effect from the academic session                       
 commencing July 1994.                                                                        
                                                                                              
 The welfare of all foreign students is the responsibility of the Council.                    
 In May 1993, the Council organized a meeting of all Foreign Students'                        
 Advisers of various Universities throughout India to review and discuss                      
 matters related to the welfare of overseas students.                                         
                                                                                              
 The Council celebrated the birth anniversary of its founder, Maulana Azad,                   
 on 11 November as Foreign Students Day by arranging special get- togethers                   
 of overseas students in Delhi and at various Universities. On these                          
 occasions, overseas students presented cultural programmes relating to                       
 their countries. Indian Missions abroad also organized special functions                     
 to mark the day by inviting former alumni of Indian Universities, thus                       
 keeping alive contacts with former alumni who studied in India.                              
                                                                                              
 Performing Arts                                                                              
                                                                                              
 The major highlights of presentation of India's composite culture abroad                     
 have been the Days of Indian Culture in Hungary, participation at the                        
 Theatre Festival at Glasgow, Brisbane International Festival, London                         
 International Festival of Theatre, Teatre Tascabole Di Bergamo in Italy,                     
 XVIII Festival of Eastern Venezuela and Five Continents and on the                           
 occasion of the Fourth World Hindi Conference in Mauritius.                                  
                                                                                              
 During April-December 1993, the Council sponsored 33 cultural troupes                        
 abroad to 39 countries (Details at Appendix XIX). Following is an                            
 indicative list of troupes/artistes sponsored by the Council:                                
                                                                                              
 (i) Smt Madhavi Mudgal-Odissi Dancer                                                         
                                                                                              
 (ii) Shri Karaikudi Mani-Percussionist                                                       
                                                                                              
 (iii) Naya Theatre Group led by Shri Habib Tanvir                                            
                                                                                              
 (iv) Sankirtana Group, Imphal                                                                
                                                                                              
 (v) Smt Penaaz Masani-Vocalist                                                               
 -134>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 (vi) Guru Maya Dhar Raut-Odissi and pupils                                                   
                                                                                              
 (vii) Ustad Bismillah Khan-Shehnai                                                           
                                                                                              
 (viii) Kum Alarmel Valli-Bharatanatyam                                                       
                                                                                              
 (ix) Kum Neera Batra-Kathak                                                                  
                                                                                              
 (x) Karnataka College of Percussion, Bangalore                                               
                                                                                              
 (xi) Teejan Bai-Pandavani Singer                                                             
                                                                                              
 (xii) National School of Drama Repertory-Theatre Group                                       
                                                                                              
 (xiii) Jhaveri Sisters-Manipuri                                                              
                                                                                              
 During April-December 1993, the Council received 14 cultural troupes from                    
 12 countries (Details at Appendix XX). Following is an indicative ist of                     
 troupes/artistes received from abroad:                                                       
                                                                                              
 (i) Zanoubi Folk Dance Troupe-Syria                                                          
                                                                                              
 (ii) Children's ensemble-D P R Korea                                                         
                                                                                              
 (iii) Talking Drums-Nigeria                                                                  
                                                                                              
 (iv) Sonia Amelio-Mexico                                                                     
                                                                                              
 (v) Het Folkloristisch Danstheater-Netherlands                                               
                                                                                              
 (vi) Ms Zaniboni-France                                                                      
                                                                                              
 (vii) Kroumata Percussion Ensemble-Sweden                                                    
                                                                                              
 (viii) Reda Dance Troupe- Egypt                                                              
                                                                                              
 (ix) Compagnie Didier Thorne-France                                                          
                                                                                              
 (x) VTM Military Band-Switzerland                                                            
                                                                                              
 The Council organized 7 special performances of Indian artistes in                           
 honour of VVIP visitors/delegates/conferences (Details at Appendix XXI).                     
                                                                                              
 Exhibitions                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 Major exhibitions abroad organized by the Council were "Magical Hands-                       
 living Indian Crafts" in Schallaburg, Austria from April to November 1993                    
 and "India Songs-Multiple Streams in Contemporary Indian Art" in five                        
 Australian cities from April to October 1993. Both these exhibitions were                    
 highly acclaimed and the one in Austria had a record number of 1,00,000                      
 visitors. Other exhibitions organized by the Council during April-December                   
 1993 were: " Photographic Exhibition My Land My People" in Egypt and                         
 Lebanon; "Children's Paintings" in South Korea; and "Contemporary Art                        
 Exhibition-Meeting Point" in UK (Details at Appendix XXII).                                  
                                                                                              
 Visitors Programme                                                                           
                                                                                              
 During April-December 1993, the Council sponsored and assisted 35 Indian                     
 scholars, intellectuals, academicians and artists to participate in                          
 seminars, symposia, study tours, etc abroad (Details at Appendix XXIII).                     
 During the same period, the Council received 31 visitors from 12 countries                   
 under the Incoming Visitors Programme (Details at Appendix XXIV).                            
 -135>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 Seminars and Symposia                                                                        
                                                                                              
 The Council in collaboration with the Supreme Council of Culture of the                      
 Arab Republic of Egypt. organized a seminar on "Contemporary Cultural                        
 Relations between India and Egypt" in New Delhi from 20 to 23 December                       
 1993, focussing on contemporary literature, theatre and cinema. Eminent                      
 scholars and personalities from both countries participated in the                           
 dialogue. The seminar was second in the series on Indo-Egyptian relations.                   
                                                                                              
 The Council also collaborated with the Khuda Baksh Library, Patna, in                        
 organization of the Seminar on "Historical & Cultural Links between India                    
 & Uzbekistan from ancient times to present day".                                             
                                                                                              
 Indian Cultural Centres Abroad                                                               
                                                                                              
 To promote greater awareness and appreciation of India's composite culture                   
 abroad, the Council has established cultural centres in Georgetown                           
 (Guyana), Moscow (Russia), Port Louis (Mauritius), Paramaribo (Suriname),                    
 Cairo (Egypt), Berlin (Germany), London (UK), Johannesburg (South Africa)                    
 and Jakarta (Indonesia).                                                                     
                                                                                              
 The centres with the exception of Berlin, London and Johannesburg impart                     
 lessons in Indian music, dance, yoga and languages. For this purpose                         
 teachers are deputed by the Council. Each centre maintains a library and a                   
 reading room and organizes lectures, symposia, exhibitions, essay                            
 competitions, plays, dance and music, performances and screening of films.                   
                                                                                              
 The centres in Berlin and London primarily focus their activities on the                     
 local decision makers, opinion makers, intellectuals and friends of India                    
 through lectures, seminars, symposia, cultural programmes and films. The                     
 centres also maintain contact with a wide cross-section of students,                         
 teachers, scholars and cultural personalities.                                               
                                                                                              
 The Cultural Centre in Johannesburg established in May 1993 has started                      
 its activities and these presently relate to information and consular                        
 services. The centre is expected to enhance its activities in the                            
 financial year 1994-95.                                                                      
 -136>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 All cultural centres abroad extend a supportive role to ICCR's activities                    
 by coordinating events from India in their respective regions.                               
                                                                                              
 Visiting Professors and Chairs of India Studies                                              
 The Council deputes visiting professors abroad to teach Indology, Indian                     
 languages and other related subjects. The deputation of Professors abroad                    
 is done under the bilateral Cultural Exchange Programme and where                            
 'institutional arrangements exist with ICCR.                                                 
                                                                                              
 ICCR presently has on deputation abroad 19 Professors teaching Hindi,                        
 Sanskrit, Tamil and Anthropology/Sociology (Details at Appendix XXV)                         
                                                                                              
 Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Essay Competition                                                    
                                                                                              
 The Council annually organizes an Essay Competition for citizens of SAARC                    
 countries below the age of 30 years. The Essay Competition is held in                        
 three languages, namely, Hindi, Urdu, and English. The topics for the                        
 Essay Competition relate to the ideals of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad and                        
 their relevance in the contemporary situation with particular focus on the                   
 SAARC region.                                                                                
                                                                                              
 Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Memorial Lecture                                                     
                                                                                              
 The 27th Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Memorial Lecture was delivered on 6                         
 December 1993 by justice Mohamad Sai'd Al Ashmawy, Chief justice of the                      
 Higher State Security and Criminal Court of the Arab Republic of Egypt.                      
 The topic of the lecture was "Religion and Politics".                                        
                                                                                              
 Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding                                       
                                                                                              
 The Council provides the secretariat for the Jawaharlal Nehru Award for                      
 International Understanding. All nominations received for the award were                     
 processed and compiled.                                                                      
                                                                                              
 Indo-US Sub-Commission on Education and Culture                                              
                                                                                              
 The Council provides the secretariat for the Indo-US Sub-Commission on                       
 Education & Culture.                                                                         
                                                                                              
 The thrust of the Indo-US Sub-Commission's programmes has been the area of                   
 new information technology. A series of programmes under the umbrella of                     
 "Information 2000+" have been organized in India.                                            
 -137>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 These are:                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 (i) an exhibition on "Structures" at National Science Centre, New Delhi;                     
                                                                                              
 (ii) "Classroom 2000+", a programme on Distance Learning by the Department                   
 of Education and Central Institute of Educational Technology;                                
                                                                                              
 (iii) a symposium on the "Future of the Mind: Mind of the Future";                           
                                                                                              
 (iv) seminar on "New Mass Communications Environment";                                       
                                                                                              
 (v) Workshop on "Low Altitude Aerial Photography" in co-operation with the                   
 US and the Indian experts from the Archaeological Survey of India.                           
                                                                                              
 Indo-British Discussion Group The Council provides the secretariat for the                   
 Indo-British Discussion Group. This year the meeting of the Indo-British                     
 Discussion Group took place in London in June 1993 and the theme of the                      
 discussions was "Dominant Trends in International Relations in the 1990s".                   
                                                                                              
 Africa Day, UN Day and PLO Day                                                               
                                                                                              
 The Council organized special functions to observe the Africa Day (25                        
 May), the UN day (24 October) and the PLO Day (29 November).                                 
                                                                                              
 Publications                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 The Council brings out six quarterly journals in different languages                         
 English ('Indian Horizons' and 'Africa Quarterly'), Hindi (Gagananchal),                     
 French (Rencontre avec l'Inde), Spanish (Papeles de la India) and Arabic                     
 (Thakafatul Hind). A special issue of Gagananchal was brought out on the                     
 occasion of the 4th International Hindi Conference held at Mauritius. This                   
 issue was unique as it carried a large number of contributions from                          
 non-Indian scholars writing in Hindi. Similarly, a special issue of Africa                   
 Quarterly on Post-apartheid South Africa was brought out in celebration of                   
 the process underway for dismantling racism in South Africa. To mark the                     
 Poetry Festival, a Special Issue of Indian Horizons was brought out on                       
 Indian poetry and was dedicated to the memory of Prof A K Ramanujam.                         
                                                                                              
 The Council has also brought out two books, "Studying in India" which is a                   
 revised edition of a publication providing information on India for                          
 foreign students wishing to study in India, and "Contemporary Relevance of                   
 Sufism" which was released on 11 November 1993 by President as part of the                   
 Maulana Azad Celebration, is a compendium of papers from 50 scholars both                    
 from India and abroad who had participated in an international symposium                     
 in New Delhi on Sufism.                                                                      
 -138>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 The Council also participated in three international book fairs: the 45th                    
 Frankfurt Book Fair, the Madison and Chicago Book Fair and the Paris                         
 International Book Fair.                                                                     
                                                                                              
 Library                                                                                      
                                                                                              
 The Council has a well-stocked library of around 70,000 titles. The                          
 prestigious personal collection of Maulana Azad is also housed in the                        
 library in a special section called Ghosha-E-Azad. These rare books and                      
 manuscripts are being laminated so that they can be preserved for                            
 reference use by researchers and scholars. An annotated catalogue of the                     
 Maulana Azad collection is also being prepared. This year a total of 105                     
 new books have already been accessioned and the process of accessioning                      
 more books, relevant to the Council's interests is underway.                                 
                                                                                              
 Presentation of Books/Musical Instruments                                                    
                                                                                              
 During the period April-December 1993, the Council under its presentation                    
 programme presented books to institutions, distinguished persons,                            
 academicians and opinion makers in the 30 countries. Major presentations                     
 were: donation of 1000 books on India to Silpakorn University in Bangkok,                    
 Thailand and presentation of a set of collected works of Mahatma Gandhi to                   
 University of Botswana. In addition, the Council presented musical                           
 instruments and audio/video tapes to institutions in 15 countries (Details                   
 at Appendix XXVI).                                                                           
                                                                                              
 Administration                                                                               
                                                                                              
 The Statutory Bodies of the Council viz the Governing Body, General                          
 Assembly and Finance Committee were reconstituted in July 1993 for a                         
 period of three years and the meetings were held on 19 and 20 July 1993.                     
                                                                                              
 Programmes/events Scheduled for Period January-March 1994                                    
                                                                                              
 Performing Arts                                                                              
                                                                                              
 The Council proposes to send 10 cultural troupes abroad to about 12                          
 countries. ICCR would collaborate with jazz India in the organization of                     
 "Jazz Yatra" a biennial event in February 1994. In addition to the above,                    
 ICCR will receive 3 cultural troupes from France, Germany and Mongolia.                      
 -139>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 Visitors Programme                                                                           
                                                                                              
 ICCR will sponsor three scholars to the IXth World Sanskrit Conference to                    
 be held in Melbourne, Australia and a Qari to participate in the                             
 International Quranic Reciters Assembly to be held in Kuala Lumpur,                          
 Malaysia. Visitors from Austria, China, Germany, Hungary, the Netherlands,                   
 Turkey, USA and Uzbekistan are to be hosted.                                                 
 -140>                                                                                        
 1993                                                                                         
 20. International Assistance for Maharashtra Earthquake Victims                              
                                                                        Top                   
 THE devastating earthquake in Maharashtra in September 1993 evoked                           
 immediate response from friendly countries, International                                    
 Organizations/Institutions including the concerned agencies of the United                    
 Nations, NGOs and NRIs from all over the world, The countries which sent                     
 assistance, cash and/or in kind, include the following:                                      
                                                                                              
 Algeria, Australia, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Canada, China, Czech Republic,                       
 Denmark, France, Germany, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Luxemberg,                   
 Maldives, Mauritius, Mongolia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,                       
 Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Portugal, Qatar, Singapore, Spain, Sweden,                           
 Switzerland, Thailand. Turkey, UAE, UK, USA and Uzbekistan.                                  
 -141>                                                                                        
 1993                                                                                         
 APPENDIX-I List of Divisions.                                                                
                                                                        Top                   
 Ministry of External Affairs-List of Divisions.                                              
                                                                                              
 Specialized & Support Divisions                                                              
                                                                                              
 1 Administration Division                                                                    
                                                                                              
 2 Bureau of Security                                                                         
                                                                                              
 3 Coordination Division                                                                      
                                                                                              
 4 CPV & 01 Division                                                                          
                                                                                              
 5 Disarmament and International Security Affairs Division                                    
                                                                                              
 6 Economic Division                                                                          
                                                                                              
 7 Economic Coordination Unit                                                                 
                                                                                              
 8 Establishment Division                                                                     
                                                                                              
 9 External Publicity Division                                                                
                                                                                              
 10 Foreign Service Institute                                                                 
                                                                                              
 11 International Organization Division                                                       
                                                                                              
 12 Legal & Treaties Division                                                                 
                                                                                              
 13 MER Division                                                                              
                                                                                              
 14 Policy Planning and Research Division                                                     
                                                                                              
 15 Protocol (including Conference Division)                                                  
                                                                                              
 16 Special Kuwait Cell                                                                       
                                                                                              
 Territorial Division                                                                         
                                                                                              
 1 Africa Division                                                                            
                                                                                              
 2 AMS Division                                                                               
                                                                                              
 3 Asia Pacific Division                                                                      
                                                                                              
 4 ASEAN Division-South East Asia Division                                                    
                                                                                              
 5 BSM Division                                                                               
                                                                                              
 6 Central Asia Division                                                                      
                                                                                              
 7 Europe East Division                                                                       
                                                                                              
 8 Europe West Division                                                                       
                                                                                              
 9 Gulf Division                                                                              
                                                                                              
 10 IPA Division                                                                              
                                                                                              
 11 LAC Division                                                                              
                                                                                              
 12 North East Division                                                                       
                                                                                              
 13 South East Asia Division                                                                  
                                                                                              
 14 WANA Division                                                                             
 -145>                                                                                        
 1993                                                                                         
 APPENDIX-II Division-wise List of Countries                                                  
                                                                                              
 Ministry of External Affairs-Division-wise List of Countries and                             
 Regions.                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 AFRICA DIVISION                                                                              
 1         Angola                 16 Gabon             31 Nigeria                             
 2         Benin                  17 Gambia            32 Rwanda                              
 3         Botswana               18 Ghana             33 Sao Tome &                          
                                                       Principe                               
 4         Burkina Faso           19 Guinea            34 Senegal                             
 5         Burundi                20 Guinea Bissau     35 Seychelles                          
 6         Cameroon               21 Kenya             36 Sierra Leone                        
 7         Cape Verde Islands     22 Lesotho           37 South Africa                        
 8         Central African                                                                    
 Republic  23 Liberia             38 Swaziland                                                
 9         Chad                   24 Madagascar        39 Tanzania                            
 10        Comoros                25 Malawi            40 Togo                                
 11        Congo                  26 Mali              41 Uganda                              
 12        Cote d'Ivoire          27 Mauritius         42 Zaire                               
 13        Equatorial Guinea      28 Mozambique        43 Zambia                              
 14        Eritrea                29 Namibia           44 Zimbabwe                            
 15        Ethiopia               30 Niger                                                    
           AMS DIVISION                                                                       
 1         Canada                 2 United States of                                          
                                  America                3 The Bahamas                        
           ASEAN DIVISION                                                                     
 1         Brunei                 3 Malaysia           5 Singapore                            
 2         Indonesia              4 Philippines        6 Thailand                             
           ASIA PACIFIC DIVISION                                                              
 1         Australia              7 Marshall Islands   14 Society                             
                                                       Islands                                
 2         Cook Islands           8 Nauru              15 Tonga                               
 3         Democratic People's    9 New Zealand        16 Tuvalu                              
                                                       17 UN Trust                            
           Republic of Korea      10 New Caledonia     Territori- es in                       
                                                       South Pacific                          
 -146>                                                                                        
 4         Fiji                   11 Papua New Guinea  18 Vanuatu                             
 5         Japan                  12 Republic of       19 Western Samoa                       
             Korea                                                                            
 6         Kiribati               13 Solomon Islands                                          
           BSM DIVISION                                                                       
 1         Bangladesh             3 Myanmar            5 Indian Ocean                         
 2         Maldives               4 Sri Lanka                                                 
           CENTRAL ASIA DIVISION                                                              
                                                                                              
 1         Azerbaijan             4 Tajikistan         6 Turkmenistan                         
 2         Kazakhstan             5 Turkey             7 Uzbekistan                           
 3         Kyrghyzstan                                                                        
           EE DIVISION                                                                        
 1         Albania                9 Georgia            16 Romania                             
 2         Armenia                10 Hungary           17 Russia                              
 3         Belarus                11 Latvia            18 Slovak                              
                                                       Republic                               
 4         Bosnia-Herzegovina     12 Lithuania         19 Slovenia                            
 5         Bulgaria               13 Macedonia         20 Ukraine                             
                                  (Not yet recognised)                                        
 6         Croatia                14 Moldova           21 Yugoslavia                          
                                                       (FRY-                                  
                                                       Serbia and                             
                                                       Montene- gro)                          
 7         Czech Republic         15 Poland                                                   
 8         Estonia                                                                            
  EW                                                                                          
 DIVISION                                                                                     
 1         Austria                10 Holy See, The     19 Norway                              
 2         Belgium                11 Iceland           20 Portugal                            
 3         Cyprus                 12 Ireland           21 San Marino                          
 4         Denmark                13 Italy             22 Spain                               
 5         Finland                14 Liechtenstein     23 Sweden                              
 6         France                 15 Luxemberg         24 Switzerland                         
 7         Germany, Federal       16 Malta 25 United                                          
                                  Kingdom of                                                  
           Republic of                                                                        
 8         Gibraltar              17 Monaco            Great Britain                          
                                                       and                                    
 9         Greece                 18 Netherlands       Northern Ireland                       
 -147>                                                                                        
           GULF DIVISION                                                                      
 1         Bahrain                4 Oman               7 Saudi Arabia                         
 2         Iraq                   5 Qatar              8 United Arab                          
                                                       Emirates                               
 3         Kuwait                 6 Republic of Yemen                                         
           IPA DIVISION                                                                       
 1         Afghanistan            2 Iran               3 Pakistan                             
           LAC DIVISION                                                                       
 1         Antigua & Barbuda      13 Dominican         25 Panama                              
                                  Republic                                                    
 2         Argentina              14 Ecuador           26 Paraguay                            
 3         Barbados               15 El Salvador       27 Peru                                
 4         Belize                 16 Grenada           28 St                                  
                                                       Christopher and                        
 5         Bolivia                17 Guatemala         Nevis                                  
 6         Brazil                 18 Guyana            29 St Lucia                            
 7         Caynan lslands         19 Haiti             30 St Vincent                          
                                                       and the                                
 8         Chile                  20 Honduras          Grenadines                             
 9         Colombia               21 Jamaica           31 Suriname                            
 10        Costa Rica             22 Netherlands       32 Trinidad &                          
                                                       Tabago                                 
                                  Antilles                                                    
 11        Cuba                   23 Mexico            33 Turks and                           
                                                       Caicos                                 
                                                       Islands                                
 12        Commonwealth of        24 Nicaragua         34 Uruguay                             
           Dominica                                    35 Venezuela                           
           NORTH EAST DIVISION                                                                
 1         Bhutan                 3 Hong Kong          5 Nepal                                
 2         China                  4 Mongolia           6 Taiwan                               
           SOUTH EAST ASIA                                                                    
           DIVISION                                                                           
 1         Cambodia               2 Laos               3 Vietnam                              
 -148>                                                                                        
           WANA DIVISION                                                                      
 1         Algeria                7 Lebanon            13 Somalia                             
 2         Djibouti               8 Libya              14 Sudan                               
 3         Egypt                  9 Mauritania         15 Syria                               
 4         Israel                 10 Morocco           16 Tunisia                             
 5         Jordan                 11 Palestine                                                
                                  12 SADR (Sahrawi                                            
 6         League of Arab States  Arab Democratic                                             
                                  Republic)                                                   
 -149>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 1993                                                                                         
 APPENDIX-III Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or                                    
 renewed by India                                                                             
 Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or                                                 
 renewed by India with other countries in 1993.*                                              
                                                                                              
 S NO TITLE OF CONVENTIONS/         DATE OF      DATE OF        DATE ON                       
      TREATIES/AGREEMENTS ETC       SIGNATURE/   RATIFICATION     WHICH                       
                                    ADOPTION     ACCESSION OR   ENTERED                       
                                                 ACCEPTANCE        INTO                       
                                                                  FORCE                       
                                                                                              
   MULTILATERAL                                                                               
                                                                                              
 1 International Sugar                                                                        
   Agreement 1992                  31.12.1992    19.1.1993   20.1.1993                        
                                                                                              
 2 Convention on the               30.7.1980     9.7.1993    8.8.1993                         
   Elimination of All                                                                         
   Forms of Discrimination                                                                    
   Against Women                                                                              
                                                                                              
 3 Amendments to Convention        9.1.1989      10.9.1993   10.9.1993                        
   and Operating Agreement                                                                    
   on International Maritime                                                                  
   Satellite Organization                                                                     
                                                                                              
 4 International Coffee            4.6.1993      22.9.1993   1.10.1993                        
   Agreement 1983                                                                             
                                                                                              
 5 United Nations Framework        10.6.1993     1.11.1993   31.1.1994                        
   Convention on Climate                                                                      
   Change                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 6 Agreement on SAARC              11.4.1993                                                  
   Preferential Trading                                                                       
   Arrangement                                                                                
                                                                                              
 7 Agreement between Govern-       27.10.1993                                                 
   ment of Republic of India                                                                  
   and Government of Union                                                                    
   of Myanmar and the Govern-                                                                 
   ment of the Kingdom                                                                        
   of Thailand on the                                                                         
   Determination of the                                                                       
   trijunction between the                                                                    
   Three Countries in the                                                                     
   Andaman                                                                                    
                                                                                              
 8 SAARC Convention on             23.11.1990    31.8.1993   15.9.1993                        
   Narcotic Drugs and                                                                         
   Psychotropic Sub-                                                                          
   stances                                                                                    
                                                                                              
   BILATERAL                                                                                  
                                                                                              
   Belgium                                                                                    
                                                                                              
 9 Double taxation Avoidance       26.4.1993                                                  
   Agreement between the                                                                      
   Government of the Re-                                                                      
   public of India and                                                                        
   the Government of                                                                          
   Kingdom of Belgium                                                                         
                                                                                              
   Belarus                                                                                    
                                                                                              
 10 Agreement between the          14.5.1993                                                  
    Government of the Re-                                                                     
    public of India and the                                                                   
    Government of the Re-                                                                     
    public of Belarus on                                                                      
    Cooperation in Science                                                                    
    and Technology                                                                            
                                                                                              
 * This list is not exhaustive.                                                               
 -150>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 11 Agreement between the          14.5.1993                 14.5.1993                        
    Government of the Re-                                                                     
    public of India and the                                                                   
    Government of the Re-                                                                     
    public of Belarus on                                                                      
    Cooperation in the                                                                        
    spheres of Culture,                                                                       
    Arts, Education, Mass                                                                     
    Media, Sports and Tourism                                                                 
                                                                                              
   Bhutan                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 12 Memorandum of Understanding    4.1.1993                                                   
    between the Government                                                                    
    of India and the Royal                                                                    
    Government of Bhutan regard-                                                              
    ing the Sankosh Multipurpose                                                              
    Project                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 13 Exchange of Letters on         17.3.1993                 17.3.1993                        
    Paro Airport Terminal                                                                     
    Complex                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 14 Protocol to the Agreement      13.5.1993                 13.5.1993                        
    between the Government                                                                    
    of India and the Royal                                                                    
    Government of Bhutan                                                                      
    regarding the Chukha                                                                      
    Hydro-Electric Project                                                                    
    (rescheduling of the loan                                                                 
    repayment and power tariff)                                                               
                                                                                              
 15 Exchange of Letters on         16.11.1993                16.11.1993                       
    Sale of Bhutan Lotteries                                                                  
                                                                                              
   China                                                                                      
                                                                                              
 16 Agreed minutes of the          5.1.1993                                                   
    Fourth Session of India-                                                                  
    China joint Group on Eco-                                                                 
    nomic Relations and Trade,                                                                
    Science and Technology                                                                    
                                                                                              
 17 Trade protocol between         5.1.1993                  1.1.1993                         
    the Government of the                                                                     
    Republic of India and                                                                     
    the Government of the                                                                     
    People's Republic of                                                                      
    China for the calendar                                                                    
    year 1993                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 18 Memorandum of Understanding    18.1.1993                 18.1.1993                        
    between the Government                                                                    
    of Republic of India and                                                                  
    the Government of the                                                                     
    People's Republic of China                                                                
    on Cooperation in the field                                                               
    of Geology and Mineral                                                                    
    Resources                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 19 Agreement on the Maintenance   7.9.1993                  7.9.1993                         
    of Peace and Tranquillity                                                                 
    along the Line of Actual                                                                  
    Control in the India-China                                                                
    Border Areas                                                                              
                                                                                              
 20 Protocol, for Extension        7.9.1993                  7.9.1993                         
    of Border Trade across                                                                    
    Shipkila Pass                                                                             
                                                                                              
 21 Agreement between the          7.9.1993                  7.9.1993                         
    Ministry of Information                                                                   
    and Broadcasting of the                                                                   
    Republic of India and the                                                                 
    Ministry of Radio, Film,                                                                  
    Television of the People's                                                                
    Republic of China on Radio                                                                
    and Television Cooperation                                                                
 -151>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 22 Agreement on Environmental     7.9.1993                  7.9.1993                         
    Cooperation between the                                                                   
    Government of the Republic                                                                
    of India and the Government                                                               
    of the People's Republic of                                                               
    China                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 23 Protocol on Festival of        23.11.1993                23.11.1993                       
    India in China between                                                                    
    the Ministry of Human                                                                     
    Resource Development of                                                                   
    the Government of the                                                                     
    Republic of India and the                                                                 
    Ministry of Culture of the                                                                
    Government of the People's                                                                
    Republic of China                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Eritrea                                                                                      
                                                                                              
 24 Protocol on the Est-           17.9.1993                 17.9.1993                        
    ablishment of Diplomatic                                                                  
    Relations between the Re-                                                                 
    public of India and the                                                                   
    State of Eritrea                                                                          
                                                                                              
 25 Protocol on the Establish-     17.9.1993                 17.9.1993                        
    ment of Consular Relations                                                                
    between the Government of                                                                 
    the Republic of India and                                                                 
    the Government of the State                                                               
    of Eritrea                                                                                
                                                                                              
   European Community                                                                         
                                                                                              
 26 Cooperation Agreement          20.12.1993                                                 
    between the Republic of                                                                   
    India and the European                                                                    
    Community on Partnership                                                                  
    and Development                                                                           
                                                                                              
    European Space Agency                                                                     
                                                                                              
 27 Cooperative Agreement          11.11.1993                11.11.1993                       
    between the Indian Space                                                                  
    Research Organization and                                                                 
    the European Space Agency                                                                 
                                                                                              
    France                                                                                    
                                                                                              
 28 Protocol of the seventh        27.7.1993                 27.7.1993                        
    meeting of the Indo-                                                                      
    French Working Group on                                                                   
    Mineral Exploration and                                                                   
    Development of the Indo                                                                   
    French joint Committee                                                                    
    on Economic and Technical                                                                 
    Cooperation                                                                               
                                                                                              
 29 Agreement for Cooperation      17.11.1993                17.11.1993                       
    in the Field of Outer                                                                     
    Space between the Indian                                                                  
    Space Research Organiza-                                                                  
    tion and the Centre                                                                       
    National D'Etudes                                                                         
    Spatiales                                                                                 
                                                                                              
  Great Britain                                                                               
                                                                                              
 30 Extradition Treaty between     22.9.1992     15.11.1993  15.11.1993                       
    the Government of the                                                                     
    Republic of India and                                                                     
    the Government of the                                                                     
    United Kingdom of Great                                                                   
    Britain and Northern                                                                      
   Ireland                                                                                    
 -152>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 31 Memorandum of Under-           13.9.1993                 13.9.1993                        
    standing between the                                                                      
    Government of India and                                                                   
    the Government of the                                                                     
    United Kingdom of Great                                                                   
    Britain and Northern                                                                      
    Ireland on Cooperation                                                                    
    for the Promotion of                                                                      
    International Under-                                                                      
    standing and Progress                                                                     
    in the Conservation,                                                                      
    Management and Sustain-                                                                   
    able Development of                                                                       
    Forests                                                                                   
                                                                                              
   Israel                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 32 Agreed Minutes between         17.5.1993                 17.5.1993                        
    the Ministry of External                                                                  
    Affairs of the Republic of                                                                
    India and the Ministry of                                                                 
    Foreign Affairs of the                                                                    
    State of Israel                                                                           
                                                                                              
 33 Agreement on Scientific        17.5.1993                                                  
    and Technological `Co-                                                                    
    operation between the                                                                     
    Government of the Republic                                                                
    of India and the Government                                                               
    of the State of Israel                                                                    
                                                                                              
 34 Cultural Agreement between     18.5.1993                                                  
    the Government of the                                                                     
    Republic of India and                                                                     
    Government of the                                                                         
    State of Israel                                                                           
                                                                                              
 35 Agreement between the          18.5.1993                                                  
    Government of the Re-                                                                     
    public of India and the                                                                   
    Government of the State                                                                   
    of Israel on Cooperation                                                                  
    in the fie1d of Tourism                                                                   
                                                                                              
 36 Memorandum of Under-           17.5.1993                 17.5.1993                        
    standing between the                                                                      
    Government of the Republic                                                                
    of India and the Government                                                               
    of the State of Israel on                                                                 
    Economic Cooperation                                                                      
                                                                                              
 Japan                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 37 Loan Agreement No ID-C7        3.12.1992                 3.12.1992                        
    for Hydro-carbon Sector                                                                   
    Program between the Overseas                                                              
    Economic Cooperation Fund,                                                                
    Japan and the President of                                                                
    India                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 38 Loan Agreement No ID-P83       3.12.1992                 3.12.1992                        
    for Anpara B Thermal Power                                                                
    Station Construction Project                                                              
    (IV) between the Overseas                                                                 
    Economic Cooperation Fund,                                                                
    Japan and the President of                                                                
    India                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 39 Exchange of Notes signed       7.12.1993                 7.12.1993                        
    between the Government of                                                                 
    India and the Government                                                                  
    of Japan for extension of                                                                 
    the Japanese Debt Grant                                                                   
    Assistance to India for                                                                   
    the year 1993-94 of Yen                                                                   
    251,833,000                                                                               
 -153>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 40 Loan Agreement No ID-P84       21.12.1992                21.12.1992                       
    for Yamuna Action Plan                                                                    
    Project between the Over-                                                                 
    seas Economic Cooperation                                                                 
    Fund, Japan and the                                                                       
    President of India                                                                        
                                                                                              
 41 Loan Agreement No ID-P86       21.12.1992                21.12.1992                       
    for Gandhar Gas Based                                                                     
    Combined Cycle Power Pro-                                                                 
    ject (III) between the                                                                    
    Overseas Economic Co-                                                                     
    operation Fund, Japan and                                                                 
    the President of India                                                                    
                                                                                              
 42 Loan Agreement No ID-P85       21.12.1992                21.12.1992                       
    for Srisailam Power Trans-                                                                
    mission System Project                                                                    
    between the Overseas Ec-                                                                  
    onomic Co operation Fund,                                                                 
    Japan and the President                                                                   
    of India                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 43 Exchange of Notes between      28.5.1993                 28.5.1993                        
    the Government of the                                                                     
    Republic of India and the                                                                 
    Government of Japan for                                                                   
    extension of Japanese grant                                                               
    assistance to India of 700                                                                
    million yen for increase of                                                               
    food production in India                                                                  
                                                                                              
 44 Exchange of Notes between                                                                 
    the Government of the Re-                                                                 
    public of India and the                                                                   
    Government of japan for                                                                   
    extension of the follo-                                                                   
    wing Japanese assistance                                                                  
    to India :                                                                                
                                                                                              
 (i)    Debt relief Grant          28.6.1993                 28.6.1993                        
        Aid of Yen                                                                            
        272,151,000                                                                           
                                                                                              
 (ii)   Grant Aid of Yen           28.6.1993                 28.6,1993                        
        907,000,000 for                                                                       
        Updating Training                                                                     
        Equipment for                                                                         
        Nautical and                                                                          
        Marine Engineering                                                                    
        Education                                                                             
                                                                                              
 (iii)  Anpara'B'Thermal           7.12.1993                 7.12.1993                        
        Power Projecte                                                                        
        (Stage V)                                                                             
                                                                                              
 (iv)   Bakreswar Thermal          7.12.1993                 7.12.1993                        
        Power Station Project                                                                 
                                                                                              
 (v)    Faridabad Thermal          7.12.1993                 7.12.1993                        
        Power Station                                                                         
        Project                                                                               
                                                                                              
 (vi)   Bridge across the          7.12.1993                 7.12.199?                        
        River Yamuna near                                                                     
        Naini Project                                                                         
                                                                                              
 (vii)  Four-Laning of             7.12.1993                 7.12.1993                        
        National Highway                                                                      
        No 5 Project                                                                          
                                                                                              
 (viii) Small-scale Indus-         7.12.1993                 7.12.1993                        
        tries Development                                                                     
        Programme (Stage IV)                                                                  
 -154>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 Kazakhstan                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 45 Agreement between the          25.5.1993                                                  
    Government of the Republic                                                                
    of India and the Government                                                               
    of the Republic of Kazakhstan                                                             
    on Co-operation in Science                                                                
    and Technology                                                                            
                                                                                              
 Malaysia                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 46 Memorandum of Understanding    2.2.1993                  2.2.1993                         
    on Defence Cooperation                                                                    
    between the Government                                                                    
    of the Republic of India                                                                  
    and the Government of                                                                     
    Malaysia                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 Moldova                                                                                      
                                                                                              
 47 Agreement between the          19.3.1993                                                  
    Government of the                                                                         
    Republic of India and                                                                     
    the Government of the                                                                     
    Republic of Moldova                                                                       
    regarding Cooperation                                                                     
    in Education, Science,                                                                    
    Culture, Arts, Mass-Media,                                                                
    Sports, Tourism and                                                                       
    Youth Affairs                                                                             
                                                                                              
 Myanmar                                                                                      
                                                                                              
 48 Agreement for Mutual           30.3.1993                 30.3.1993                        
    Cooperation between the                                                                   
    Government of the Republic                                                                
    of India and the Government                                                               
    of the Union of Myanmar for                                                               
    Reducing Demand and Preve-                                                                
    nting Illicit Trafficking in                                                              
    Narcotic Drugs and Psycho-                                                                
    tropic Substances and                                                                     
    Related Matters                                                                           
                                                                                              
 Poland                                                                                       
                                                                                              
 49 Agreement between the Gove-    12.1.1993                                                  
    rnment of the Republic of                                                                 
    India and the Government                                                                  
    of the Republic of Poland                                                                 
    on Cooperation in Science                                                                 
    and Technology                                                                            
                                                                                              
 Romania                                                                                      
                                                                                              
 50 Agreement between the Gove-    18.10.93                                                   
    rnment of the Republic of                                                                 
    India and the Government                                                                  
    of the Republic of Romania                                                                
    on Cooperation in Science                                                                 
    and Technology                                                                            
 -155>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 Russian Federation                                                                           
                                                                                              
 51 Agreement on Cooperation       28.1.1993                 28.1.1993                        
    between the Government of                                                                 
    the Republic of India and                                                                 
    the Government of the                                                                     
    Russian Federation                                                                        
    on the Matters relating to                                                                
    Competence of the Ministry                                                                
    of Finance of the Republic                                                                
    of India and the Ministry of                                                              
    Security of Russian                                                                       
    Federation in the sphere of                                                               
    combating Illicit Traffic in                                                              
    Narcotics Drugs and Psychot-                                                              
    ropic Substances                                                                          
                                                                                              
 52 Agreement between the Gov-     28.11.1993                                                 
    ernment of the Republic of                                                                
    India and the Government                                                                  
    of Russian Federation on                                                                  
    Cultural and Scientific                                                                   
    Cooperation                                                                               
                                                                                              
 53 Agreement on Cooperation       18.10.1993                                                 
    between Ministry of Home                                                                  
    Affairs, Government of                                                                    
    India and the Ministry                                                                    
    of Internal Affairs                                                                       
    of the Russian Federation                                                                 
                                                                                              
    Singapore                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 54 Memorandum of Understanding    5.2.1993                                                   
    between the Government of                                                                 
    the Republic of India                                                                     
    and the Government of the                                                                 
    Republic of Singapore                                                                     
    concerning Cooperation in                                                                 
    the fields of Arts, Heritage                                                              
    and the Archives                                                                          
                                                                                              
    South Africa                                                                              
                                                                                              
 55 Protocol on the Establishment   22.11.1993               22.11.1993                       
    of Diplomatic Relations                                                                   
    between the Republic of                                                                   
    India and the Republic                                                                    
    of South Africa                                                                           
                                                                                              
 56 Protocol on the Establishment   22.11.1993               22.11.1993                       
    Consular Relations between                                                                
    the Republic of India and                                                                 
    the Republic of South Africa                                                              
                                                                                              
 Syria                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 57 Memorandum of Understanding    8.12.1993                 8.12.1993                        
    between the Department of                                                                 
    Space, Government of the                                                                  
    Republic of India and the                                                                 
    General Organization of                                                                   
    Remote Sensing of the                                                                     
    Syrian Arab Republic on                                                                   
    Cooperation in the                                                                        
    Peaceful Applications                                                                     
    of Remote Sensing                                                                         
                                                                                              
 Tajikistan                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 58 Memorandum of Understanding between                      14.12.1993                       
    the Government of the Republic of India                                                   
    and Government of the Republic of                                                         
    Tajikistan                                                                                
 -156>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 59 Agreement between the          15.2.1993                 15.2.1993                        
    Government of the Republic                                                                
    of India and the Government                                                               
    of the Republic of Tajiki-                                                                
    stan on Cooperation in the                                                                
    spheres of Culture, Arts,                                                                 
    Education, Science, Mass-                                                                 
    Media (including Cinemato-                                                                
    graphy) and Sports                                                                        
                                                                                              
 Thailand                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 60 Agreement between India and    27.10.1993                                                 
    Government of the Kingdom of                                                              
    Thailand on the Maritime Bo-                                                              
    undary between the two                                                                    
    countries in the Andaman Sea                                                              
    from Point 7 to the Trijunc-                                                              
    tion Point (Point T) between                                                              
    India, Thailand and Myanmar                                                               
                                                                                              
 Uzbekistan                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 61 Agreement between the          29.7.1993                                                  
    Government of the Republic                                                                
    of India and the Government                                                               
    of Republic of Uzbekistan on                                                              
    Cooperation in Science and                                                                
    Technology                                                                                
                                                                                              
 62 Treaty on the Principles of    24.5.1993     5.1.1994    5.1.1994                         
    Inter-State Relations and                                                                 
    Cooperation between the                                                                   
    Republic of India and the                                                                 
    Republic of Uzbekistan                                                                    
                                                                                              
 UNDP                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 63 IND/93/012-Upgradation of      5.5.1993                  5.5.1993                         
    R&D Facilities of RDSO,                                                                   
    Lucknow (Phase II)                                                                        
                                                                                              
 64 IND/92/031-Comparative Study   3.3.1993                  3.3.1993                         
    of Corporate and Industry                                                                 
    Competitiveness in India and                                                              
    selected Countries in the                                                                 
    Asia-Pacific Region                                                                       
                                                                                              
 65 IND/93/006-Modernisation of    11.3.1993                 11.3.1993                        
    the Administration and More                                                               
    Effective Use of Trade Marks                                                              
    in India                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 66 IND/93/014-Quality Assurance   22.3.1993                 22.3.1993                        
    in Telecom Materials                                                                      
    Products and Components                                                                   
                                                                                              
 67 IND/93/007-Managment           7.5.1993                                                   
    Development of Senior                                                                     
    Administrators                                                                            
                                                                                              
 68 IND/93/016/A/01/99-            16.8.1993                 16.8.1993                        
    Assistance to Indian                                                                      
    Railways for Organizational                                                               
    Development and System                                                                    
    Changes                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 69 IND/93/004/A/01/99-            22.6.1993                 22.6.1993                        
    Institute for Auto                                                                        
    Parts Technology                                                                          
 -157>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 Zambia                                                                                       
                                                                                              
 70 Mutual agreement between the   4.12.1993                 4.12.1993                        
    Government of the Republic                                                                
    of India and the Government                                                               
    of the Republic of Zambia                                                                 
    to Combat Illicit                                                                         
    Trafficking in Narcotic                                                                   
    Drugs and Psychotropic                                                                    
    Substances and Money                                                                      
    Laundering                                                                                
 -158>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 APPENDIX-III A                                                                               
                                                                                              
 Full Powers issued during 1993.                                                              
                                                                                              
 S NO     CONVENTION/TREATY                         DATE OF FULL POWERS                       
                                                                                              
 1 Full Powers in Favour of Shri M V Chandrashekara,          18.2.1993                       
   Minister of State, Ministry of Finance to sign                                             
   the Convention between the Government of the                                               
   Republic of India and the Government of                                                    
   the Republic of Italy for the Avoidance of                                                 
   Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal                                               
   Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income                                                    
                                                                                              
 2 Full Power in favour of Shri S L Malik,                    30.6.1993                       
   Ambassador of India to Vietnam to sign the                                                 
   Air Services Agreement between the                                                         
   Government of the Republic of India and                                                    
   the Government of Socialist Republic of Vietnam                                            
 -159>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 APPENDIX-III B                                                                               
                                                                                              
 Instruments of Ratification issued during 1993.                                              
                                                                                              
 S NO     CONVENTION/TREATY                   DATE OF           DATE OF                       
                                              SIGNATURE/     INSTRUMENT                       
                                              ADOPTION                                        
                                                                                              
 1 Convention Establishing the multilateral   13.4.1992      6.9.1993                         
   Investment Guarantee Agency                                                                
                                                                                              
 2 Cultural Agreement between the Government  13.1.1993     25.8.1993                         
   of the Republic of India and the                                                           
   Government of the Republic of Chile                                                        
                                                                                              
 3 Cultural Agreement between the Government  22.9.1992     13.8.1993                         
   of the Republic of India and the                                                           
   Government of the Republic of                                                              
   Suriname                                                                                   
 -160>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 1993                                                                                         
 APPENDIX-IV Statement showing the number of Fresh and                                        
 Miscellaneous applications                                                                   
 Statement showing the number of Fresh and Miscellaneous applications                         
 received and services granted by each Passport Office during the year                        
 1993.                                                                                        
                         FRESH APPLICATIONS      MISCELLANEOUS SERVICES                       
                                                                                              
 S NO  STATION           RECEIVED    GRANTED         RECEIVED   GRANTED                       
                                                                                              
 1 AHMEDABAD              111325      124080           60467      60517                       
                                                                                              
 2 BANGALORE              111035      104068           32583      31532                       
                                                                                              
 3 BARELLEY                59603       61906           29213      28566                       
                                                                                              
 4 BHOPAL                  25833       26410           11856      11848                       
                                                                                              
 5 BHUBANESHWAR            10069       11114            3263       3255                       
                                                                                              
 6 BOMBAY                 211059      209480          155031     158233                       
                                                                                              
 7 CALCUTTA                42470       51720           29796      29246                       
                                                                                              
 8 CHANDIGARH              73766       95554           39156      37923                       
                                                                                              
 9 COCHIN                 137771      183535           76620      76168                       
                                                                                              
 10 DELHI                 129632      128186           75190      72132                       
                                                                                              
 11 GOA                    16065       16015           15723      15780                       
                                                                                              
 12 GUWAHATI                8840        9358            2794       2914                       
                                                                                              
 13 HYDERABAD             202069      215090          108142     102011                       
                                                                                              
 14 JAIPUR                 67030      106104           28657      29875                       
                                                                                              
 15 JALANDHAR              80042      110070           35611      36989                       
                                                                                              
 16 KOZHIKODE             206917      341000          103262     192911                       
                                                                                              
 17 LUCKNOW               139215      138457           33628      33575                       
                                                                                              
 18 MADRAS                152674      188416           66646      68047                       
                                                                                              
 19 NAGPUR                 12934       12890            3548       3454                       
                                                                                              
 20 PATNA                  45485       46661           13469      13270                       
                                                                                              
 21 TRICHY                218491      334847           56508      55433                       
                                                                                              
 22 TRIVANDRUM            124600      194319           75051      74719                       
                                                                                              
    GRAND TOTAL          2186925     2709280         1056214    1138398                       
 -161>                                                                                        
 1993                                                                                         
 APPENDIX-V Statement showing the Revenue and Expenditure                                     
 Figures                                                                                      
                                                                                              
 Statement showing the Revenue and Expenditure Figures of Passport                            
 Offices during the year 1993.                                                                
 S NO     OFFICE                      REVENUE               EXPENDITURE                       
                                      EARNED                   INCURRED                       
                                                                                              
 1 AHMEDABAD                         25186018                   4711127                       
                                                                                              
 2 BANGALORE                         24556840                   5436392                       
                                                                                              
 3 BAREILLY                          12712307                   4171790                       
                                                                                              
 4 BHOPAL                             5841435                   1030511                       
                                                                                              
 5 BHUBANESHWAR                       2122435                    686795                       
                                                                                              
 6 BOMBAY                            57623170                  13184579                       
                                                                                              
 7 CALCUTTA                          11386505                   3022308                       
                                                                                              
 8 CHANDIGARH                        16859165                   5765348                       
                                                                                              
 9 COCHIN                            29152568                   7402184                       
                                                                                              
 10 DELHI                            29953574                   8444914                       
                                                                                              
 11 GOA                               4219296                   1603441                       
                                                                                              
 12 GUWAHATI                          1960136                    741401                       
                                                                                              
 13 HYDERABAD                        43607389                   8071238                       
                                                                                              
 14 JAIPUR                            5548346                   4135097                       
                                                                                              
 15 JALANDHAR                        17411576                   5262669                       
                                                                                              
 16 KOZHIKODE                        45642319                   8256166                       
                                                                                              
 17 LUCKNOW                          27573448                   6106207                       
                                                                                              
 18 MADRAS                           33136816                   6662241                       
                                                                                              
 19 NAGPUR                            2554935                   1056565                       
                                                                                              
 20 PATNA                            7444640                     1701047                      
                                                                                              
 21 TRICHY                          49836603                     6848198                      
                                                                                              
 22 TRIVANDRUM                      27592916                     5463702                      
                                                                                              
    TOTAL                           481922437                   109763920                     
 CPV DIVISION                             -                     324072325                     
                                                                                              
 TOTAL                             481922437                   433836245                      
 -162>                                                                                        
 1993                                                                                         
 APPENDIX-VI Consular Data for 1993.                                                          
 Consular Data for 1993.                                                                      
                                                                                              
 1 Number of Attestations                                      2,08,342                       
                                                                                              
 2 Number of Indians repatriated at Government cost                 237                       
                                                                                              
 3 Number of Indians arrested abroad*                             3,503                       
                                                                                              
 4 Number of deaths of Indians reported to the Ministry*          1,181                       
                                                                                              
 5 Number of foreigners arrested in India*                          912                       
                                                                                              
 6 Number of foreigners died in India*                              229                       
                                                                                              
 7 (i) Numer of requests for extradition received by                                          
       Government of India from abroad                                7                       
                                                                                              
  (ii) Number of requests for extradition from                                                
       Government of India to foreign Governments                     2                       
                                                                                              
 8 Number of lost/damaged passport cases received*               11,150                       
 -163>                                                                                        
 1993                                                                                         
 APPENDIX-VII Names of Ambassadors/High Commissioners of India                                
                                                                                              
 Names of Ambassadors/High Commissioners of India abroad who have taken                       
 charge                                                                                       
 from 1.1.93 to 17.12.93.                                                                     
 EMBASSIES/HIGH COMMISSIONS                                                                   
                                                                                              
 S NO      COUNTRY       CAPITAL        AMBASSADOR/         DATE OF                           
                                        HIGH COMMISSIONER   APPOINTMENT                       
                                                                                              
 1 Azerbaijan            Baku           K Gajendra Singh     9.12.1993                        
                                                                                              
 2 Bahrain               Bahrain        Rajanikanta Verma    18.11.1993                       
                                                                                              
 3 Belarus               Minsk          R C Shukla           16.1.1993                        
                                                                                              
 4 Brunei Darussalam     Brunei Dar-                                                          
                         ussalam        Brig (Retd)          28.6.1993                        
                                        Bhawani Singh                                         
                                                                                              
 5 Bulgaria              Sofia          B P Aggarwal         7.7.1993                         
                                                                                              
 6 China                 Beijing        C Dasgupta           8.1.1993                         
                                                                                              
 7 Cuba                  Havana         R S Rathore          18.1.1993                        
                                                                                              
 8 Cyprus                Nicosia        Y M Tiwari           14.7.1993                        
                                                                                              
 9 France                Paris          Ranjit Sethi         8.11.1993                        
                                                                                              
 10 Guyana               Georgetown     P L Goyal            1.4.1993                         
                                                                                              
 11 Hong Kong            Hong Kong      Smt Kamlesh Kumar    1.2.1993                         
                                                                                              
 12 Iran                 Tehran         S K Arora            25.1.1993                        
                                                                                              
 13 Maldives             Male           Dr Harswarup Singh   29.3.1993                        
                                                                                              
 14 Namibia              Windhoek       K S Jasrotia         1.2.1993                         
                                                                                              
 15 Norway               Oslo           S K Mathur           23.6.1993                        
                                                                                              
 16 Peru                 Lima           T Cherpoot            29.1.1993                       
                                                                                              
 17 Singapore            Singapore      BMC Nayar              3.9.1993                       
                                                                                              
 18 Spain                Madrid         G D Atuk              22.3.1993                       
 -164>                                                                                        
 1993                                                                                         
 APPENDIX-VIII Cadre Strength at Headquarters and                                             
 Missions/Posts abroad during 1992-93                                                         
 Cadre Strength at Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad during 1992-93                      
 including posts budgeted by Ministry of Commerce-December 1993.                              
 SL NO         CADRE/POST                    POSTS AT   POST AT   TOTAL                       
                                         HEADQUARTERS   MISSIONS                              
                                                                                              
 IFS (A)                                                                                      
                                                                                              
 1 Grade-I                                      4            17      21                       
                                                                                              
 2 Grade-II                                     5            23      28                       
                                                                                              
 3 Grade-III                                   25           101     126                       
                                                                                              
 4 Grade-IV                                    32            77     109                       
                                                                                              
 5 junior Administrative Grade/Senior Scale    52           182     234                       
                                                                                              
 6 junior Scale                                 3            30      33                       
                                                                                              
 7 Training Reserve (Prob) junior Scale         -            27      27                       
                                                                                              
 8 Training Reserve for all Grades             10             -      10                       
                                                                                              
 9  Leave Reserve                              19             -      19                       
                                                                                              
 10 Deputation Reserve                         20             -      20                       
                                                                                              
 IFS (B)                                                                                      
                                                                                              
 1 Grade-I                                     25           119     144                       
                                                                                              
 2 Grade-II/III                               171           153     324                       
                                                                                              
 3 Grade-IV                                   351           378     729                       
                                                                                              
 4 Grade-V/VI                                 451           192     643                       
                                                                                              
 5 Grade-II of Cypher Sub-Cadre                81           123     204                       
                                                                                              
 6 Selection Grade of Stenographer Cadre       16            34      50                       
                                                                                              
 7 Grade-I of Stenographer Cadre               31           146     177                       
                                                                                              
 8 Grade-II of Stenographer Cadre             212           177     389                       
                                                                                              
 9 Grade-III of Stenographer Cadre             42            77     119                       
                                                                                              
 10 Combined Research Cadre                    21             5      26                       
                                                                                              
 11 Interpreters' Cadre                        11            24      35                       
                                                                                              
 12 L & T Cadre                                16             1      17                       
                                                                                              
 TOTAL                                       1598          1886    3484                       
 -165>                                                                                        
 1993                                                                                         
 APPENDIX-IX List of Officers qualified in various foreign languages                          
 List of Officers qualified in various foreign languages.                                     
 SL NO COMPULSORY FOREIGN LANGUAGE                          NO OF OFFICERS                    
 1     Arabic                                               88                                
 2     Bahasa Indonesia                                     9                                 
 3     Bulgarian                                            1                                 
 4     Burmese                                              1                                 
 5     Chinese                                              50                                
 6     Dutch                                                1                                 
 7     French                                               84                                
 8     German                                               37                                
 9     Gorkhali/Nepali                                      1                                 
 10    Hungarian                                            1                                 
 11    Italian                                              5                                 
 12    Japanese                                             23                                
 13    Kazaka                                               1                                 
 14    Kishwahili                                           9                                 
 15    Laotian                                              -                                 
 16    Malay                                                1                                 
 17    Persian                                              13                                
 18    Polish                                               1                                 
 19    Portuguese                                           14                                
 20    Russian                                              73                                
 21    Serbo-Croatian                                       3                                 
 22    Sinhalese                                            1                                 
 23    Spanish                                              49                                
 24    Swedish                                              1                                 
 25    Thai                                                 1                                 
 26    Tibetan                                              3                                 
 27    Turkish                                              3                                 
 28    Ukrainian                                            1                                 
 29    Vietnamese                                           2                                 
 -166>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 1993                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 APPENDIX-X Statement showing the number of appointments                                      
 Statement showing the number of appointments (both by direct                                 
 recruitment and promotion) made in various groups                                            
 in the Ministry of External Affairs and reserved vacancies                                   
 filled by scheduled castes/scheduled tribes during the year 1993.                            
                                                                                              
 GROUP     TOTAL NO OF   NUMBER OF   NUMBER OF RESERVED   NUMBER OF                           
           VACANCIES     VACANCIES   CANDIDATES APPOINED  VACANCIES                           
           FILLED        RESERVED                         DE-RESERVED                         
                         FOR                              DUE TO NON-                         
                                                          AVAILABILITY                        
                                                          OF RESERVED                         
                                                          CANDIDATES                          
                                                                                              
                                      SC      ST                                              
                                                                                              
 Group'A'    37            6    3     6        1          As per rules                        
                                                                                              
 Group'B'    99           25    7    21        5          As per rules                        
                                                                                              
 Group'C'   130           35    6    28        6          As per rules                        
                                                                                              
 Group'D'    30            5          5        Nil        As per rules                        
 (Excluding Sweepers)                                                                         
                                                                                              
 -167>                                                                                        
 1993                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 APPENDIX-XI Revenue Expenditure of the MEA during the Year                                   
 1993-94.Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry of External Affairs                              
 during the Financial Year 1993-94.                                                           
                                                                                              
                                              REVISED ESTIMATES 1993-94                       
                                                (IN CRORES OF RUPEES)                         
                                                                                              
 Headquarters                                                     48.88                       
                                                                                              
 Missions/Posts abroad                                           317.75                       
                                                                                              
 International Conferences and Meetings                           10.79                       
                                                                                              
 Hospitality Charges                                               6.50                       
                                                                                              
 Contribution to International Organizations (including UN)       21.76                       
                                                                                              
 Central Passport Organization                                    50:90                       
                                                                                              
 Special Diplomatic Expenditure                                  156.29                       
                                                                                              
 Grants-in-Aid to ICCR                                            15.00                       
                                                                                              
 Other Miscellaneous items                                        14.64                       
                                                                                              
 Loss by Exchange                                                 23.90                       
                                                                                              
 Payment to SCI for charter operations between Madras-Port Blair                              
 sector                                                            8.30                       
                                                                                              
 Payment to Indian Airlines for charter operations between                                    
 Madras-Port Blair sector                                          1.07                       
                                                                                              
 Aid to other Countries                                                                       
                                                                                              
 Aid to Bangladesh                                                 1.70                       
                                                                                              
 Aid to Bhutan                                                    62.00                       
                                                                                              
 Aid to Nepal                                                     13.00                       
                                                                                              
 Aid to Sri Lanka                                                  5.73                       
                                                                                              
 Aid to Maldives                                                  21.17                       
                                                                                              
 Aid to Cambodia                                                   4.05                       
                                                                                              
 Aid to Other Developing Countries                                38.54                       
                                                                                              
 Aid under AFRICA Fund                                             1.27                       
                                                                                              
 TOTAL REVENUE EXPENDITURE:                                      823.24                       
                                                                                              
 -168>                                                                                        
 1993                                                                                         
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
 APPENDIX-XII Expenditure on Indian Missions/Posts abroad                                     
  Expenditure on Indian Missions/Posts abroad and Headquarters                                
  of the Ministry of External Affairs in 1993-94.                                             
                                                                                              
 The estimated expenditure on the Headquarters Organization of the Ministry                   
 during the current financial year (1993-94) is expected to be Rs 48.88                       
 crores which is 5.94% of the total estimated revenue expenditure of this                     
 Ministry. Out of this, Rs 11.57 crores will be on Salaries and Wages, Rs                     
 11. 00 crores on Travel Expenses, Rs 15.97 crores on Office Expenses, Rs                     
 5.50 crores on Publicity and Rs 4.00 crores on Rent and Maintenance.                         
                                                                                              
 The total estimated expenditure on Indian Missions/Posts is expected to be                   
 Rs 317.75 crores during the current financial year which works out to                        
 38.60% of the total revenue expenditure of this Ministry. Out of this, an                    
 amount of Rs 133.83 crores is for Salaries (including Foreign Allowance),                    
 OTA and Wages, Rs 38.34 crores for Travel Expenses (Transfer Passages/Home                   
 Leave Passages and Local Tours), Rs 65.04 crores for Office Expenses and                     
 Rs 80.54 crores for Rent, Rates and Taxes as well as for Repairs and                         
 Maintenance of Government owned/rented accommodation in Missions abroad.                     
 Average expenditure per Mission abroad (including Publicity) works out to                    
 Rs 2.25 crores.                                                                              
                                                                                              
 The remaining 55.46% of the estimated revenue expenditure of the Ministry                    
 is being incurred on various aid programmes for neighbouring and other                       
 developing countries including ITEC programmes, Aid under AFRICA Fund,                       
 SAARC and SCAAP Programmes, contribution to United Nations Organizations                     
 and other International bodies, Passport Organizations, Hospitality,                         
 Grants-in-Aid to Indian Council for Cultural Relations and other                             
 miscellaneous items.                                                                         
                                                                                              
 In the Capital Section there is a total provision of Rs 79.76 crores in RE                   
 93-94. Out of this an amount of Rs 15.00 crores is for Loan to Nepal, Rs                     
 15.00 crores for Loan to Bhutan, Rs 4.00 crores for Loan to Bangladesh and                   
 Rs 44.25 crores for Construction and Purchase of Properties.                                 
 -169>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 1993                                                                                         
 APPENDIX-XIII VVIPs Visits to India during 1993.                                             
 VVIPs Visits to India during 1993.                                                           
                                                                                              
 SL NO   NAME OF VISITOR                     DATE                                             
                                                                                              
 Heads of State, Vice President, Heads of Government                                          
                                                                                              
 1 His Majesty Jigme Singhye Wangchuk    4 to 7 January 1993                                  
   King of Bhutan                                                                             
                                                                                              
 2 His Excellency Mr R Premadasa           14 to 17 January 1993                              
   President of Sri Lanka (Private)                                                           
                                                                                              
 3 His Majesty Jigme Singhye Wangchuk      22 to 25 January 1993                              
   King of Bhutan (Private)                                                                   
                                                                                              
 4 His Excellency Mr John Major         23 to 27 January 1993                                 
   Prime Minister of United Kingdom                                                           
 5 His Excellency Mr Boris Yeltsin       27 to 29 January 1993                                
   President of Russia                                                                        
                                                                                              
 6 His Excellency Mr Felipe Gonzalez    7 to 10 February 1993                                 
   Prime Minister of Spain                                                                    
                                                                                              
 7 Mrs Rafiaakaroui wife of Prime Minister of  13 February 1993                               
   Tunisia (Private)                                                                          
                                                                                              
 8 His Excellency Mr Abdumalik Abdullojonov  14 to 18 February 1993                           
   Prime Minister of Tajikstan                                                                
                                                                                              
 9 Mrs Maurine wife of Zambian Vice President                                                 
   (Private)                            16 February 1993                                      
                                                                                              
 10 His Excellency Dr Helmut Kohl         18 to 22 February 1993                              
    German Chancellor                                                                         
                                                                                              
 11 His Excellency Mr Arpad Goncz President of   22 February 1993                             
    Hungary (Transit)                                                                         
                                                                                              
 12 Her Royal Highness the Princess of Wales                                                  
    (Princess Diana)                          2 to 6 March 1993                               
    (Transit)                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 13 His Excellency Mr Mircea Ion Snegur President                                             
 of Moldova                                  17 to 19 March 1993                              
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
 14 His Excellency Mr LI Jong OK       25 to 27 March 1993                                    
    Vice President of Democratic Peoples Republic of Korea                                    
                                                                                              
 15 His Excellency Mr G P Koirala         26 to 28 March 1993                                 
    Prime Minister of Nepal (Private)                                                         
 -170>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 16 His Excellency Dr Mahattir Mohd       31 March 1993                                       
    Prime Minister of Malaysia (Transit)                                                      
                                                                                              
 17 His Excellency Mr Cassam Uteem       2 to 9 April 1993                                    
    President of Mauritius                                                                    
                                                                                              
 18 His Excellency Dr Mahattir Mohd      9 April 1993                                         
    Prime Minister of Malaysia (Transit)                                                      
                                                                                              
 19 His Excellency Mr R Premadasa          12 to 15 April 1993                                
    President of Sri Lanka (Private)                                                          
                                                                                              
 20 His Excellency Dr Robert Mugabe         6 to 12 May 1993                                  
    President of Zimbabwe (Transit)                                                           
                                                                                              
 21 His Majesty King Birendra Bir   6 to 12 May 1993                                          
   Bikram Shah of Nepal                                                                       
                                                                                              
 22 His Excellency Mr Ali Hassan Mwinyi      10 to 15 May 1993                                
    President of Tanzania                                                                     
 23 His Excellency Mr V F Kebich    12 to 15  May 1993                                        
    Prime Minister of Belarus                                                                 
                                                                                              
 24 His Excellency Mr Blaise Compaore   30 May to 3 June 1993                                 
                                                                                              
    President of Burkina Faso                                                                 
 25 His Excellency Mr Bernard Dowiyogo  9 to 11 June 1993                                     
    President of Nauru                                                                        
                                                                                              
 26 His Excellency Mr Ranil Wickremesinghe  21 to 23 June 1993                                
    Prime Minister of Sri Lanka                                                               
                                                                                              
 27 His Excellency Mr N A Nazarbaev      20 July 1993                                         
    President of Kazakhstan (Transit)                                                         
                                                                                              
 28 Her Excellency Mrs Mary Robinson    26 September to 3 October 1993                        
    President of Ireland                                                                      
                                                                                              
 29 Chairman Yasser Arafat of Palestine Liberation                                            
    Organization          28 September to 2 October 1993                                      
    (Transit)                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 30 His Excellency Mr J Rawlings President of Ghana                                           
    (Transit)                 1 and 2 October 1993                                            
                                                                                              
 31 His Excellency Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni  4 October 1993                                  
    President of Uganda (Transit)                                                             
                                                                                              
 32 His Excellency Mr Fjt Chiluba  5 to 8 October 1993                                        
    President of Zambia                                                                       
 -171>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 33 King Carl Gustaf of Sweden     10 to 18 October 1993                                      
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
 34 His Excellency Mr R F M Lubbers    26 to 28 October 1993                                  
    Prime Minister of Netherlands                                                             
                                                                                              
 35 King Carl Gustaf of Sweden (Transit)   4 and 5 November 1993                              
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
 36 Crown Prince of Nepal (Private)   8 to 17 November 1993                                   
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
 37 His Excellency Mr Ong Teng Cheong    21 to 30 November 1993                               
    President of Singapore (Private)                                                          
                                                                                              
 38 His Excellency Mr A Jugnauth         22 to 24 November 1993                               
    Prime Minister of Mauritius (Private)                                                     
                                                                                              
 39 His Majesty King Birendra Bir Bikram Shah of                                              
    Nepal (Private)                    29 November 1993                                       
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
 Deputy Prime Ministers, Foreign Ministers                                                    
 and Others        11 December 1993                                                           
                                                                                              
 1 Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jabar Al-Sabash    10 and 11 February 1993                        
   First Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister                                           
   of Kuwait                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 2 His Excellency Mr Datuk Abdullah HJ Haji Ahmed                                             
   Badawi                           14 February 1993                                          
   Foreign Minister of Malaysia (Private)                                                     
                                                                                              
 3 His Excellency Mr D Fokker        2 to 16 April 1993                                       
   Labour Minister of Mauritius (Transit)                                                     
                                                                                              
 4 His Excellency Mr Farouo Qaddoumi     5 to 9 April 1993                                    
   Foreign Minister of Palestine                                                              
                                                                                              
 5 Datuk Abdullah Badawi Foreign Minister of                                                  
   Malaysia (Transit)               6 April 1993                                              
                                                                                              
 6 His Excellency Mr Vermon J Mwaanga     18 to 21 April 1993                                 
    Foreign Minister of Zambia                                                                
                                                                                              
 7 His Excellency Mr Theodere Hele    20 to 24 April 1993                                     
   Foreign Minister of Benin                                                                  
                                                                                              
 8 His Excellency Mr Omar Mustafa Al Muntasir   29 and 30 April 1493                          
   Foreign Minister of Libya                                                                  
                                                                                              
 9 His Excellency Mr Shimon Peres Foreign Minister                                            
   of Israel                               16 to 18 May 1993                                  
 -172>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 10 His Excellency Mr Fathulla Jameel      17 to 21 May 1993                                  
    Foreign Minister of Maldives                                                              
                                                                                              
 11 His Excellency Mr IU F larov         24 to 31 May 1993                                    
    Deputy Prime Minister of Russia (Transit)                                                 
                                                                                              
 12 His Excellency Mr A S M Mostafizur Rahman    11 to 13 June 1993                           
    Foreign Minister of Bangladesh                                                            
                                                                                              
 13 His Excellency Mr Josef Zieleniec     16 to 21 July 1993                                  
    Foreign Minister of Czech Republic                                                        
                                                                                              
 14 His Excellency Mr Hedayat Amin Arsala   16 to 21 July 1993                                
    Foreign Minister of Afghanistan (Private)                                                 
                                                                                              
 15 His Excellency Mr G A Abilsyitov     19 to 25 July 1993                                   
    Deputy Prime Minister of Kazakhstan                                                       
                                                                                              
 16 His Excellency Mr T M Miryakubov      26 to 30 July 1993                                  
    Deputy Prime Minister of Uzbekistan                                                       
                                                                                              
 17 His Excellency Dr Qmar Bin Abdul N Al Zawawi   1 and 2 August 1993                        
    Special Advisor of Sultan of Oman                                                         
                                                                                              
 18 His Excellency Mr E O Kapabaev     4 to 6 August 1993                                     
    Foreign Minister of Kyrghyzstan                                                           
                                                                                              
 19 His Excellency Mr Trivimi Velliste  14 to 17 October 1993                                 
    Foreign Minister of Estonia                                                               
                                                                                              
 20 His Excellency Sq Ldr Prasong Soonsiri 3 to 8 November 1993                               
    Foreign Minister of Thailand                                                              
                                                                                              
 21 Sir Duglas Hurd               15 to 18 November 1993                                      
    Secretary of State of United Kingdom                                                      
                                                                                              
 22 His Excellency Mr R F Botha      21 to 23 November 1993                                   
    Foreign Minister of South Africa                                                          
                                                                                              
 23 His Excellency Mr Yladislav jouanovic 27 November to 1 December 1993                      
    Foreign Minister of Yugoslav                                                              
                                                                                              
 24 His Excellency Mr L I Ruihuan   29 November to 4 December 1993                            
    Chairman NCCPPC China                                                                     
                                                                                              
 25 His Excellency Mr Saidkassimov  1 to 4 December 1993                                      
    Foreign Minister of Uzbekistan                                                            
                                                                                              
 -173>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 1993                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 APPENDIX-XIV Visits abroad of the President, VP and PM                                       
                                                                                              
 Visits abroad of the President, Vice President and Prime Minister of India                   
 during 1993.                                                                                 
 1  Visit of the Vice President     27 January to I February 1993                             
           to Paris                                                                           
                                                                                              
 2  Visit of the Prime Minister to    7 to 11 April 1993                                      
     Thailand and to Bangladesh                                                               
                                                                                              
 3 Visit of the Vice President  6 and 7 May 1993                                              
         to Sri Lanka                                                                         
                                                                                              
 4 Visit of the Vice President   16 to 29 May 1993                                            
       to United Kingdom                                                                      
                                                                                              
 5 Visit of the Prime Minister to    23 to 26 May 1993                                        
         Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan                                                            
                                                                                              
 6 Visit of the Prime Minister to Muscat 14 to 16 June 1993                                   
                                                                                              
 7 Visit of the Vice President to   28 June to 5 July 1993                                    
                      France & Morocco                                                        
                                                                                              
 8 Visit of the President to Ukraine,  13 to 26 July 1993                                     
   Turkey, Hungary, United  Kingdom and Greece                                                
                                                                                              
 9 Visit of the Prime Minister to Bhutan    21 and 22 August 1993                             
                                                                                              
 10 Visit of the Prime Minister to     6 to 11 September 1993                                 
      China and Korea                                                                         
                                                                                              
 11 Visit of the Prime Minister to Iran     20 to 22 September 1993                           
                                                                                              
 12 Visit of the Vice President to Vietnam  22  to 28 September 1993                          
      and Republic of Korea                                                                   
 -174>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 1993                                                                                         
 APPENDIX-XV Major International Conferences /Meetings/ Seminars                              
                                                                                              
 Major International Conferences /Meetings/ Seminars etc organized by                         
 Inter-                                                                                       
 Governmental Organizations at which Government of India was represented in                   
 1993-94.                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 1 Sixth meeting of Rockfeller Chiang Mai 10 to 15 February 1993 Institute                    
 Programmeon Rice Bio-technology                                                              
                                                                                              
 2 13th Conference of Asia and Pacific Labour Tehran 21 to 23April 1993                       
 Ministers                                                                                    
                                                                                              
 3 14th Session of UNCHS Nairobi 26 April to 5 May 1993                                       
                                                                                              
 4 UNICEF Executive Board Session New York 26 April to 7 May 1993                             
                                                                                              
 5 11th Meeting of Technical Committee on Thimpu 30 April to 2 May 1993                       
 Health and Population Activities of SAARC Countries                                          
                                                                                              
 6 4th Meeting of Commonwealth Ministers Nicosia 5 to 9 July 1993                             
 responsible for Women's Affairs                                                              
                                                                                              
 7 42nd Conference of State Labour Ministers New Delhi 7and 8 July 1993                       
                                                                                              
 8 7th Session of the UN Group of Experts on Geneva 12 to 21 July 1993                        
 Transport of Dangerous Goods                                                                 
                                                                                              
 9 ICGEB Meeting Vienna 18 to 23 July 1993                                                    
                                                                                              
 10 Regional Consultation on "Managing Wate Manila 24 to 27 August 1993                       
 Resources to meet Mega City needs"                                                           
                                                                                              
 11 Water Supply & Sanitation Collaborative Rabat 6 to 11 September 1993                      
 Council Meeting                                                                              
                                                                                              
 12 Regional Seminar on Nature of and Beijing14 to 16 September 1993                          
 rationale for the protection of plant varieties                                              
                                                                                              
 13 To serve as a Member of International UK 20 to 24 September 1993                          
 Commission on Radiological Protection                                                        
                                                                                              
 14 ESCAP sponsored meeting on New Delhi 27 September to 1 October 1993                       
 Network ofRegional Training Institution in Asia and Pacific -175>                            
                                                                                              
 15 8th SAARC Technical Committee Meeting on Dhaka 6 and 7 October 1993                       
 Women Development                                                                            
                                                                                              
 16 Seminar on Examination of Geneva October to 2 November 1993 Patent                        
 Applications                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 17 ESCAP Conference on Asia and Bangkok 27 October to 2 November 1993                        
 Urbanisation in Pacific Region                                                               
                                                                                              
 18 Meeting on Safety Procedure Hague 15 to 26 November 1993 on Chemical                      
 Weapons TheStorage Facilities                                                                
                                                                                              
 19 UNDP-ESCAP sponsored Third Congress of Bombay 20 to 24 November 1993                      
 Citynet                                                                                      
                                                                                              
 20 SAARC Ministerial level Conference Kathmandu 21 to 23 November 1993 on                    
 "Women & Family Health"                                                                      
                                                                                              
 21 ILO Seminar on Sexual harassment at Manila 22 to 26 November 1993 Work                    
 Place                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 22 East & South Asian Workshop Beijing 29 November to 3 December 1993 on                     
 Strategies for Accelerating Improvement of Civil Registration and Vital                      
 Statistics Systems                                                                           
                                                                                              
 23 Meeting on Chemical The Hague 29 Nov-ember to 3 December 1993 Weapons                     
 Destruction Facility                                                                         
                                                                                              
 24 Asia Pacific Workshop or Micro Kaula 2 to 5 December 1993                                 
 -Enterprisesand Entrepreneur Development for Island and Rural Lumpur                         
                                                                                              
 25 International Meeting on Plant Culture Dhaka 19 to 21 December 1993                       
 Tissue                                                                                       
                                                                                              
 26 Meeting of the Inter-Sessional Group to New York 10 to 1 January 1994                     
 working develop the Platform for Action -176>                                                
                                                                                              
 1993                                                                                         
 APPENDIX-XVI Major International Conferences /Meetings/ Seminars                             
                                                                                              
 Major International Conferences /Meetings/ Seminars organized by Non                         
 Governmental                                                                                 
 Organizations in which Indian Experts participated in their personal                         
 capacity with Government assistance in 1993.                                                 
                                                                                              
 I Children delegation as India's Kobe 28 April to 5 May 1993 participation                   
 in World Children's Forum                                                                    
                                                                                              
 2 G-15 Meeting (on biotechnology) Brazil 18 to 23 1993                                       
                                                                                              
 3 US Agency for International Bangalore 26 to 28 August 1993                                 
 Development-TRF Workshop on the "Role of Cities for Management of Urban                      
 Environment in India"                                                                        
                                                                                              
 4 WEDC Conference on "Water, Accra 6 to 10September 1993 Sanitation,                         
 Environment and Development"                                                                 
                                                                                              
 5 Australian Biotechnology Conference 20 to 24September 1993                                 
                                                                                              
 6 First Asian Region Meeting of Jakarta 11 to 13October 1993 G-15 Jakarta                    
                                                                                              
 7 Indian Water Works AssociationNagpur 26 to 28November 1993                                 
 -International Water Supply Association Workshop on "Alternate Methods of                    
 Water Treatment" 8 SAARC Meeting on Plant-tissue Culture 7and 8 December                     
 1993 -177>                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 1993                                                                                         
 APPENDIX-XVII                                                                                
 Miscellaneous Major International Conferences, etc in '1993-94 at which                      
 Government of India was represented or in which Indian Experts                               
 participated with Government of India's assistance in their personal                         
 capacity.                                                                                    
                                                                                              
 1 International Seminar on Kathmandu 19 to 21 April 1993 Hydrology with a                    
 Special Colloquium on Environmental Problems and Water Resources of                          
 Himalayan Region                                                                             
                                                                                              
 2 IEEE 1993 National Radar Boston 20 to 22 April 1993 Conference                             
                                                                                              
 3 International Congress of Cannes 25 to 28 April 1993 Nuclear Cardiology                    
                                                                                              
 4 5th Asian and Oceania Thyroid Association Congress Sydney 2 to 5 May                       
 1993                                                                                         
                                                                                              
 5 Global Consultation on the Tunis 3 to 7 May 1993 Construction Industry                     
                                                                                              
 6 3rd International Symposium on Special Topics in Chemical Propulsion: 10                   
 14 May 1993 Scheveningen Non-Intrusive Combustion Diagnostics                                
                                                                                              
 7 3rd (1993) International Offshore 6 to 11 June 1993 Singapore and Polar                    
 Engineering Conference                                                                       
                                                                                              
 8 IEEE Signal Processing Workshop California 7 to 9 June 1993 on Higher                      
 Order Statistics                                                                             
                                                                                              
 9 8th International Conference on Kiev 8 to 14 June 1993 Fractures (ICF-8)                   
                                                                                              
 10 Indo-German Workshop on Surface 13 to 19 June 1993 Germany Engineering                    
                                                                                              
 11 Indo-German Workshop on Surface 13 to 26 June 1993 Germany Engineering                    
                                                                                              
 12 1993 IEEE AP-S International Michigan 27 june to 2 July 1993 Symposium                    
 & URSI Radio Science Meeting                                                                 
                                                                                              
 13 International Conference on the Vancouver 8 to 14 August 1993                             
 Applications of the Mossbauer                                                                
                                                                                              
 14 AIAA Atmospheric Flight Mechanics California 9 to 11 August 1993                          
 Conference                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 15 3rd International Conference on Tokyo 31 August to 4 September 1993                       
 Advanced Materials -178>                                                                     
                                                                                              
 16 Workshop on Domestic Capacity Building Nairobi 6 to 8 September 1993 in                   
 the Building Materials Sector for African Region                                             
                                                                                              
 17 International Food Convention Mysore 7 to 11 September 1993 (IFCON-93)                    
 at CFTR                                                                                      
                                                                                              
 18 20th General meeting of the San Francisco10 to 25 September 1993                          
 International Towing Tank Conference (ITTC)                                                  
                                                                                              
 19 13th International Congress of Calgary 12 to 18 September 1993                            
 Biometerology                                                                                
                                                                                              
 20 7th International Conference on Image Bari 20 to 22 September 1993                        
 Analysis & Processing                                                                        
                                                                                              
 21 14th International Symposium on Quebec 26 to 29 September 1993                            
 Ballistics                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 22 International Symposium on Structural Pennsy1vania 26 September 1993 to                   
 30 Intermetallics                                                                            
                                                                                              
 23 Seminar on Non-Proliferation Dual Use Philadelphia 3 to 6 October 1993                    
 Technologies and New Initiatives                                                             
                                                                                              
 24 The INMARSAT International Conference Paris 12 to 14 October 1993 and                     
 Exhibition on Mobile Satellite Communications                                                
                                                                                              
 25 2nd Asian-Pacific International Symposium Beijing 15 to 18 October 1993                   
 on Combustion and Energy Utilisation                                                         
                                                                                              
 26 International Trade Exhibition-Batimat Paris 9 to 14 November 1993                        
                                                                                              
 27 13th Asian and Pacific Conference of 14 to November 1993 Correctional                     
 Hong Kong 20 Administrators                                                                  
                                                                                              
 28 International Workshop on Physics New Delhi 14 to December 1993                           
 Semiconductor 18 Devices                                                                     
                                                                                              
 29 International Symposium on Recent New Delhi 15 to December 1993                           
 Advances in 18 Microwave Technology 30 International Congress on Oral                        
 Cancer Madras 22 to 25 January 1994 -179>                                                    
                                                                                              
 1993                                                                                         
 APPENDIX-XVIII Meetings/Conferences held under the aegis of the NAM                          
 Meetings/Conferences held under the aegis of the Non-Aligned movement(NAM                    
 during 1993-94.                                                                              
                                                                                              
 S NO TITLE OF CONFERENCE                  VENUE          DATE                                
                                                                                              
 1 17th Meeting of the Ministers of        Bali           4 May 1993                          
   Health of Non-Aligned and Other                                                            
   Developing Countries                                                                       
                                                                                              
 2 Meeting of the Standing Nlinisterial   Bali           10 to 13 May 1993                    
   Committee for Economic Cooperation                                                         
   of the Non-Aligned Movement                                                                
                                                                                              
 3 IV Conference of the Ministers of      Pyongyang      14 to 18 June 1993                   
   Non-Aligned Countries                                                                      
                                                                                              
 4 Expert Group Meeting on Population   Bali           19 to 21 July 1993                     
   of the Non-Aligned Movement                                                                
                                                                                              
 5 Expert Group Meeting on the         Jakarta        13 and 14                               
   Promotion  and Enhancement of                         September 1993                       
   the Self-Propelling Growth                                                                 
   Strategy within the Framework of                                                           
   international Development Cooperation                                                      
                                                                                              
 6 Meeting of Ministers of Foreign     New York       4 October 1993                          
   Affairs and Heads of Delegation                                                            
   of the Movement of Non-Aligned                                                             
   Countries to the 48th Session of                                                           
   the UN General Assembly                                                                    
                                                                                              
 7 Ministerial Meeting on Population   Bali           9 to 13                                 
   of the Non-Aligned Movement                          November 1993                         
                                                                                              
 8 Long term Projection on the Use    Jakarta        26 and 27                                
   and Application of Modern                           November 1993                          
   Technology by the Mass Media in                                                            
   Non-Aligned Countries                                                                      
                                                                                              
 -180>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 1993                                                                                         
 APPENDIX-XIX Outgoing Performing Arts Delegations (ICCR)                                     
 Outgoing Performing Arts Delegations (ICCR) (April to December 1993).                        
 S NO   COUNTRY    TYPE OF GROUP   PERIOD                       REMARKS                       
                                                                                              
 1      North      Cultural        7 to 18      April Spring Friendship                       
        Korea      Delegation      April 1993   Art Festival in Pyongy-                       
        Mongolia   from Leh,                    ang and to give perfor-                       
                   Ladakh                       mances in Mongolia                            
                                                                                              
 2 to 4 Hungary,   (i) Daya-       19 to 24     To give performances o-                       
        Slovak     Shehnai         April 1993   n the occasion of Days                        
        Republic                                of Indian Culture in H-                       
                                                Hungary and to give pe-                       
                                                rformances in other co-                       
                                                untries                                       
        Hungary    (ii) Ms Madhavi                                                            
                   Mudgal, Odissi                                                             
                   Dancer and Shri                                                            
                   Gautam Bhatta-                                                             
                   charya, Light                                                              
                   Expert                                                                     
                                                                                              
        Hungary,   (iii) Shri Kar-                                                            
                   aikudi Mani,                                                               
                   South Indian                                                               
                   Percussion Gro-                                                            
                     up                                                                       
                                                                                              
 5      Mauritius  16-member       8 April to   To visit Mauritius at                         
                   Sharon       4 May 1993      the invitation of Gove-                       
                   Prabhakar,                   rnment of Mauritius an-                       
                   Pop Singer,                  d perform for the rele-                       
                   Bombay                       ase of two Tea Products                       
                                                                                              
 6      Romania,   Smarjit         2 to 11      To give Lectures and m-                       
        Czechoslov Chakravorty     May 1993,    eet counterparts under                        
        Republic                   12 to 27     CEP item No 44 as an o-                       
        Germany                    May 1993,    observer to the Prague                        
                                   27 May to    Spring Festival                               
                                   1 June 1993                                                
                                                                                              
 7      UK         38-member       10 May to    Partial trave1 assista-                       
                   Naya Theatre    10 June      nce to group to give p-                       
                   Group led by    1993         erformances at the inv-                       
                   Habib Tanveer                itation of Tramway Com-                       
                                                pany, Glasgow and in L-                       
                                                eicester, Haymarket                           
 -181>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 8      Australia  9-Member Langas 26 May 1993  To participate in the                         
                   & Manganiyars                Brisbane Festival                             
                 from Rajasthan                                                               
                                                                                              
 9      Tanzania,  5-Member Kathak 2 June to    To give performances                          
        Kenya,     Group of Ms     16 July                                                    
                   Neera Batra     1993                                                       
        Uganda,                                                                               
        Burundi,                                                                              
        Rwanda,                                                                               
        Zambia,                                                                               
        Zimbabwe,                                                                             
        Zanzibar,                                                                             
        Botswana,                                                                             
        South Africa                                                                          
                                                                                              
 10     Poland,    Folk Dance      4 to 7 June, To give performances at                       
        Lithuania, Group from      17 to 12     the time of an Art Exh-                       
        Germany,   Rajasthan       June,        ibition of India being                        
        Norway                     13 june to  held in Szczecin (Polan-                       
                                   4 July,      d) prior to their visit                       
                                   20 June to   to Stuttgart on 13 June                       
                                   2 July       for India Week at the                         
                                   1993         International Horticul-                       
                                                ture Exhibition (IGA)                         
                                                in Stuttgart (Germany)                        
                                                and to give performanc-                       
                                                es during Magic Hands                         
                                                Exhibition in Austria                         
                                                and to give performanc-                       
                                                es in Lithuania                               
                                                                                              
 11     UK         23-Member       13 June to   Request from London In-                       
                   group of Ms     17 July      ternational Festival of                       
                   Neelam Man-     1993         Theatre (Council's lia-                       
                   singh  Chou-                 bility 50% towards air-                       
                   dhury from                   fares)                                        
                   Chandigarh                                                                 
                                                                                              
 12     Sweden     Naveena Jafa    6 to 19      At the invitation of S-                       
                   & Rani Khanam   July 1993    venska Rikskonserter,                         
                   Kathak Dancer                Sweden to participate                         
                                                in Folk Festival and to                       
                                                give performances in N-                       
                                                orway                                         
                                                                                              
 13     Italy      Sankirtana      7 August to  Request received from                         
                   Group from      8 September  Theatre Tascabole Di B-                       
                   Imphal led      1993         ergamo, Italy                                 
                   by Lokendra                                                                
                   Arambam                                                                    
 -182>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 14     Bhutan     Penaaz Masani   12 to 19     For India's Independen-                       
                   Popular Singer  August 1993  ce Day Celebrations                           
                                                                                              
 15     Pakistan   Rajendra & Nina 17 to 21     For India's Independen-                       
                   Ghazal Singer   August 1993  ce Day Celebrations                           
                                                                                              
 16     Seyche-    Ms Parwati Khan 20 August    To participate in the                         
        lles,      Pop Singer      to 9 Sept-   4th Indian Ocean Games                        
        Mauritius                  ember 1993   in Victoria, Seychelles                       
                                                and to give performanc-                       
                                                es in Mauritius                               
                                                                                              
 17 &   (i) USA    C V Chandra-    22 August    At the invitation of B-                       
 18                sekhar Group    to 26 Sep-   attery Dance Company,                         
                                   tember 1993  USA                                           
                                                                                              
        (ii) USA   Jhaveri Sisters 22 August    At the invitation of B-                       
        Mexico     Group           to 25 Sep-   attery Dance Company,                         
                                   tember 1993  USA; To participate in                        
                                                Cervantino festival in                        
                                                Mexico                                        
                                                                                              
 19     South      Manipuri Dance  27 August    To participate in the                         
        Korea,     Group of Priti  1993         Taejon Expo 1993 in Se-                       
                   Patel & Sruti                eoul                                          
        China      Banerjee        8 to 16      To participate in Yang-                       
                                   September    Ko (Folk Dance) Festiv-                       
                                   1993         al in Shenyang Lioning                        
                                                Province in China                             
                                                                                              
 20     USA        Two accompa-    30 August    Ravillia Festival of M-                       
                   nists of Ms     to 30 Sep-   usic and Dance                                
               Leela Raja        tember 1993                                                  
                                                                                              
 21     USA       Ms Protima       20 September To give performances                          
                  Bedi Odissi      to 24 Nove-  and workshops at the                          
                  Dance            mber 1993    invitation of Internat-                       
                                                ional foundation for V-                       
                                                edic Education, USA                           
 -183>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 22     UK,        9- Member Odi-  2 to 4       To give performances in                       
                   ssi Group       October      Germany arranged by In-                       
                   of Guru         1993,        do-German Society. To                         
        Ireland,   Maya Dhar       4 to 6       participate in Dublin                         
                   Raut            October 1993 Theatre Festival (Agre-                       
        Germany,                   8 October to ed in principle). To                          
                                   7 November   give performances in                          
                                   1993,        UK, Belgium and Nether-                       
                                   9 to 11      lands.                                        
        Belgium,                   November                                                   
                                   1993,                                                      
        Netherlands                12 and 13                                                  
                                   November                                                   
                                                                                              
 23     Germany    Four Travel                  International Shadow P-                       
                   Grants to                    lay Theatre Festival of                       
                   Shadow Puppet                Oberhausen 1993                               
                   Group                                                                      
                                                                                              
 24     UK         (i) Shri Rudra-              For Uk University Circ-                       
                   patnam Srikan-               uit                                           
                   than Ramakanth                                                             
                   Carnatic/other                                                             
                   Traditions                                                                 
                   Vocalist                                                                   
                                                                                              
                   (ii) Ms Tiru-                                                              
                   vengadam Rukmani                                                           
                   Violinist & Vi-                                                            
                   calist                                                                     
                                                                                              
                   (iii) Ms Sukanya                                                           
                   Ramgopal Percu-                                                            
                   ssionist                                                                   
                                                                                              
 25     South      Pt Uma Shankar  17 to 24     To participate in the                         
        Korea      Mishra Sitar    October      Asian Contemporary M-                         
                   Player          1993         usic Festival in South                        
                                                Korea                                         
                                                                                              
 26     Venezuela, 3-Member        25 to 30     To participate in XVIII                       
        Valencia,  Kathak Group    October      Festival of Eastern Ve-                       
        Curacao,   of Ram Mohan    1993         nezuela and Five Conti-                       
        st Maarten Mishra along-   31 Octo-     nents and to give perf-                       
                   with Dr Nalini  ber to       ormances at other plac-                       
                   eswith          7 November   es                                            
                                   1993                                                       
 -184>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 27     UK,        Ustad Bismillah 6 to 20      At the invitation of S-                       
        Germany    Khan Shehnai    November     hireen Isal, Sargam                           
                   Player          1993         (UK) and to give perfo-                       
                                                rmances in Germany                            
                                                                                              
 28     Muscat     Nandu Bhende    6 to 12      For Indian Trade Fair                         
                   Pop Singer      November                                                   
                                   1993                                                       
                                                                                              
 29 & 30  Japan    (i) Alarmel     23 November  For Min-On Concert tour                       
 33                Valli           to 9 Dec-                                                  
                   (ii) Karnataka  ember 1993                                                 
                   College of                                                                 
                   Percussion                                                                 
                                                                                              
 31 to 33 Mauritius (i) Teejan Bai 22 November   To participate in the                        
                   Pandavani Sin-  to 5 Dec-     4th Word Convention on                       
                   ger                                                                        
                                                  Hindi                                       
                  Pandavani Singer      5 December 1993                                       
                    (ii) Bhojpuri Folk Music       do -                                       
                    Group of Ms Shailesh                                                      
                      Srivastava                                                              
     (iii) 31-Member Drama        29 November to                                              
     Group from National         8 December 1993                                              
           School of Drama (NSD)                                                              
 -185>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 1993                                                                                         
 APPENDIX-XX Incoming Performing Delegations (ICCR).                                          
 Incoming Performing Delegations (ICCR). (April to December 1993).                            
 1 25-Member Zanoubia Folk Dance Group from Syria was in India from 8 to 17                   
 April 1993. The group performed at Delhi, Chandigarh, Bombay and                             
 Hyderabad.                                                                                   
                                                                                              
 2 15-Member Children Instrumental Ensemble from DPRK visited and performed                   
 in Delhi, Lucknow and Calcutta from 17 to 26 April 1993.                                     
                                                                                              
 3 AFRICA DAY CELEBRATION : As an annual feature the Council observed the                     
 Africa Day on 25 May 1993 at Siri Fort Auditorium. Under this Celebration                    
 the following two groups were invited:                                                       
                                                                                              
 (a) 6-Member Musical group from Nigeria visited India from 24 May to 6                       
 June 1993 and performed at Delhi, Chandigarh, Lucknow, Calcutta and                          
 Bombay.                                                                                      
                                                                                              
 (b) 10-Member Folk Dance Group from Mauritius was in India from 24 May to                    
 9 June 1993 and performed at Delhi, Chandigarh, Lucknow, Calcutta,                           
 Barrackpore, Hyderabad and Bombay.                                                           
                                                                                              
 4 3-Member Group of Sonia Amelio (Castanet Player) from Mexico gave a                        
 performance on 17 June 1993 at India International Centre. The programme                     
 was organized in collaboration with the IIC.                                                 
                                                                                              
 5 38-Member Group of Het Folkloristisch Danstheatre from Netherlands was                     
 in India from 11 to 25 September 1993 and performed at Delhi, Bangalore,                     
 Madras, Bombay and Calcutta.                                                                 
                                                                                              
 6 In collaboration with the Alliance Francaise de Delhi, the Council                         
 sponsored the visit to India of Evelyne Zaniboni, Blues Singer from 22                       
 September to 15 October 1993. She also performed at Chandigarh, Bhopal,                      
 Calcutta, Hyderabad, Bangalore, Madras, Trivandrum, Bombay, Pune and                         
 Delhi.                                                                                       
                                                                                              
 7 In collaboration with the Max Mueller Bhavan and Embassy of Switzerland,                   
 the Council lent support to the theatre production of Swiss Parate Labor                     
 Project under the aegis of the Indo-Swiss Co-operation in the field of                       
 theatre on 25 September 1993.                                                                
                                                                                              
 8 9-Member percussion Ensemble from Sweden-'Kroumata' visited India from 2                   
 to 13 October 1993 and performed at Bombay, Bangalore and Delhi. A Special                   
 programme was also arranged at Teen Murti Auditorium on 12 October in                        
 honour of the King and Queen of Sweden.                                                      
                                                                                              
 9 7-Member Flamenco dancers from Spain together with 6-member Kathak                         
 dancers presented a joint show on 13 October 1993 at Delhi in                                
 collaboration with the Embassy of Spain.                                                     
                                                                                              
 10 15-Member Redo Cultural Troupe from Egypt visited India from 23 to 31                     
 October 1993 and presented shows in Delhi and Bombay. The programme was                      
 organized in collaboration with the Embassy of the Arab Republic of Egypt                    
 and the group also presented a programme at the Embassy.                                     
                                                                                              
 11 35-Member VTM Military Band from Switzerland was presented in Delhi on                    
 14 November 1993 in collaboration with the Indian Army and the Embassy of                    
 Switzerland.                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 12 Priya Mitchell, an eminent violinist and Christian Schuster, a pianist                    
 presented a concert in collaboration with the British Council Division in                    
 Delhi on 6 November 1993. The duo also travelled to Bombay, Bangalore,                       
 Hyderabad and Calcutta for performances.                                                     
                                                                                              
 13 Council in collaboration with the British Council Division and Sangeet                    
 Natak Akademi conducted a percussion workshop by Evelyne Glennie alongwith                   
 Indian percussionists like T H Vinayakram, Govind Chakravorty, Tej Prakash                   
 Tulsi and Gazi Khan. The workshop was held on 25 November at the BCD                         
 Auditorium. The Council also in collaboration with                                           
 -186>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 BCD and National School of Drama arranged a theatre workshop by members of                   
 Northern Broadsides who toured India between 14 November to 7 December                       
 1993 with their Shakespeare Drama 'The Merry Wives'.. Mr Barrie Rutter,                      
 Artistic Director, conducted the workshop on 25 November at the NSD.                         
                                                                                              
 14 The Council in collaboration with the Alliance Francaise sponsored                        
 'Iron Works' a contemporary French Dance by Compagnie Didier Theron. The                     
 group toured India from 3 to 17 December and performed in Delhi,                             
 Hyderabad, Madras, Bombay and Chandigarh.                                                    
                                                                                              
 15 The Council in collaboration with the IIC has agreed to lend support to                   
 the Indo-Japanese Association by organizing a concert of string and flute                    
 players from India who will perform alongwith 6-member Flute and                             
 Shakuhachi Players from Japan. The programme held on 23 December 1993 at                     
 India International Centre.                                                                  
 -187>                                                                                        
 1993                                                                                         
 APPENDIX-XXI Special Programmes in honour of VVIP (ICCR)                                     
 Special Programmes in honour of VVIP (ICCR)visitors/delegates/conferences                    
 1 Council organized a programme by Ms Vijya Lakshmi (Mohiniattam) and                        
 Biswajit Roy Chowdhury (Sarod) for the delegates of the 4th Regional                         
 Conference of United Nations Association of Asia Pacific on 28 April 1993                    
 at Hotel Taj Mahal, Mansingh Road, New Delhi.                                                
                                                                                              
 2 Council presented an Odissi Dance recital by Madhavi Mudgal in honour of                   
 the visit of the Irish President, Mrs Mary Robinson to India. The                            
 programme was presented at the Rashtrapati Bhavan on 27 September 1993                       
                                                                                              
 3 As an annual feature, the Council celebrated United Nations Day on 25                      
 October 1993 at Teen Murti Auditorium. Ms Kavita Dwivedi presented an                        
 Odissi recital on the occasion.                                                              
                                                                                              
 4 For the delegates of the Indo-Uzbekistan Seminar on historical and                         
 cultural links, the Council presented a Kathak recital by Malti Shyam and                    
 Renu Bassi on 6 December 1993 at Teen Murti Auditorium.                                      
                                                                                              
 5 Council organized a concert by Shri Bhajan Sopori, Santoor Player on 13                    
 December 1993 at Rashtrapati Bhavan for the delegates to the G-15 Summit.                    
                                                                                              
 6 The Council organized a Flute Recital by Shri Rajendra Prasanna on 16                      
 December 1993 at Rashtrapati Bhavan. The programme was organized in honour                   
 of the President of Indonesia.                                                               
                                                                                              
 7 For the delegates of the Global Organization of People of Indian Origin                    
 living abroad, the Council presented Odissi Dance by Rajlakshmi Behera on                    
 28 December'1993 at IIC.                                                                     
 -188>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 INDIA UZBEKISTAN INDONESIA                                                                   
                                                                                              
 1 Council organized a programme by Ms Vijya Lakshmi (Mohiniattam) and                        
 Biswajit Roy Chowdhury (Sarod) for the delegates of the 4th Regional                         
 Conference of United Nations Association of Asia Pacific on 28 April 1993                    
 at Hotel Taj Mahal, Mansingh Road, New Delhi.                                                
                                                                                              
 2 Council presented an Odissi Dance recital by Madhavi Mudgal in honour of                   
 the visit of the Irish President, Mrs Mary Robinson to India. The                            
 programme was presented at the Rashtrapati Bhavan on 27 September 1993                       
                                                                                              
 3 As an annual feature, the Council celebrated United Nations Day on 25                      
 October 1993 at Teen Murti Auditorium. Ms Kavita Dwivedi presented an                        
 Odissi recital on the occasion.                                                              
                                                                                              
 4 For the delegates of the Indo-Uzbekistan Seminar on historical and                         
 cultural links, the Council presented a Kathak recital by Malti Shyam and                    
 Renu Bassi on 6 December 1993 at Teen Murti Auditorium.                                      
                                                                                              
 5 Council organized a concert by Shri Bhajan Sopori, Santoor Player on 13                    
 December 1993 at Rashtrapati Bhavan for the delegates to the G-15 Summit.                    
                                                                                              
 6 The Council organized a Flute Recital by Shri Rajendra Prasanna on 16                      
 December 1993 at Rashtrapati Bhavan. The programme was organized in honour                   
 of the President of Indonesia.                                                               
                                                                                              
 7 For the delegates of the Global Organization of People of Indian Origin                    
 living abroad, the Council presented Odissi Dance by Rajlakshmi Behera on                    
 28 December'1993 at IIC.                                                                     
 -188>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 INDIA UZBEKISTAN INDONESIA                                                                   
                                                                                              
 1993                                                                                         
 APPENDIX-XXII Exhibition (Outgoing and Incoming)                                             
 Exhibition (Outgoing and Incoming) for 199-1-94 (ICCR).                                      
 S NO TITLE OF COUNTRY PERIOD NAME OF            REMARKS                                      
      EXHIBITON               COMMISSIONER/                                                   
                              ARTIST                                                          
                              SPONSORED                                                       
      outgoing Exhibitions.                                                                   
                                                                                              
 1 'Magical Hands' Austria April to Dr Jyo-                                                   
                                     tindra Jain ICCR sponsored an exi-                       
   'Living Indian Crafts'     November 1993      hibition of living In-                       
                                                    ian crafts 'Magical                       
                                                  Hands' to Austria for                       
                                                 display at the intern-                       
                                                 ational Exhibiton Cen-                       
                                                 tre at Schallaburgh C-                       
                                                   astle. The Exhibiton                       
                                                 included the live dem-                       
                                                 onstration of skill of                       
                                                  crafts persons at the                       
                                                                 venue.                       
                                                                                              
  2 Photographs Egypt July 1993                     An Exhibition of 48                       
                                                 photographs was spons-                       
                                                 ored to Egypt for dis-                       
                                                 play at the Maulana A-                       
                                                 bdul Kalam Azad centre                       
                                                  for Indian culture in                       
                                                  Cairo. The Exhibition                       
                                                 was inaugurated on 5th                       
                                                 July 1993 by Mr Moham-                       
                                                  mad Ghoneim, First U-                       
                                                  nder Secretary, Egyp-                       
                                                  tian Ministry of Cul-                       
                                                   ture in the presence                       
                                                     of the Ambassador.                       
                     Lebanon                      Exhibiton proposed to                       
                                                 be sent to Lebanon fr-                       
                                                              om Cairo.                       
                                                                                              
 3 Bust of Gurudev   Guyana May 1993             A marble bust of Guru-                       
 dev Rabindranath Tagore                      Tagore was sent to Guyana                       
                                                    for presentation to                       
                                                 the Tagore Memorial S-                       
                                                 econdary School in Ge-                       
                                                 orgetown.                                    
 -189>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 4 Children's Paintings Seoul (Korea) May 1993     An exhibit-ion of 20                       
                                                   award        winning                       
                                                   children   paintings                       
                                                   were sent   to Korea                       
                                                   for participation in                       
                                                   the            Third                       
                                                          International                       
                                                   Children's       Art                       
                                                            Exhibition.                       
                                                                                              
 5 Marble bust of Gandhiji Myanmar September 1993  A marble bust     of                       
                                                   Gandhiji was    sent                       
                                                   for installation  at                       
                                                   the Mahatma   Gandhi                       
                                                   Prayer         Hall,                       
                                                              Zeyawadi.                       
                                                                                              
 6 Contemporary Art  UK   September 1993           Works of C  Jagdish,                       
   Exhibition 'Meeting                             Ms Kanchan  Chander,                       
   Point'                                          Ms Shyamli  Kastigar                       
                                                   and Regi         Mon                       
                                                   Augustine were  sent                       
                                                   to UK for display at                       
                                                   the    Wolverhampton                       
                                                   Museum &         Art                       
                                                   Gallery,  Exhibition                       
                                                   was organized     as                       
                                                   part of the    South                       
                                                   Asian Visual    arts                       
                                                   festival. Visit.  of                       
                                                   Shri C jagdish   and                       
                                                   Ms Kanchan   Chander                       
                                                   was also   sponsored                       
                                                   to UK for       this                       
                                                                purpse.                       
                                                                                              
 7 India Songs:  Australia March to  Shri Haku     An Exhibition     of                       
   Shan &                                          contemporary   works                       
   Streams in Contemporary           October 1993  Urban & Folk     art                       
   Manjit Bawa                                     display at       the                       
   Indian Art                                      New South W     ales                       
                                                   gallery in    Sydney                       
                                                   during March   1993.                       
                                                   The Exhibition   was                       
                                                   inaugurated by   our                       
                                                   High Commissioner in                       
                                                   Canberra.        The                       
                                                   Exhibition was  also                       
                                                   displayed in   other                       
                                                   few cities        in                       
                                                             Australia.                       
                                                   The Works         of                       
                                                   following    artists                       
                                                   were           sent:                       
                                                   Amitava Das,  Bhupen                       
                                                   Khakhar,      Nalini                       
                                                  Malini, R Reddy,  N N                       
                                                   Rimzon,       Arpita                       
                                                   Singh,             J                       
                                                           Swaminathan,                       
                                                   Ganesh,        Teju,                       
                                                   Megha Devi,   Yamuna                       
                                                    Devi, Pema   Fatya,                       
                                                   etc. A few     items                       
                                                   from the  collection                       
                                                   of National  Museum,                       
                                                   New Delhi, were also                       
                                                                  sent.                       
 -190>                                                                                        
 1993                                                                                         
 APPENDIX-XXIII Outgoing Visitors (ICCR).                                                     
 Outgoing Visitors (ICCR).                                                                    
                                                                                              
 S NO   NAME OF PERSON    COUNTRY         PURPOSE                PERIOD                       
 1 Ms Aruna Sunderlal     UK              Study Tour-to      3 April to                       
   Founder & Director     Germany         visit Music       16 May 1993                       
   Bangalore School of                    Schools and to                                      
   Music                                  learn about the                                     
   Bangalore                              developments in                                     
                                          music education                                     
                                          for children                                        
                                                                                              
 2 Shri M Varadarajan   South Africa       To attend the    23 April to                       
   Member                                 International     1       May                       
   Minorities Commission                  Conference on                                       
   New Delhi                              Culture organized                                   
                                          by the African                                      
                                          National Congress                                   
                                          in Johannesburg                                     
                                                                                              
 3 Ms Kristine Michael    UK              To participate        1 to 30                       
   Ceramic Artist                         and work in the      May 1993                       
   New Delhi                              Pottery's                                           
                                          Exhibition at the                                   
                                          Aldermaston Pottery                                 
                                                                                              
 4 Dr N Rajasekharan      Germany         To participate in    17 to 22                       
   Reader in Linguistics                  the First            May 1993                       
   Annamalai University                   International                                       
   Annamalainagar                         Conference/Seminar                                  
                                          on Dravidian                                        
                                          Studies at Stuggart                                 
                                                                                              
 5 Dr Pabitra Mohan Nayak Austria         To participate in   18  to 22                       
   Reader & Head                          the Triennial       May  1993                       
   Post Graduate Department               Conference of                                       
   of English                             European                                            
   SCS College                            Association for                                     
   Puri (Orissa)                          Commonwealth                                        
                                          Literature and                                      
                                          Language Studies at                                 
                                          the University                                      
                                          of Graz                                             
 -191>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 6 Professor A H H Abidi  Russia         To participate in    24 to  28                       
   Professor                              the Seminar on       May 1993                       
   Centre for West Asian                  'Muslim                                             
   and African Studies                    Minorities and                                      
   Jawaharlal Nehru University            Christian Majority'                                 
                                          in Russia and                                       
                                          Europe at Astrakhan                                 
                                                                                              
 7 Dr & Smt Karan Singh   South Africa    To participate in   26 May to                       
   New Delhi                              a public meeting  2 June 1993                       
                                          organized by                                        
                                          the Transvaal Indian                                
                                          Community in                                        
                                          Johannesburg to                                     
                                          inaugurate the                                      
                                          year-long                                           
                                          Centenary Celebrations                              
                                          of Gandhiji's                                       
                                          arrival in                                          
                                          South Africa                                        
                                                                                              
 8 Professor B R Nanda    South Africa    To give the           2 to 15                       
   Gandhian Scholar                       Commemorative       June 1993                       
                                          Address at the                                      
                                          University of                                       
                                          Durban-Westville                                    
                                          in connection                                       
                                          with Centenary                                      
                                          Celebrations of                                     
                                          Gandhiji's arrival                                  
                                          in South Africa                                     
                                                                                              
 9 Shri Ranjan Kumar Singh     Norway     To attend a           From 25                       
   Sub-Editor-cum Reporter                six-week course     June 1993                       
   Navbharat Times                        in Norwegian Art                                    
   New Delhi                              at the                                              
                                          International                                       
                                          Summer School                                       
                                          University                                          
                                          of Oslo                                             
                                                                                              
 10 Shri Eric Gonsalves     UK           To attend meeting      4 to  8                       
                                          of the              July 1993                       
                                          Indo-British                                        
                                          Discussion                                          
                                          Group                                               
                                                                                              
 11 Shri Dileep Padgaonkar - do -             - do -             - do -                       
    Editor                                                                                    
    Times of India                                                                            
    New Delhi                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 12 Shri Rajiv Kumar       - do -             - do -             - do -                       
    Senior Economic Adviser                                                                   
    Ministry of Finance                                                                       
    New Delhi                                                                                 
 -192>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 13 Dr Amarjiva Locha,    UK             (i) To participate     5 to 10                       
    Lecturer in History                  in the 5th           July 1993                       
    Shivaji College                      International                                        
    University of Delhi                  Conference on Thai                                   
                                         Studies in London                                    
               and                       and                                                  
    New Delhi             Mexico         (ii) 13th           29 July to                       
                                         International         5 August                       
                                         Congress of               1993                       
                                         Anthro-pological                                     
                                         & Ethnological                                       
                                         Sciences in                                          
                                         Mexico                                               
                                                                                              
 14 Shri Raj Bisaria     UK              To attend a            5 to 31                       
    Theatre Director                     four-week Summer     July 1993                       
    Lucknow                              School at the                                        
                                         Centre for Extra                                     
                                         Mural Studies,                                       
                                         Birkback College,                                    
                                         University of London                                 
                                         in Contemporary                                      
                                         British Theatre,                                     
                                         Literature and                                       
                                         Culture                                              
                                                                                              
 15 Shri C Mohd Sherif  Germany          To participate in      8 to 26                       
    Technical Director                   the Summer Seminar   July 1993                       
    Kerala Kalarippayat Akademy          of the Kadgamala                                     
    Kannur (Kerala)                      Akademie at Bunsoh                                   
                                                                                              
 16 Dr Mrs Parul Shah      Japan         To participate in      1 to 12                       
    Dance/Performer                      JADE 1993          August 1993                       
    Vadodra                              International                                        
                                         Dance Conference &                                   
                                         Festival                                             
                                                                                              
 17 Ms Prakriti Kashyap  - do -          - do -                  - do -                       
    Dance/Performer.                                                                          
    Bombay                                                                                    
                                                                                              
 18 Smt Alka Raghuvanshi    UK           To participate    15 August to                       
    Arts Editor                          in the Edinburgh  4 September                        
    The Pioneer                          Festival for             1993                        
    New Delhi                            Performing Arts                                      
                                                                                              
 19 Dr Aru Alagappan  Sri Lanka         To participate in the  18 to 25                       
    Head                                 Tamil Sahitya Day  August 1993                       
    Department of Tamil                   Celebrations                                        
                                                                                              
 Annamalai University                                                                         
    Annamalainagar                                                                            
 -193>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 20 Dr R M Periakaruppan  Sri Lanka      To participate in     18 to 25                       
    Tamil Scholar                        the Tamil Sahitya  August 1993                       
                                         Celebrations                                         
                                                                                              
 21 Dr O Lourdo          - do -              - do -              - do -                       
    Professor & Head                                                                          
    Department of Folklore                                                                    
    St Xaviers College                                                                        
    Palayamkottai                                                                             
    Tamil Nadu                                                                                
                                                                                              
 22 Dr M I Khan           Hong Kong      To participate in     21 to 29                       
    Reader                               the 34th           August 1993                       
    Sanskrit Department                  International Congress                               
    University of Delhi                  of the Asian and North                               
                                         African Studies                                      
                                                                                              
    Dr D P Sharma        - do -          do -                    - do -                       
    Keeper                                                                                    
    National Museum                                                                           
    New Delhi                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 23 Professor Meenakshi  Germany         To participate 24 September to                       
    Chairperson                          the Annual      2 October 1993                       
    Centre of Linguistics                meeting of German                                    
    English Jawaharlal                   University Professors                                
    Nehru University                     in English                                           
    New Delhi                            (Anglistentag)                                       
                                         held in Eichstadt,     Bavaria                       
                                                                                              
 24 Shri K L Nandan        UK            To participate in the 25 to 26                       
    Editor in Chief                     International    September 1993                       
    Sunday Male                          Hindi Conference                                     
                                         & Kavi Sammelan in  Manchester                       
                                                                                              
 25 Dr Nemai Sadhan Bose  France         To participate in the  5 to 20                       
    Former Vice-Chancellor               function in connection October                       
    Vishwa Bharati University            with the Centenary        1993                       
    Calcutta                             Celebrations of          Swami                       
                                         Vivekananda's Parliament    of                       
                                         Religions at Chicago in   1893                       
 -194>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 26 Professor Hossainur   France         To participate in the  5 to 20                       
    Rahman                               function in connection October                       
    Professor of History                 with  the Centenary of 1993                          
    Mahassin Government College          Parikrama and his Address at                         
    West Bengal                          the Word Parliament the of                           
                                         Religions at Chicago in 1893                         
                                                                                              
 27 Ms Roxana D           Italy          To participate as 11 to 19                           
    Anklesaria                           Indian Jury member for 1993                          
    Concert Pianist and                  Valentino Bucchi November 1993                       
    Adjudicator                          Award in Rome                                        
    Poona Music Society                                                                       
    Poona                                                                                     
                                                                                              
 28 Professor Saroja       Poland        To participate in the 22 to 28                       
    Bhate                                International September   1993                       
    Department of Sanskrit &            Conference on Sanskrit and                            
    Prakrit Languages                    Related studies to be organiz-                       
    University of Poona                  ed by the Jagellonian Univers-                       
                                         ity at Krakow                                        
                                                                                              
 29 Professor T N         Kenya          To Participate in the   4 to 9                       
    Krishnan                             Kenya  Music   August     1993                       
    Vice President                       Adjudicator                                          
    SNA                                                                                       
                                                                                              
 30 Professor Vinod       France          To collect  18  September  to                       
    Bhatia                                source      16   October 1993                       
    Academy of Third World                material on 'Central' Asia                          
    Jamia Millia Islamia                  Paradoxes of Translation                            
    New Delhi                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 31 Professor Dauji Gupta Mexico         To participate in   29 July to                       
    Ex-Mayor                             the 13th     5   August   1993                       
    Lucknow                              International Congress of                            
                                         Anthropological and Ethnologi-                       
                                         cal Science                                          
                                                                                              
 32 Smt Veena Verma       Norway             To participate in 24 to 27                       
    MP                                   Seminar        October    1993                       
                                                                                              
 33 Shri Shankar Dayal Singh - do -      - do -                    do -                       
      MP                                                                                      
                                                                                              
 -195>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 34 Shri Shrikant         Norway         To participate        24 to 27                       
    Ramchandra Jichkar                    Seminar          October 1993                       
                                                                                              
 35 Professor Jaya Shekara     Russia       To identify 5 December 1993                       
    Centre for Soviet and East              one to      15 January 1994                       
    European Studies                     two Russian Research Institute                       
    School of International Studies      with the help of Indian                              
    JNU, New Delhi                       Embassy in Moscow to Establish                       
                                         direct Co-operative relations                        
                                         between JNU & these institutes                       
 -196>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 1993                                                                                         
 APPENDIX-XXIV > Incoming Visitors ICCR.                                                      
 Incoming Visitors ICCR.                                                                      
 S NO   NAME OF THE VISITOR   COUNTRY   PERIOD   PURPOSE  REMARKS                             
 1  Mr Hans Vermeersch        Belgium   July-    To Meet Orientation                          
    Music composer                      August   Indian  Grant for two                        
                                        1993     Musicians months                             
                                                                                              
 2  Dr Artemio D Palongpalong Philipp-  8 to 21   To meet                                     
    Dean, Asian Centre        ines     August    his counterpart and to                       
    University of Philippines          1993      visit Indian Universi-                       
                                                  ties and Institutions                       
                                                                                              
 3  Mr Paddy Ashdown          UK       2 to 9    Goodwi- MEA Agency                           
    Leader of the UK's Liberal         October   ll vis- work                                 
    Democratic Party and               1993      it                                           
    Mrs Ashdown                                                                               
 4  Professor Man Young       Republic 18 to 27  To speak at the                              
    Hwang                     Korea    October   inaugural  function of                       
    Associate Professor of the         1993      the exhibition on 'Cu-                       
    Department of Painting                       ltural Interflow'                            
    Mokwon University, Taejon                    between India and the                        
                                                 Pensive Beyond' and to                       
                                                 meet Indian artists                          
                                                                                              
    Three member delegation                                                                   
 5 (i) Professor Valentin     Russia   27 Octob- To finalise programme                        
       Sidorov                          er to     of the Proposed Word                        
       President                       2 Novemb- Congress on Spiritual                        
       International Association       er 1993   Concord                                      
                                                                                              
       International Association                                                              
       "Peace Through Culture"                                                                
                                                                                              
   (ii) Dr Boris Autenshlus                                                                   
    General Director                                                                          
    Experimental Creative Centre                                                              
                                                                                              
 -197>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
   (iii) Mr Nicolai Ogorodni- Russia   27 Octob- To finalise  programme                       
         kov                           er to 2    of the proposed World                       
         finalise                                                                             
         kov                           2 November 1993 programme of the                       
         Assistant Secretary General                                                          
     International Association          2 November 1993  proposed World                       
       Congress on                                                                            
       "Peace Through Culture"                        Spiritual Concord                       
        (Interpreter)                                                                         
                                                                                              
 6 Mr Amanzhol Shamkenov  Kazakhstan    29 October to          Goodwill                       
 Eminent Poet and Recipient              7 November 1993        visit                         
 of the Jawaharlal Nehru                                                                      
 Friendship Award                                                                             
                                                                                              
 7 His Excellency           Thailand       10 to 19          To deliver                       
 Dr Thanat Khoman Former                      November 1993  Jawaharlal                       
 Foreign Minister and                                        Nehru Memo                       
 Deputy Prime Minister of                                 -rial Lecture                       
 Thailand & Mrs Khoman                                                                        
                                                                                              
 8 Dr Moosajee Bhamjee    Ireland        22 to 29        Goodwill visit                       
 Member of Parliament                    November 1993                                        
                                                                                              
 9 Ms Djahel Vinaver       Mexico        November-       To Orientation                       
 Dancer and                              December update    Grant   for                       
 Choreographer                          1993  her knowledge/ two months                       
                                     techniques of Odissi Dance                               
                                                                                              
 10 5 Scholars           Uzbekistan     4 to 9           To participate                       
                                        December 1993    in the Intern-                       
                                                        ational Seminar                       
                                                        on Historical &                       
                                                        Cultural Links                        
                                                        between   India                       
                                                        and  Uzbekistan                       
                                                     from ancient times                       
                                                         to present day                       
                                                                                              
 11 Mr justice Mohamad Sai'd   Egypt    4 to 16      To deliver Maulana                       
 Al Ashmawy                           December 1993     Abul Kalam Azad                       
 Chief justice of Higher State                         Memorial lecture                       
 Security and Criminal Court                                                                  
                                                                                              
 12 Mr Nirj Deva             UK         18 to 23       Goodwill     MEA                       
 Member of Parliament                    December 1993  visit    Agency                       
                                                                   work                       
 -198>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 13 10-Member delegation led   Egypt   18 to 26       To participate in                       
 by Dr Gaber Asfour, Secretary           December 1993      the  'Indo-                       
 General Supreme Council of                         Egyptian Seminar on                       
 culture                                          Contemporary Cultural                       
                                                      Relations between                       
                                                       India and Egypt'                       
                                                                                              
 14 Dr (Mrs) Ursula Pasterk   Austria    20 to 30      To meet Cultural                       
                                        December 1993 Personalities and                       
                                                     visit Indian dance                       
                                                   & music Institutions                       
                                                                                              
 15 Dr (Ms) Kathleen Raine    UK    19 December 1993     To meet Indian                       
 Poet/Writer and Philosopher      to 2 January 1994     writers,  poets                       
                                                         and give talks                       
                                                        at universities                       
                                                                                              
 16 Lord Templeman             UK   20 December 1993    Goodwill    MEA                       
                                   to 7 January 1994    visit    Agency                       
                                                                   work                       
 -199>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 1993                                                                                         
 APPENDIX-XXV Visiting Professors-Chairs of Indian Studies Abroad (ICCR).                     
 Visiting Professors-Chairs of Indian Studies Abroad (ICCR).                                  
                                                                                              
 Under various schemes, the ICCR Council sends abroad Visiting Professors                     
 for teaching Indology, Indian languages and allied subjects. During the                      
 period under report the following academics were in position abroad:                         
                                                                                              
 1 Dr Devendra Shukla Designate Visiting Hindi Professor at the University                    
 of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria.                                                                   
                                                                                              
 2 Dr Arun Prakash Mishra Visiting Associate Professor of Hindi at the                        
 Indian Cultural Centre, Georgetown, Guyana.                                                  
                                                                                              
 3 Dr Jai Singh Yadav Visiting Associate Professor of Indian Studies at the                   
 Gadjah Mada University, Yogyakarta, Java, Indonesia.                                         
                                                                                              
 4 Dr K Subramoney Visiting Professor of Tamil Language & Literature at the                   
 University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.                                                        
                                                                                              
 5 Dr Hari Mohan Sharma/Dr Abdul Bismillah Visiting Associate Professor of                    
 Hindi at the University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.                                           
                                                                                              
 6 Dr Satya Brat Sharma Visiting Professor of Hindi at the Adam Machiewicz                    
 University, Poznan, Poland.                                                                  
                                                                                              
 7 Dr Triloki Nath Singh Visiting Hindi Lecturer at the Indian Cultural                       
 Centre, Paramaribo, Suriname.                                                                
                                                                                              
 8 Dr Y Venkataramana Rao Visiting Professor of Hindi at the School of                        
 Foreign Languages (NIHERST), Port of Spain, Trinidad.                                        
                                                                                              
 9 Dr P K Mishra/Dr N Jayaram Visiting Professor of Social & Cultural                         
 Anthropology at the University of West Indies, St Augustine Campus,                          
 Trinidad and now Dr Jayaram is being deputed.                                                
                                                                                              
 10 Dr V R Jagannathan Visiting Associate Professor of Hindi at the                           
 University of West Indies, St Augustine Campus, Trinidad.                                    
                                                                                              
 11 Dr (Mrs) Kamlesh Singh Visiting Assistant Professor of Hindi Language                     
 and Literature at the Catholic University of Louvain in Belgium. She is                      
 also teaching Hindi at the State University of Ghient.                                       
                                                                                              
 12 Dr O P Singhal Visiting Associate Professor of Hindi Language &                           
 Literature at the Beijing University, Beijing, China.                                        
                                                                                              
 13 Dr (Mrs) Usha Satya Vrat Shastri Visiting Professor of Sanskrit at the                    
 Silpakorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.                                                     
                                                                                              
 14 Dr (Mrs) C Tulasamma Visiting Professor of Hindi at the Hankook                           
 University, University of Foreign Studies, Seoul, Republic of Korea.                         
                                                                                              
 15 Dr Mohan Lal Sar/Dr (Mrs) Anita Ganguly Visiting Associate Professor of                   
 Hindi at the Helsinki University, Helsinki, Finland.                                         
                                                                                              
 16 Dr (Mrs) Noorjahan Begum Visiting Associate Professor of Hindi at the                     
 Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey.                                                           
                                                                                              
 17 Dr (Mrs) Jogesh Kaur Visiting Associate Professor of Hindi at the                         
 Jawaharlal Nehru Cultural Centre, Moscow, Russia.                                            
 -200>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 18 Dr Syed Asghar Wajahat Visiting Associate Professor of Hindi at the                       
 Eotvos Lorand University, Budapest, Hungary.                                                 
                                                                                              
 19 Dr N S Shukla/Dr S K Lal Visiting Professor of Sanskrit at the                            
 University of Sorbonne Nouvelle, Paris-III, Paris, France.                                   
                                                                                              
 Books, cassettes, video tapes and musical instruments, furnitures/fixtures                   
 etc have been sent to the Cultural Centres abroad.                                           
 -201>                                                                                        
 1993                                                                                         
 APPENDIX-XXVI Presentation Unit (ICCR)                                                       
 Presentation Unit (ICCR) (April to December 1993)                                            
                                                                                              
 Presentation of Books                                                                        
                                                                                              
 1 Thailand For presentation to five Universities A set of Buddhist books A                   
 set of books (1000) and for Prime Minister's visit to Thailand To Princess                   
 in Thailand Books on India To Indian Mission Books on Vivekananda                            
                                                                                              
 2 Turkey For presentation to Indian Mission 3 copies of Indian Music                         
                                                                                              
 3 South Korea For presentation by Indian Ambassador ICCR Publications                        
                                                                                              
 4 Mexico For presentation to University of ICCR Publications Veracruz in                     
 Mexico                                                                                       
                                                                                              
 5 Philippines For preser tion to Asian Centre A set of books on University                   
 of Philippines Art & Culture National Society Council Books on India Asian                   
 Centre University Indian Culture                                                             
                                                                                              
 6 Singapore For presentation to Indian Fine A set of books on Arts Society                   
 Indian Culture                                                                               
                                                                                              
 7 Zimbabwe Children School in Zimbabwe A set of children books                               
                                                                                              
 8 Romania The Institute for Educational ScienceBooks on Hindu Vedas                          
 Central Universities Library A set of books on Indian Culture                                
                                                                                              
 9 Mauritius HRM's visit to Mauritius Books on Indian Culture                                 
                                                                                              
 10 Myanmar Presentation in School Children Books NCERT Books To School                       
                                                                                              
 11 Sweden Oriental Studies Books on Religion                                                 
                                                                                              
 12 Belgium For presentation 50 Books on Art & Culture and 120 audio                          
 cassettes                                                                                    
                                                                                              
 13 Botswana Various Universities Books on Gandhi Association Books on                        
 Hinduism For presentation in University Collected Works of Mahatama Gandhi                   
 (Vol 1-90) -202>                                                                             
                                                                                              
 14 Egypt Presentation purpose Short Stories For presentation Maulana Abul                    
 Kalam Azad To Egyptian Universities Short Stories ICC, Egypt Panchatantras                   
                                                                                              
 15 Italy For presentation purposes 100 Portfolios Romanian Students                          
 Dictionaries                                                                                 
                                                                                              
 16 Ghana Embassy for presentation ICCR Publications Library & Archieval                      
 Studies Books on Library Sciences                                                            
                                                                                              
 17 Pakistan For publicity purposes Books on India                                            
                                                                                              
 18 Ukraine Presentation to School Hindi Books                                                
                                                                                              
 19 Malaysia Indian University Books on Vivekananda                                           
                                                                                              
 20 Cuba Sixth International Book Fair ICCR Books                                             
                                                                                              
 21 Peru Museum Library ICCR Books                                                            
                                                                                              
 22 Syria Local dignitaries Books on Gandhi                                                   
                                                                                              
 23 Sri Lanka Presentation Purposes Books on Nehru                                            
                                                                                              
 24 Vietnam Presentation purposes ICCR Publications                                           
                                                                                              
 25 Russia For display Books on Indian Dances                                                 
                                                                                              
 26 Switzerland For Exhibition Guru Granth Sahib                                              
                                                                                              
 27 Ireland Trinity College Books on India                                                    
                                                                                              
 28 Laos For presentation Books on Buddhism & ICCR Publications                               
                                                                                              
 29 Trinidad & To Mission for presentation Books on Vivekananda Tobago                        
 -203>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
 Presentation of Art Objects/Musical Instruments                                              
                                                                                              
 1 Jamaica For Club India, Indian Cultural A set of musical Society                           
 instruments                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 2 Cuba For presentation to the Cuban 6 Cassettes of Institute of                             
 Friendship with people Rabindra Nath Tagore organized the function in Cuba                   
                                                                                              
 3 Mauritius For presentation purposes 25 sets of musical instruments                         
                                                                                              
 4 Brazil For presentation purposes 120 Audio Cassettes                                       
                                                                                              
 5 Ukraine To Indian Mission A set of musical instruments                                     
                                                                                              
 6 Suriname For presentation to Hindustani A set of musical immigrants                        
 instruments                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 7 Singapore To Indian Fine Arts Society A set of musical instruments                         
                                                                                              
 8 Ghana For presentation purposes A set of musical instruments                               
                                                                                              
 9 South Africa To Cultural Centre Audio Cassettes (2)                                        
                                                                                              
 10 Iran For presentation purposes 6 Audio Cassettes                                          
                                                                                              
 11 Kenya For presentation purposes 4 Tanjavur plates                                         
                                                                                              
 12 Philippines Art Gallery One pair of doll (Rajasthani)                                     
                                                                                              
 13 Trinidad & For presentation purposes A set of musical Tobago                              
 instruments                                                                                  
                                                                                              
 14 Mozambique To Indian Association in Maputo A set of musical instruments                   
                                                                                              
 15 Uzbekistan Prime Minister's visit to Tashkent 4 Typewriters                               
                                                                                              
 -204>                                                                                        
                                                                                              
External website that     External website External website External website External website 
opens in a new window     that opens in a  that opens in a  that opens in a  that opens in a  
                          new window       new window       new window       new window       

    Address : Patiala House, Annexe - BNew Delhi                              
   -110001                                           Page last updated on: 09 
    Telephone: 23389073, 23382694, 23073685;                  December, 2013  
   Fax: 23386340, 23387700;Feedback :            Site designed and maintained 
   dirlibmea.gov.in                                  by: National Informatics 
    Officer In-charge:-                                         Centre (NIC), 
    (c)Content Owned by MEA Library Ministry of   DeitY, MoCIT, Government of 
   External Affairs, Government of India                               India. 
   Terms & Conditions | Privacy Policy |         Visitors:                    
   Copyright Policy | Hyperlinking Policy |      
   Accessibility Statement | Help                

   java script is required for this page
   MEAs App twitter Facebook Google plus YouTube flickr
   loading
