1955-56

Contents
Jan 01, 1955
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART I
Administration(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)

Pages

Headquarters
Indian Foreign Service
Missions abroad
Inspectorate
Expenditure
Tribal areas-North East Frontier Agency

1-2
2-3
3-4
4
4-5
5-7

PART II
A. States in special treaty relations with India(i)
(ii)

Bhutan
Sikkim

B. Foreign possessions in India

8
8
8-9

C. India's neighbours(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)

Afghanistan
Burma
Ceylon
China (see under East Asia)
Nepal
Pakistan

9-10
10-11
11
11
11-12
12-17

D. South-East Asia, Australia and New Zealand

17-18

E. East Asia

18-20

F. West Asia

20-21

G. Africa

22-26

H. Europe

26-28

I. The Americas

28-29

J. External Publicity(i)
(ii)

Information Activities
Cultural Activities

30-32
32-33

K. Miscellaneous(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)

Emigration
Haj
Distinguished visitors from abroad
Consular Division
Diplomatic and Consular Missions in India
Foreign Aid

33-34
35
35-36
36-37
37
37

PART III
A. United Nations
B. Asian-African Conference

38-43
43
APPENDICES

(i)
Indian Missions Abaord
44-46
(ii) Foreign Missions in India
47-49
(iii) Treaties, Conventions. and Agreements concluded or renewed
by India with oiher countries during 1955-56.
50-51
(iv)
(v)

International Organisations of which India is a member
Administration Chart of the Ministry of External Affairs

52-54

188 E. A.
INDIA
BHUTAN
USA

AFGHANISTAN

BURMA

CHINA

NEPAL

Jan 01, 1955

ADMINISTRATION

PART I
ADMINISTRATION
Organization of the Ministry
(i) Headquarters-A chart showing, the organization of the
Ministry as on Jan 16, 1956 is given in the Appendix. There.

PAKISTAN

AUSTRALIA

NEW ZEALAND

are 74 Sections in the Ministry of which 22 are Administrative and.
the rest Territorial and Technical. These Sections are grouped into,
the following 10 Divisions and a Foreign Service Inspectorate:1. American Division.-All countries in North and South.
America and Foreign Aid.
2. Western Division.-United Nations, Europe (excluding the
United Kingdom) and foreign possessions in India.
3. Eastern Division.-China, Japan, Korea, Mongolia, Sikkim.
Bhutan, Nepal and the North East Frontier Agency.
4. Southern Division.-West Asia, North Africa and Sudan,
South-East Asia, Ceylon, Australia and New Zealand,
Fiji, Passports and Visas.
5. African Division.-Africa (other than North Africa and
Sudan), the United Kingdom and Colonies, and Emigration.
6. Pakistan Division.-Pakistan.
7. Protocol Division.-Protocol, Consular work and Hospitality
Organization.
8. Administration Division.-Administration relating to Missions abroad and at Headquarters.
9. External Publicity Division.
10. Historical Division.
11. Foreign Service Inspectorate.
The staff of the Ministry, including the Branch Secretariat at
Calcutta, consists of 1,063 junior officers (including 60 Section Officers), one Officer-in-Charge of the Central Cypher Bureau. 30 Under
Secretaries, one Deputy Chief of Protocol, 14 Deputy Secretaries,
one Chief Passport Officer of Deputy Secretary's rank, one Deputy
Director Historical Division, one Director Information Services of
India, one Director of Historical Division, two Foreign Service
Inspectors, six Joint Secretaries, two Secretaries, and one Secretary-General.
<pg1>
<pg2>
Four Territorial Divisions and the Administration Division are
in the charge of Joint Secretaries who are designated as Directors
of Divisions. The Protocol Division is in charge of a Joint Secretary,
designated as Chief of Protocol. The American, Pakistan and Ex-

ternal Publicity Divisions are in the charge of Deputy Secretaries
who are also designated as Directors. The Director Historical Division is also in charge of the Research & Intelligence Section and
the Library. The two Foreign Service Inspectors are officers of
the rank of Joint Secretary.
The Organisation and Methods Section in the Ministry, set up in
1954, has now been placed in the charge of a Deputy Secretary. In
collaboration with the O & M Division of the Cabinet Secretariat,
this section guides the Ministry in methods of work, and suggests
improvements in procedure and in organisational problems. The
same officer has also taken up the duties of the Vigilance Officer,
a new charge which has been created at the instance of the Ministry
of Home Affairs in order to ensure the expeditious disposal of all
disciplinary matters.
The Foreign Secretary deals with the American, Western and
Eastern Divisions and the West Asian and North African countries
of the Southern Division, the Protocol Division, the External Publicity Division, and the Historical Division.
The Commonwealth Secretary deals with all Commonwealth
countries excluding Canada (included in the Americas), the South
Asian countries of the Southern Division, and some countries of the
African Division.
The Foreign Secretary is in general charge of administration including the Foreign Service personnel. The Commonwealth Secretary is consulted in regard to matters of administration concerning
the Divisions in his charge.
The Secretary General is the principal official adviser to the Prime
Minister on matters relating to foreign policy and is responsible for
the supervision and co-ordination of the Ministry as a whole.
(ii) The Indian Foreign Service.-At present the permanent
strength of the service is 184. Nine permanent supernumerary posts
were created during the year under report. There are also 32 temporary posts of various grades necessitated by the expansion of Indian
representation abroad. Of these, 155 posts are held by I.F.S. officers
and 70 posts by non-I.F.S. officers and non-officials. It is proposed
to recruit ten more officers to the I.F.S. on the results of the competitive examination held by the Union Public Service Commission
in 1955.
<pg3>
Cabinet approval has been obtained to the revised Scheme for
the constitution of the Indian Foreign Service Branch `B' and the
new service is expected to come into existence during the year
1956-57.
(iii) Missions Abroad.-It has been decided to open a number of

new posts and missions abroad. Among these are:
(a) Legation of India in Hungary, Budapest.
(b) Consulate in Kobe, Japan.
(c) Consulate in Sourabaya, Indonesia.
(d) Office of Assistant Commissioner, Uganda.
(e) Office of Assistant Commissioner, Lagos (Nigeria).
(f) A consulate at Khorramshahr (Iran) in place of the consulate at Meshed.
It has also been decided to open two other missions in Europe.
The Special Mission in Cambodia has been raised to the status
of a Legation. The Consulate-General at Vientiane, Laos, has also
been raised to the status of a Legation consequent on the establishment of diplomatic relations with Laos.
In keeping with their policy to construct or purchase property
abroad, where found more economical, Government have purchased
a building for the residence of the Ambassador at Djakarta. Quarters
for the staff at Kathmandu are also under construction. A plot of
land has been acquired for the construction of the Chancery in
Karachi. Plans for the construction of Chancery and Embassy
buildings at Accra; Ankara anal Canberra on plots of land which
have already been acquired are under preparation.
Proposals for purchase of land or buildings in various places including Brussels, Tehran, Gyantse and Gartok are under consideration. The terms of lease on which the land will be made available
to us by the Chinese Government are under negotiation.
The Advisory Committee set up under the Chairmanship of
Rajkumari Amrit Kaur has made certain recommendations regarding
supply of furnishings for residences of Heads of Indian Missions.
abroad. These recommendations mainly relate to the standardization of items like crockery, cutlery, glassware, linen and carpets..
The recommendations are at present under consideration.
The need for the delegation of enhanced financial powers to the.
diplomatic and consular representatives abroad had been engaging
the attention of this Ministry for some time past. Accordingly in
April, 1955, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor General,
enhanced financial powers were delegated to Heads of Missions abroad
<pg4>
with a view to reducing clerical work, eliminating unnecessary
correspondence and removing, as far as possible, administrative
bottlenecks. Experience has proved that this step has contributed
to efficiency and expedition of administrative work in Missions
abroad.
(iv) Inspectorate.-The Foreign Service Inspector, accompanied

by a senior representative of the Ministry of Finance, visited Indian
Missions and posts in the following countries during the year: China
(including Hong Kong), Japan, Indonesia, Indo-China, Burma,
Singapore, Malaya, Australia, New Zealand and Thailand.
The Deputy High Commissions at Lahore and Dacca and the
Embassy of India at Kathmandu were also inspected by ad hoc inspecting teams.
On the basis of the inspecting teams' reports decisions have been
taken on the revision of foreign allowances at the posts inspected,
and on a variety of other administrative matters.
(v) Expenditure.-The expenditure of this Ministry falls under
four Demands viz. (i) External Affairs (ii) Tribal Areas (iii) State
of Pondicherry and (iv) Miscellaneous. According to the revised
estimates, expenditure in 1955-56 is expected to be 1454-59 lakhs.
Some of the items included therein are either fixed or do not relate
to External Affairs proper:Rs.
1. Tribal Areas including the Assam Rifles and provisions for economic
development(Rs.50.68 lakhs), and Community Project (Rs.12.41 lakhs)
532.6
7 lakhs
2. Payments to neighbouring States and expenditure on Pondicherry
4 lakhs

255.8

3. Contributions to U.N.O. Delegations thereto and delegations to the
International Armistice Supervisory Commission in Indo-China
82.2
4 lakhs
4. Expenditure on demarcation of boundaries between India and
Pakistan, Recovery of abducted women and children and implementation of Prime Ministers' Agreement
17.5
0 lakhs
5. Passport and Emigration Establishments
9 lakhs

20.0

6. Miscellaneous expenditure e.g. that on pilgrimage and evacuees,
repatriation of Indians, Loss by exchange etc.
6.1
6 lakhs
The expenditure on External Relations proper amounts to
Rs. 540.09 lakhs. This includes Rs. 53.93 lakhs on the High Commissioner's office in London, and Rs. 83.61 lakhs on pay and allowances of officers and staff and other expenses at Headquarters. Expenditure on Missions and Posts abroad comes to Rs. 402.55 lakhs
and is to spread over 78 Missions of which two (Nova-Goa and
Meshed) were closed during the year and two (Madrid and Mandalay)

did not open during this year. This gives an average of Rs. 5.30
lakhs per Mission. Of this, an average of Rs. 1.29 lakhs per Mission
<pg5>
is spent on pay and allowances of officers, 1.73 lakhs on pay and
allowances of staff, 0.71 lakhs on office and residential accommodation and the balance consists of contingent and other miscellaneous
expenditure.
In spite of the expansion in the activities of this Ministry arising
from the opening of new Missions at Budapest (Hungary), Kobe
(Japan) and Sourabaya (Indonesia) and addition of Information
Sections at Stockholm (Sweden), Gangtok (Sikkim) and Phnom Penh
(Cambodia), all possible steps have been taken to keep the expenditure at the minimum. The closing of the Consulates General at
Nova-Goa and Meshed during the course of the year has also resulted
in some savings. The originally sanctioned Grant under the four
Demands mentioned above, was Rs. 1470.6, lakhs which was subsequently augmented to the extent of Rs. 45.68 lakhs by Supplementary Grants under "External Affairs" and "Miscellaneous". The
net saving of Rs. 61.69 lakhs is mainly under "Tribal Areas" and
"Pondicherry" due to non-materialisation in full of the Economic
Development Programmes and economy in Administrative charges.
(vi) Tribal Areas-North East Frontier Agency.-This area continued to be administered by the Governor of Assam as the Agent
to the President, under the Ministry of External Affairs. Wider
powers were delegated by the Governor to the Adviser and to the
Political Officers to expedite implementation of various schemes
and avoid unnecessary delays. Appreciable progress was made by
the Administration in the maintenance of law and order and in
furthering the economic and cultural activities of the inhabitants
in spite of the agitation of a small dissident minority in one of the
six divisions, namely, Tuensang. Even in this area, the law and
order situation is now under control and the resettlement of disturbed villages and dissident elements who have surrendered, is
being pushed ahead rapidly.
The dearth of really satisfactory personnel, technical and administrative, is still proving to be a major problem. A new administrative cadre called the Indian Frontier Administrative Service is being set up for this area. To meet increasing requirements
for the expansion of administration and to provide facilities for
training locally the strength of the Assam Rifles which consisted
of seven battalions has now been increased to nine battalions. Of
these additional battalions, one is for Manipur and the other for
Tripura.
The Second Five-Year Development Plan has been prepared and
sanctioned by the Planning Commission involving an expenditure
<pg6>

of Rs. 10 1/2 crores (minus 5 per cent. overall reduction); the main
features of this Plan are indicated below(In lakhs)
1. Engineering(a) Roads
250.00
(b) Air Strips
20.00
(c) Power
19.00
2. Agriculture
118.i6
3. Forest
41.84
4. Community Projects/National Extension Service
5. Medical & Public Health
212.50
6. Education
145.00
7. Industry
47.48
8. Research
15.00
9. Publicity
12.52
10. Statistics & Planning
2.00
-------TOTAL
1000.50
--------

117.00

Two more N.E.S. Blocks were allotted to the Agency in the
year 1954-55 and another two in the year 1955-56.
More and more tribal people are being trained to run the
administration and development of the tribal areas. Basic Education is being encouraged with the tribal language as the medium
of instruction in the lower classes and Hindi in the upper classes.
Academic progress has been very satisfactory and the total strength
of the students is 7,000 and the number of schools 170. Communications are still backward but are being pushed forward with the
help of the people themselves on a self help basis.
As in the previous year, a party of tribal representatives took
part in the Republic Day Celebrations.
In order to carry out the directive given by the Prime Ministerthat the development of the people of NEFA must be carried out
along the lines of their own genius, certain fundamental decisions
have been taken. Instructions have been issued to our staff to
approach the people of NEFA with an attitude of sympathy and
friendliness and to ensure that they do not interfere with their
social and cultural traditions. The people's religious beliefs are
to be respected and sympathetically understood, and on no account,
are any efforts to be made to draw them into the rituals and faith
of another religion. The necessity for high moral conduct and
integrity has been particularly impressed upon the staff. The use
of the local dialects is to be encouraged and developed. Indigenous
<pg7>

art and craft are to be preserved and, wherever possible, improved
upon by the introduction of equipment which makes for quicker
production. Nothing is to be imposed on the people and care has
been taken to ensure that in the process of development the people
do not lose their natural gift of self-reliance and all that is fundamentally good in their present way of life.
188 E. A.
INDIA
CHINA JAPAN KOREA MONGOLIA BHUTAN NEPAL SUDAN AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND USA
FIJI PAKISTAN CANADA HUNGARY INDONESIA UGANDA NIGER NIGERIA IRAN CAMBODIA
LAOS GHANA TURKEY BELGIUM CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC BURMA HONG KONG
REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE THAILAND UNITED KINGDOM SPAIN SWEDEN
Jan 16, 1956

A. STATES IN SPECIAL TREATY RELATIONS WITH INDIA
PART II
A. STATES IN SPECIAL TREATY RELATIONS WITH INDIA
(i) Bhutan.-Relations with Bhutan continued to be friendly
and the opportunity for co-operation for mutual benefit of the
people is increasing steadily. Thanks to the assistance rendered
by the Maharaja and the authorities in Bhutan, flood control stations have been opened at various places in Bhutan. Bhutanese personnel have been posted to some of these Hydro-Meteorological
posts after having been given a course of training in river gauge,
rain gauge and silt observations. Students from Bhutan are also
being given free education facilities in schools in India. The former
Foreign Secretary paid a visit to Bhutan in May 1955, the first high
official of the Government of India to visit that country. This visit
contributed considerably towards increasing friendly co-operation
between India and Bhutan.
(ii) Sikkim.-The 7 year development plan formulated for the
development of the economy of Sikkim is making slow but steady
progress. Out of the total estimated expenditure under the Plan
of Rs. 223 lakhs, a sum of Rs. 202 lakhs is being given by the Government of India to the Sikkim Durbar as a grant-in-aid, while the
balance is advanced as a loan, to be re-paid in 15 equal annual instalments, for the construction of an aerial ropeway. Apart from
giving financial aid the Government of India are providing facili-

ties for the training of Sikkimese personnel in technical institutions
in India. The Maharajakumar and his younger brother are taking
keen interest in the welfare of the people and the various development projects, and the people of Sikkim are fully co-operating in
this.
In order to foster and encourage interest and research in IndoTibetology a Library-cum-Research Institute in Indo-Tibetology is
proposed to be established in Gangtok for which an ad hoc grant of
Rs. 2 lakhs is to be made by the Government of India to the Sikkim
Durbar.
B. FOREIGN POSSESSIONS IN INDIA
The de jure transfer to India of the former French Possessions
in India is awaiting the conclusion of a treaty of cession between
India and France. The French Government has been approached
but the delay in the conclusion of the treaty has been due to the
French Government's preoccupations at home and also with more
pressing problems elsewhere.
<pg8>
<pg9>
The first general elections for the Representative Assembly were
held on the basis of adult franchise in July, 1955 and a Council of
Government was formed with six Councillors to assist in the administration of the Pondicherry State.
The Planning Commission allotted a sum of Rs. 67.2 lakhs to
cover expenditure on some important development schemes in the
State under the First Five Year Plan to be completed during the
year 1955-56. Another sum of Rs. 6 crores has been allotted for
the same purpose by the Planning Commission under the Second
Five Year Plan.
A limited number of Indian Acts were applied to the State during the year under report. Most of the French regulations and
decrees remained in force.
The intransigent attitude of the Portuguese Authorities over
Goa was exemplified by their brutal firing and shooting down of
unarmed and non-violent satyagrahis on Aug 15, 1955. As a
protest the Government of Portugal were asked to close their Legation in New Delhi and their Consulates in Bombay, Madras and
Calcutta. The Indian Consulate General in Goa was also withdrawn
on 1 September 1955.
On the termination of diplomatic relations between India and
Portugal, the Government of India agreed, at the request of the
Portuguese Government, to Portuguese interests in India being
looked after by the Brazilian Government through their Embassy

in New Delhi. The Portuguese Government also agreed to the
Egyptian Government looking after Indian interests in Portugal
and Portuguese territories overseas through the Egyptian Legation
at Lisbon and the Egyptian Embassy at New Delhi.
C. INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS
(i) Afghanistan.-During the year there was steady and continued development of friendly relations between India and
Afghanistan. Consequent upon the difficulties in transit of goods,
the Indian Airlines Corporation made special arrangements for air
traffic between Amritsar and Kabul/Kandahar for carrying goods
from India and fresh fruits and other commodities from Afghanistan. As considerable merchandise belonging to Afghanistan was
passing through Amritsar, the Afghan Government desired to establish a Trade Agency there, and the Government of India agreed to
this.
The Government of, India participated in the Afghan Jashan
celebrations. On that occasion, three Indian sports teams (one
<pg10>
hockey, one, football and one table-tennis) led by, Shri Shah Nawaz,
M.P., visited the country.
The Government of India have provided training facilities to
Afghan nationals in various fields. Six Afghan teachers came to
study the methods of work in cottage industries at Bombay, Nagpur,
Bangalore and Chandigarh for about two months. Three Afghan
nationals completed training in milk production and distribution in
India. One Afghan official is receiving training as a librarian in
India.
A number of Afghan Air-force personnel completed their training in various trades in the I.A.F. establishments in India. Some
more trainees also arrived here during the year.
At the request of the Afghan Government, the services of a
planning expert were made available to them to advise on the development and organisation of cottage and small-scale industries
in Afghanistan. He stayed in Kabul for about four weeks and submitted a report to the Government there. A sugar expert was also
sent to Jalalabad to advise the Government of Afghanistan on the
setting up of a sugar factory at that place.
As the Government of Afghanistan proposed to set up meteorological and aeronautical communication facilities at Kabul and
Kandahar, the Government of India undertook to provide the necessary equipment and to instal the same at the two airports, and to
operate the same for a period of two years. The necessary aeronautical equipment has already been sent there and installed at
Kabul. The Indian personnel who installed the equipment there

will now be proceeding to Kandahar. Another working party is
operating the equipment at Kabul. It is proposed to send the necessary meteorological equipment in the near future.
The Government of Afghanistan established their own internal
"Aryana Airways" during the year. For that purpose, the Government of India agreed to de-register four Indian Dakota planes.
(ii) Burma.-Our friendly relations with Burma grew in strength
during the year under review. The two Prime Ministers met a
number of times during the year and had discussions on subjects
of common interest. The Government of Burma have been appreciative of our help to them in their economic difficulties. The Economic Delegation headed by U. Raschid, Burmese Minister for Trade
Development, visited India and concluded a Rupees 20 crore loan
agreement. The Government of India purchased nearly two lakh
tons of rice from Burma to enable the latter to dispose of surplus
stocks although India was not very much in need of rice at that
time.
<pg11>
In the international sphere also there has been close co-operation,
to mutual advantage, between the two Governments.
As in previous years, several Burmese delegations visited India
to study various branches of Industry. Every facility was given
to students and technicians from Burma. as also to service personnel to undergo training in educational and technical institutions
and military establishments in this country.
The close co-operation between the officials of the two governments in dealing with various problems arising on our common
border has been maintained.
(iii) Ceylon.-28,406 applications from persons of Indian origin
for registration as Ceylon citizens were considered, and of these
1,028 were accepted and 27,378 rejected. Comparative figures for the
previous year were 23,752, 1,985 and 21,767 respectively. The Government of Ceylon continued to serve quit notices on Indian
nationals whose Temporary Resident Permits had expired, irrespective of their length of stay in Ceylon. 5,721 applications were
received from persons of Indian origin in Ceylon for registration as
Indian citizens under article 8 of the Constitution, 5,561 were accepted
and not a single application was rejected. Comparative figures for
the previous year were 8,163, 5,618 and Nil respectively.
The interpretation of some of the clauses of the Indo-Ceylon
Agreement came under dispute. There was an exchange of letters
between the Prime Ministers of India and Ceylon, but the differences have not yet been settled.
This, however, has not affected the general co-operation between

the two countries in matters of common interest.
(iv) China.-(See under East Asia)
(v) NepaI.-Relations with Nepal continued to be friendly and
mutual co-operation between the two countries increased. Development schemes and projects taken up in pursuance of Government
of India's Aid Programme in Nepal have made satisfactory progress.
The construction of the 79 mile long Tribhuvan Rajpath linking
Thankot and Bhainse-Dhorban is expected to be completed by the
end of December, 1956. The Gaucher airfield at Kathmandu has
been metalled with the help of our Military Engineers and the cooperation of Nepal Government. The construction of a terminal
building at the Gaucher aerodrome is in hand. Facilities have
been offered by the Government of India for the education and
training of Nepalese students and technicians in the various institutions in India under the Colombo Plan.
<pg12>
In April-May 1955 certain districts of Nepal were stricken by
famine. A free gift of 10,000 tons of rice was made by the Government of India to Nepal and supplies were air-dropped by the Indian
Air Force in inaccessible areas Where relief was urgently needed.
Their Majesties King Mahendra Bir Bikram Shah Deva and the
Queen of Nepal paid a state visit to this country in December 1955.
They toured various parts of the country and visited a number of
multipurpose projects, factories, and community projects centres.
They received a very warm welcome from the people of India
wherever they went.
A party of 45 students and teachers from Nepal were invited to
India and taken round on visits to educational institutes, development centres, Community Projects etc.
Nepal was admitted as a member of the United Nations at the
end of the year. The King of Nepal said in his message to the
Prime Minister "I am convinced that our presence in the United
Nations side by side with India will enhance the scope of cooperation between India and Nepal and further strengthen the
close relations existing between our two countries."
(vi) Pakistan.-Efforts for settlement by negotiation of disputes
outstanding between India and Pakistan and for greater co-operation at all levels were continued during the year. The Prime
Minister of Pakistan, accompanied by the Pakistan Minister for
the Interior, Major General Mirza, visited India in May 1955 and
discussed various Indo-Pakistani problems, including Kashmir.
Canal Waters.-The Indus Basin Working Party, consisting of
engineers of India and Pakistan, assisted by engineers and the
management of the International Bank for Reconstruction and

Development continued its discussions for preparation of a comprehensive plan for utilisation of the waters of the Indus system of
rivers. The discussions continued on the basis of a proposal put
forward by the Bank in February 1954 envisaging in general that
the waters of the three eastern rivers viz. the Sutlej, Ravi and
Beas, should be allocated for use by India and those of the three
western rivers viz. Jhelum, Chenab and Indus, be allocated for use
by Pakistan Pending conclusion of the discussions, India and
Pakistan entered into two agreements for ad hoe Transitional
Agreements for Kharif 1955 and Rabi 1955-56. The discussions, for
the preparation of a comprehensive plan are still in progress in
Washington and are expected to last till the end of March 1956.
<pg13>
Flood Control.-In a communication to the Government of Pakistan in December 1954, the Government of India, while, expressing
gratification that agreement had been reached between the two
Governments on the need for a cooperative approach to the future
development by India and Pakistan of the water resources of the
Ganga, stated it to be their opinion that, in view of the extensive
and frequent damage caused in East Bengal and West Bengal by
floods in the Ganga and Brahmaputra a further field for fruitful cooperative work would be the formulation of flood control measures
on the two rivers. In May 1955 the Government of Pakistan replied
welcoming the proposal. In September 1955, in response to a proposal by the Prime Minister of Pakistan for cooperation between
the two countries for control of floods in the eastern regions of India
and Pakistan, a delegation of four Indian engineers visited Karachi
for preliminary discussions. As a result of these discussions, the
Government of India agreed to give wireless flood warnings and
other relevant data during the monsoon to the Government of East
Bengal to enable them to devise ways and means to control floods
in their territory. In October 1955, the East Bengal Minister for
Works and Irrigation, Mr. Abdus Salam Khan, visited New Delhi
for discussion of this subject.
Following the floods in East Bengal in August 1955, there were
heavy floods in the East and West Punjab in October. As a token
of sympathy the Government of India donated Rs. 100,000/- for
flood relief in East Bengal in the form of corrugated iron sheets
and sarees and Rs. 10,000/- for flood relief in West Punjab in the
form of mazri cloth. The Prime Minister of Pakistan sent a message
of sympathy to the Prime Minister of India regarding the floods
in the East Punjab.
Minorities in East Bengal.-The Annual Report for 1954-55 mentioned the increased exodus of Hindus from East Bengal which in
the later portion of that year was taking place at the rate of 20,000
persons a month. The continuance of migration at approximately
the same high rate in the present year has been a matter of grave
concern to the Government of India. In April 1955, the subject was
discussed in Karachi by the Indian Minister of Rehabilitation, Shri

Mehr Chand Khanna, with the Pakistani Minister for the Interior,
Major General Mirza and as a result, the Government of Pakistan
undertook to take steps to create favourable conditions for the safety
and wellbeing of the minority community. In the same month, the
Indian Deputy Minister for External Affairs, Shri Anil K. Chanda
(deputising for the Indian Minister of Minority Affairs) and the
Pakistani Minister for Minority Affairs undertook a joint tour of
certain areas of East Bengal. On conclusion of the tour, the Pakistan
<pg14>
Minister for Minority Affairs assured his Indian counterpart in a
letter that the Government of Pakistan would take effective steps
to redress the grievances of the minorities in East Bengal.
According to available figures, 117,879 Hindus migrated from
East Bengal to India on Migration Certificates in the calendar year
1954. The corresponding figure for 1955 is 238.826.
Evacuee Property.-In pursuance of decisions taken at an IndoPakistan Conference held at Karachi in March-April 1955, when the
Indian Minister of Rehabilitation visited Karachi, the working of
the Indo-Pakistan Agreement of June 1950 on movable evacuee property was reviewed. Agreed conclusions were reached and were.
published in November 1955 in the form of Consolidated Implementation Instructions.
Financial Matters.-An Indo-Pakistan Financial Conference at
official level was held in Karachi in June 1955. The decisions reached have been ratified by the two Governments and are now being
implemented.
Trade.-An Indo-Pakistan Trade Agreement providing inter alia
for border trade between West Bengal, Assam and Tripura on the
one hand and East Bengal on the other came into force on the 1st
September 1955.
Communications.-Resumption in October 1954 of rail traffic,
between Amritsar and Lahore was mentioned in the report for 1954-55.
Efforts to extend the facilities for traffic between the two countries continued in the present year and met with some success. As
a result of an agreement in April 1955 in Karachi between the,
Indian Minister of Rehabilitation and the Pakistani Minister for
Communications, Dr. Khan Sahib, through traffic between Amritsar
and Lahore was resumed on the 1st August 1955. On the same.
date, through traffic was also resumed on the Jodhpur-BarmerMunabao (India)-Khokrapar (Pakistan)-Hyderabad route. Proposals are under examination for running through bogies (i) from
Lahore to Calcutta (ii) from Lahore to Delhi (iii) from Hyderabad
(Sind) to Ajmer and Ahmedabad and for running a through train
from Calcutta through East Pakistan to Haldibari in Cooch Behar
District of West Bengal.

Passport and visa Scheme.-With a view to liberalising the Indo-Pakistan Passport and Visa Scheme, discussions were held in March
1955 between the Indian Minister of Rehabilitation and the Pakistani Minister for the Interior. On the basis of the decisions reached
by the two Ministers, the Government of India drafted a revised
Indo-Pakistan Passport and Visa Scheme and referred it in May<pg15>
1955 to the Government of Pakistan for concurrence. The reply of
the Government of Pakistan has not so far been received.
As in the case of the Indo-Pakistan Cricket Test Match held in
Lahore in January 1955, the Passport and Visa Rules were relaxed
by the two Governments on the occasion of the Horse Show in
Lahore in February 1955, the Polo tournament in Jaipur and Delhi
in March 1955, the Exhibition Hockey Matches of the Police teams of
East and West Punjab in Amritsar, Jullundur, Lahore and Lyallpur
in April 1955 and the Pakistan-MCC cricket Test Match in Lahore in
January 1956. Similar arrangements are being made for the Horse
Show to be held in Lahore in February 1956.
Border Incidents.-In May 1955, the Indian Minister of Home
Affairs and the Pakistani Minister for the Interior, who had accompanied the Prime Minister of Pakistan to New Delhi, discussed measures to prevent incidents on the borders of the two countries. The
two Ministers reached an Agreement which was ratified by the
Government of India soon after. In December 1955 the Government
of Pakistan suggested certain modifications to the agreement before
they ratified it. The question is under examination.
The most serious border incident of the year occurred on the
7th May 1955 near the Indian village Nekowal on the Jammu-West
Pakistan border when the Pakistan border police suddenly and
without provocation attacked a party of Indian civilian employees of
the Central Mechanised Farm ploughing with tractors under the
protection of a small Indian army escort. As a result of firing by
the Pakistan border police, 12 Indian nationals, including the officer
in charge of the escort, were killed and one person was injured.
Some tractors were also damaged. The UN Observers who investigated the incident came to the conclusion that there was a preconceived design on the part of the Pakistan border police and
declared the incident a border violation on the part of Pakistan.
The Government of India lodged a protest with the Government
of Pakistan and asked them to take steps to punish the guilty persons and to pay compensation to the victims of the incident. Correspondence took place between the Prime Ministers of India and
Pakistan in the matter. The Government of Pakistan are disputing
the facts in spite of the findings of the UN Observers and are disclaiming responsibility on the part of their forces involved.
Shrines and Holy Places.-In May 1955 the Indian Minister of
Home Affairs and the Pakistani Minister for the Interior reached

188 E. A.
<pg16>
an agreement for the appointment of a Joint Committee of representatives of the two Governments which would (i) work out details
of implementation of the Agreement of July 1953 on shrines and
holy places (ii) prepare lists of important shrines in the West Pakistan and in certain selected areas in India, the protection and preservation of which should be the special responsibility of the Government concerned and (iii) consider the question of properties
attached to the shrines and the income derived therefrom. The
Joint Committee is to report to the two Ministers within three
months of its formation. If necessary, the Committee may visit the
shrines concerned in the two countries. The Ministers also agreed
that all facilities and assistance should be given to pilgrims visiting:
shrines and holy places in the two countries either as individual
pilgrims or in pilgrim parties.
The Government of India ratified this Agreement soon after it
was concluded. The Pakistan Government ratified it at the end of
December 1955. Steps are now being taken to implement the
Agreement.
Under the agreed procedure which has been in force for some
years, 19 pilgrim parties sponsored by the Government of Pakistan
visited shrines in India during the year and 15 pilgrim parties
sponsored by the Government of India visited shrines in West
Pakistan.
Steering Committees.-In May 1953, the Governments of India
and Pakistan directed their Ministries to take up immediately the
issues outstanding between the two countries for the purpose of
reaching early and lasting solutions. In order to keep the two
Prime Ministers fully informed of the progress made, the two Governments set up Steering Committees to meet from time to time to,
review progress and to devise means by which unsolved or longpending issues might be resolved. The two Steering Committees
met in Karachi in July 1953 and again in Karachi in February 1955
and in Delhi in March 1955. The Committee did not meet in 1955-56.
However, the Ministries of the two Governments continued their
approaches to each other in regard to specific issues, in terms of the
directives given by the two Governments.
Recovery of Abducted Women and Children.-The Abducted
Persons (Recovery and Restoration) Act, 1949, as subsequently
amended is valid upto the end of November 1956.
<pg17>
The table below shows the recoveries made both in India and
Pakistan since the problem arose in 1947:-

MUSLIM ABDUCTED PERSONS RECOVERED IN INDIA
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------From 6-12-47
to
1950 1951 1952 1953 1954 1
955 Total
31-12-49
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Sew across to Pakistan
97 20,852

12,552 1,413 1,974 1,162 2,040 1,114

5

Restored to relatives or otherwise released in India
344 276 328 126 926 812 5
68 3,380
--------------------------------------------------------12,896 1,689 2,302 1,288 2,966 1,926 1,1
65 24,232
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------NON-MUSLIM ABDUCTED PERSONS RECOVERED IN PAKISTAN
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Arrived in India
6,272 871 743 474 324 160 2
67 9,111
Restored to relatives or otherwise released in Pakistan
31 25 30 31 30 60
48 255
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------6,303 896 773 505 354 220 3
I5 9,366
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------D SOUTH-EAST ASIA, AUSTRALIA, AND NEW ZEALAND
India's relations with her neighbours in South East Asia continued
to be friendly. Several countries in this region share India's approach
in matters of foreign policy and desire to create an area of peace.
(i) Indonesia.-The Vice-President of Indonesia, Dr. Mohammed,
Hatta, visited India during the month of October and November,
1955.
A Cultural Agreement between India and Indonesia was concluded on 29th December, 1955.

Links have been established between the Air Forces of the two
countries by instituting a measure of cooperation and mutual assistance in the form of exchange of officers, equipment, and courier
service.
it has been decided to open a Consulate at Sourabaya which will
start functioning some time in March, 1956.
(ii) Malaya.-The Government of India have noted with satisfaction the constitutional progress in Malaya. Mr. Tungku Abdul"
Rahman, Chief Minister of Federation of Malaya passed through
Bombay in January, 1956 on his way to London for discussion with
the Government of the U.K. on measures for further constitutional
progress in Malaya.
Mr. David Marshall, the Chief Minister of Singapore, visited
India in December 1955 on his way to London, where he went for
<pg18>
talks for constitutional reforms in Singapore. While in Delhi, he
had informal talks with the Prime Minister.
(iii) Indo-China.-The International Commissions for Supervision
and Control in Indo-China set up as a result of the Geneva Conference
of July 1954 continued their activities during the year. Implementation of the military clauses of the cease fire Agreements was
satisfactorily completed by the middle of 1955. A major part of the
Commission's work in Cambodia has been completed and the Commission has started a progressive reduction in its activities and
personnel. However in Vietnam and Laos some complex problems
still confront the Commissions and vigorous efforts are being made
in consultation with the Co-Chairmen of the Geneva Conference to
resolve them.
The Government of India have also been making efforts to
strengthen our economic and cultural relations with the Indo-China
States. Free gifts of 5000 and 500 tons of rice were made to Cambodia
and Laos respectively to enable them to tide over local shortages.
The Crown Prince and the Prime Minister of Laos visited India and
it has been decided to establish diplomatic relations at Legation
level. A technical Survey Team comprising specialists in various
fields was sent to Cambodia to assess that country's requirements of
technical assistance from India.
(iv) Thailand.-India's relations with Thailand continued to be
friendly. An HT.2 trainer aircraft designed and built in the Hindustan Aircraft Factory, Bangalore was taken to Thailand for demonstration purposes in December 1955.
(v) Australia.-The Right Honourable R. G. Casey, Foreign
Minister of Australia, visited India and had talks with the Prime

Minister.
(vi) New Zealand.-The Rt. Honourable K. J. Holyoake, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Agriculture, Government of New
Zealand, visited India during the month of December, 1955.
(vii) Philippines.-Relations with the Philippines remained
cordial.
E. EAST ASIA
(i) China.-The growth of Sino-Indian relations during the
year was marked by visits of leading men and women from both
sides and an exchange of cultural and goodwill delegations between
the two countries.
<pg19>
In May, following the invitation extended to him by the Prime
Minister, Mr. Chou-En-lai, at the Bandung Conference, Shri Krishna
Menon visited Peking.
At the invitation of the Chinese Health Minister, the Health
Minister of India, Raj Kumari Amrit Kaur, paid a three-week visit
to China in October. In December, Madame Soong Ching Ling,
Vice-Chairman of the Standing Committee of the Peoples' Congress
of China visited this country at the invitation of the Prime Minister
of India. During her brief tour of various parts of the country,
Madame Soong received a warm and enthusiastic welcome from the
people of India.
A delegation of Students and Doctors led by Shri C. P. Ramaswamy Iyer and a delegation of Film artists, technicians and writers
under the leadership of Shri Prithviraj Kapoor visited China during
September-October. At the invitation of the All China Athletics
Federation, the Volley-ball Federation of India sent a team to China
in the middle of September. The Political Science and Law Association of China invited a lawyers' Delegation which also visited China
during the same month.
The Governments of India and China also agreed to exchange
Scholars for studies. Ten Chinese scholars arrived in India to study
in various Universities and Colleges in the country. The Government of India also granted scholarships to ten students for studies
in China.
Sino-Indian Trade showed an upward trend. In 1954-55 figures
of imports and exports showed substantial improvement in the total
trade between the countries as compared to 1953-54.
The Government of India's efforts to secure for the People's
Republic of China her rightful place in the United Nations continued. India's representatives at the tenth session of the General

Assembly and meetings of the United Nations organs continued to
support and put forward this demand.
(ii) Japan.-Friendly relations with Japan were further strengthened during the year.
An Air Agreement was signed with Japan on 26th November,
1955. The Agreement provided for designated air services of India
and Japan to operate to the other country on agreed routes.
A Cultural Agreement with Japan is under negotiation.
<pg20>
(iii) Mongolia.-The Government of India agreed to establish
diplomatic relations with the Mongolian People's Republic at ambassadorial level. The Mongolian Ambassador in Peking has been accredited to India and the Indian Ambassador in Peking has been
concurrently accredited to the People's Republic of Mongolia.
(iv) Korea.-The Government of India's efforts to promote peaceful solution of the Korean problem continued during the year.
During the year efforts were also made by the Government of
India to solve the problem of the eighty-two ex-Prisoners of War
from Korea who were still in their care. Fifty-five of them have
now, in accordance with their wishes, been sent to Brazil. It is
hoped that homes will be found for some others also in other
neutral countries. A few ex-prisoners will still remain in India of
their voluntary choice and the Government of India have arranged
training courses for them in various vocations.
F. WEST ASIA
Relations between India and the countries of West Asia continued
to be cordial during the year under review. Several steps were
taken to promote goodwill and friendship existing between India and
these countries.
An Air Agreement was concluded with Iraq on the 27th July
1955.
An exhibition of Iraqi Fine Arts and Crafts was held in New
Delhi, Calcutta and Hyderabad in March-April, 1955.
Negotiations are under way for the conclusion of an Air Agreement and a Direct Wireless Agreement with Iran.
A number of books were presented by the Iranian Ambassador in
India to the National Archives of India and various Institutions and
Libraries in India.
In the sphere of cultural relations, various measures were taken

or are under contemplation to promote closer understanding between
the peoples of India and the West Asian countries. A cultural
agreement has been signed with Iran and a library of 4,000 books
opened in Tehran.
The Indo-Arab Society, which was inaugurated by the Prime
Minister at Bombay in October 1954, is also engaged in promoting
the exchange of cultural, educational, social and economic relations
between India and Arab countries.
<pg21>
Under the Cultural Scholarship Scheme of the Government of
India, ten scholarships were offered to students from West Asian
countries for studies in India.
The three Indian students who were selected for study at the
Tehran University last year have been granted extension of their
scholarships for another year by the University.
A number of distinguished visitors including His Majesty the King
of Saudi Arabia, Crown Prince Amir Feisal, Prime Minister and"
Foreign Minister of Saudi Arabia', and Prince Saif Al Hussain of
Yemen and their Majesties the Shah and Queen of Iran paid visits
to India during the year. These visits have considerably helped in
the promotion of friendly relations between India and the countries
concerned.
A Syrian Press Delegation visited India in May 1955 at the invitation of the Government of India.
An Indian Army Football team visited Iran during May 1955 to
participate in the Army meet of West Asian countries. At the invitation of the Pahlevi Estate Department of Iran, an officer of the
Community Project Administration visited Iran during OctoberNovember 1955 to advise the Department. An Indian Entomologist
from Jodhpur visited Iran to watch Anti-locust operations there
during May 1955.
Two service teams from Iran (one football and one polo) have
been invited to visit India during February-March 1956.
At the invitation of the Government of Syria, the Minister in the
Ministry of External Affairs will be paying a visit to that country
in March 1956.
As a gesture of goodwill and sympathy to the Arab refugees of
Palestine, the Government of India have made a further contribution
of cloth worth Rs. 2.5 lakhs for the use of the school children in
Jordan.
The West Asian countries showed their sympathy for the people
of India by contributing liberally to the Prime Minister's National

Relief Fund and other worthy causes. These included donations of
Rs. 3 lakhs by His Majesty the King of Saudi Arabia and Rs. 1-5
lakhs by the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia to the Prime Minister's
National Relief Fund.
The Red Lion and Sun Society of Iran presented a sum of
Rs. 10,000 to the Indian Red Cross Society for flood relief in India.
The Indians residing in Ahwaz (Iran) also contributed Rials 10,510
(Rs. 667/4/- approx.) for the sufferers of flood in Punjab and PEPSU.
<pg22>
G. AFRICA
(i) Egypt.-The year was distinguished by the development of
very close relations between India and Egypt. Lt. Col. Gamal Abdel
Nasser, Prime Minister, Col. Anwar El Sadath, Minister of State,
and Wing Commander Gamal Salem, Deputy Prime Minister of
Egypt, visited India during the year at the invitation of the Government of India. The Prime Minister, on his way back to India from
Europe in July, halted at Cairo and had talks with the Egyptian
Prime Minister on the world situation and on matters of common
interest to India and Egypt. These exchanges of visits paved the
way for closer relations and friendship between the two countries.
A joint statement issued by the two Prime Ministers at Cairo stated
that there was general agreement in their approach to various international problems. "The Prime Ministers attach great value to,
maintaining close contacts and having consultations on important
matters of international interest as well as of concern to the two
countries".
A Treaty of Friendship was signed at Cairo on 6 April 1955. The
Treaty inter alia provides for the conduct of commercial and industrial relations as well as those pertaining to customs, navigation,
civil aviation, cultural affairs, extradition, and other matters of interest to both countries in accordance with special agreements as may
be already in operation or may hereafter be concluded between
them, India and Egypt agree to strengthen and develop cultural
ties and assist each other as far as possible in industrial and agricultural progress.
An Egyptian education mission visited India to study sports and
social welfare activities in the country. An officer of the Planning
Commission of Egypt has been deputed to study the working and
organization of the Planning Commission and the implementation
of India's Five Year Plans. The Minister for Food and Agriculture,
Shri A. P. Jain, paid a ten-day visit to Egypt at the invitation
of the Egyptian Minister of Agriculture, Dr. Abdel Razak Sidky.
At the invitation of the Commander-in-Chief of Egypt, General
Srinagesh, Chief of the Army Staff, visited Egypt.
Five Egyptian scientists will be arriving in India shortly for a
tour of Atomic Energy institutions and centres.

A Goodwill Military Mission from India has been invited to tour
Egypt. The Mission is expected to leave for Egypt in February
1956.
Under the Cultural Scholarship Scheme of the Government of
India, two scholarships have been given to students from Egypt.
<pg23>
Two, scholars have been sent to Egypt under the Government of
India scholarship scheme for studying Arabic.
An Indian student has been sent to Egypt for studies in cotton
growth and research on a scholarship offered by the Government of
Egypt.
The Government of Egypt donated (Pound)E. 10,000/- to the Prime
Minister's Relief Fund.
(ii) Sudan.-The year has seen important developments in the
Sudan culminating in its attainment of independence. The AngloEgyptian Agreement of 1953 concerning the Sudan had provided
inter alia for an International Commission to supervise the elections
to a Constituent Assembly which was to decide the future of the
Sudan and to draw up a constitution. On 22 August 1955 the
Sudanese Parliament decided that the International Commission
should consist of the representatives of India, Czechoslovakia,
Yugoslavia, Pakistan, Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland. The
Governments of Egypt and the United Kingdom invited India to
nominate her representative to serve on the Commission. The
Government of India accepted the invitation. Later the Sudanese
Parliament, in a resolution adopted on 19 December 1955, declared
that the Sudan would be a fully independent sovereign State, and
requested the Condominium Powers to recognize this. The Governments of Egypt and United Kingdom recognized the independence
and sovereignty of the Sudan with effect from 1 January 1956. Consequently, the International Commission was not set up. India was
among the first countries which recognized the independence and
sovereignty of the Sudan.
The Prime Minister of Sudan, Mr. Ismail El Azhari, visited India
at the invitation of Government.
Several officials of the Sudan Government visited India during
the year. The Government of Sudan have recruited a number of
technical and judicial personnel and teachers for service in Sudan.
Under the Cultural Scholarship Scheme of the Government of
India, one scholarship has been given to a student from Sudan.
Eight Sudanese students have joined the Muslim University,
Aligarh, for studies in various courses at their own expense.

(iii) French North Africa.-The Government of India have made
clear their sympathy with the nationalist movements in Tunisia,
Algeria and Morocco and have expressed satisfaction at the efforts
being made to reach peaceful solutions in Tunisia and Morocco.
188 E. A.
<pg24>
(iv) British East Africa.-The State of Emergency proclaimed in
Kenya in October, 1952, following the outbreak of violence on the
part of the members of the Kikuyu tribe continued during the year
under review. There has, however, been a marked decrease in the
incidence of crime though there are as yet no perceptible signs of
complete restoration of normal conditions. The Government of
India have all along maintained that, while violence and counterviolence must be condemned, repression alone offers no solution and
that every effort should be made to deal with the economic and
other causes which lie at the root of the trouble.
India is interested in enlarging the area of peace and opposes all
forms of racial domination. She stands for co-operation between
different races and for political and economic emancipation of the
Africans. Her policy has caused misgivings in the minds of a
section of the European settlers who have, in turn, built up the
bogey of India's imperialistic designs on Africa and sought to foment
hatred against Asians. While a few isolated attacks on Indians and
Indian property have taken place there is no deterioration in
relations between Asians and Africans in Kenya.
In Uganda the principal event was the return, after a period of
nearly two years exile. of the Kabaka of Buganda.
Another significant event in Uganda was the reconstitution of
the Government of the Protectorate in pursuance of the constitutional reforms announced in April, 1955. These reforms envisaged
an increase in African membership from their original strength of
20 in a Legislative Council of 56 to 30 in a Legislative Council of 60.
On the Representative side, Africans were provided 18 seats as
against six for Asians and six for Europeans. The reforms also
envisaged the introduction of a ministerial system in the Government with one of the portfolios going to an Asian. There was considerable opposition to these proposals. Criticism, particularly that
emanating from African quarters, fastened itself on Indians getting
separate representation as well as a Ministership in the Uganda
Government. An Asian Minister has since been appointed though,
as the Governor of Uganda put it, the appointment will not become
a precedent for communal representation in the Ministry by laying
down the allocation of posts in the Constitution as between different
races. In regard to these constitutional changes, the Government
of India have adhered to the view that people of Indian origin in
the Protectorate should identify themselves completely with the

interests of the country of their adoption, wholeheartedly supporting the national aspirations of the African people. This is consistent
with the oft-repeated Indian policy of extending full support to the
<pg25>
aspirations of the African people for racial equality, freedom and
independence.
In Tanganyika, the membership of the Legislative Council was
increased in 1955 in conformity with proposals announced in 1954.
It now consists of a Speaker (an unofficial member), 31 ex-officio
and nominated official members and 30 non-official members (10
Africans, 10 Asians and 10 Europeans). One non-official member of
each of the three races represents the eight provinces and Dar-esSalaam and one of each race represents such interests as the Governor deems fit.
(v) Central Africa.-Constitutional changes in respect of the
Protectorate of Nyasaland were announced by the United Kingdom
Government in June, 1955.
(vi) West Africa.-The Gold Coast and Nigeria continued to
make progressive advancement towards independence. In the Gold
Coast, the controversy arising out of the demand of the Ashantis for
a federal constitution remained unresolved. However, it is hoped
that a solution acceptable to all concerned will soon be found and
that the Gold Coast will shortly emerge as an independent nation.
The U. N. General Assembly during its last session accepted the
recommendation of a Special Mission presided over by an Indian
representative to hold a plebiscite in British Togoland which is now
administered as a Trust territory.
(vii) South Africa.-The South African Government continued
its apartheid and other oppressive measures. A detailed memorandum summarising the various administrative and legislative
measures adopted by the Union Government and the dangers inherent in its racial policies was submitted by the Government of India
to the U. N. Commission on the Racial Situation in South Africa.
The Commission submitted its third report to the U. N. General
Assembly.
(viii) Ethiopia.-Relations with Ethiopia continued to be
friendly. India participated in the Emperor's Silver Jubilee Celebrations and the International Trade Fair held in Addis Ababa. The
Indian community in Ethiopia presented to the Emperor, as a gesture
of their esteem and goodwill, a fully-equipped hospital at a cost of
over Rs. 4,00,000.
(ix) Mauritius.-A nine-member delegation, headed by the
Governor, was invited to the United Kingdom for discussions with
the Secretary of State for Colonies on constitutional reforms. Agre-

ement was reached on a number of proposals designed to improve
<pg26>
and strengthen the machinery of Government, on the need for a
change in the status and powers of the present liaison officers, and
on the appointment. of a Speaker for the Legislative Council from
outside the Island. There remained, however, differences of opinion
among the Mauritian representatives, on certain other proposals.
These proposals will be further considered by the United Kingdom
Government in the light of these discussions.
H.EUROPE
(i) United Kingdom.-During his visit to Europe last summer, the
Prime Minister paid a short visit to the United Kingdom at the request of Sir Anthony Eden, to exchange views on matters of common interest
(ii) U.S.S.R.-During the year 1955-56 a number of delegations,
official and unofficial, from India visited the U.S.S.R. and similarly
a number of delegations from the U.S.S.R. came to India at the
invitation of the Government of India. The most outstanding visits were that of the Prime Minister of India to the Soviet
Union in June 1955 and the return visit to India in November-Deceber 1955 by Mr. N. A. Bulganin, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the U.S.S.R., and Mr. N. S. Khrushchev, Member of the
Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the U.S.S.R.
The Prime Minister of India received an enthusiastic welcome
wherever he went in the U.S.S.R. At the conclusion of his visit, a
joint statement was issued by him and the Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of the U.S.S.R. expressing, among other things, firm
adherence to the Five Principles known as the Panch Sheela.
The people of India reciprocated the warm reception given to
their Prime Minister by the people of the U.S.S.R. by according a
similarly enthusiastic welcome to the two Soviet leaders. At the conclusion of this visit, a joint statement was issued on the 13th December 1955 by the Prime Minister of India and the Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of the U.S.S.R. and the member of the Presidium
of the Supreme Soviet of the U.S.S.R. This joint statement reiterated the adherence of the leaders of the two countries to the principles
of the Panch Sheela and dealt with several matters of international
importance. A joint communique signed by the representatives of
India and the U.S.S.R. was also issued on the same day. This indicated the desire of the two countries to increase the volume of trade
between them to their mutual benefit.
(iii) Czechoslovakia.-The Prime Minister paid a visit to
Czechoslovakia from 6th to 7th June 1955.
<pg27>

(iv) Poland.-The Prime Minister of India paid a visit to
Poland from 23rd to 26th June 1955. At the conclusion of the visit
a joint, statement wag signed by the Prime Minister and the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Polish People's Republic.
The two Prime Ministers fully approved of the Five Principles
known as Panch Sheela, which have already been accepted by a
number of countries for the conduct of international relations.
(v) Yugoslavia.-The friendly relations alreay existing
between the two countries were further strengthened by the visit
of the Prime Minister of India to Yugoslavia in July 1955. At the
conclusion of the visit a joint statement was signed by the Prime
Minister and the Yugoslav President which inter alia said:
"The President and the Prime Minister expressed their satisfaction at the development of political co-operation
between their two countries, guided by the principles
of international co-operation and of peaceful and
active co-existence as set forth in their first Joint
Statement on their mutual relations. Yugoslavia and
India have drawn closer together and established bonds
of warm friendship that reflect the sentiments of their
peoples. The President and the Prime Minister expressed the desire that in the spirit of existing
friendship, there should be an exchange of views from
time to time between the two countries on current
international questions."
(vi) Austria.-While in Europe in June 1955 the Prime
Minister called a conference at Salzburg of Heads of Indian Missions in Europe to discuss and apprise them of the general international situation.
(vii) Italy.-The Prime Minister visited Rome and the Vatican
on 7th and 8th July 1955. His Excellency Professor Gaetano
Martino, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Italy, visited India from 3rd
to 8th January 1956 to return on behalf of his Government the visit
paid by the Prime Minister. Close co-operation between Italy and
India in the efforts for peace is envisaged in a joint communique
issued on 6th January 1956 by Dr. Martino and the Prime Minister
of India. The Prime Minister and the Italian Foreign Minister
have agreed that the two countries should utilize all opportunities
within the frame-work of the United Nations, of which Italy became a member recently, for the preservation of peace. They
further agreed that all possibilities of co-operation between the two
countries in economic and cultural fields should be utilised.
<pg28>
(viii) West Germany.-Dr. Franz Bleucher, Deputy Prime
Minister of the Federal Republic of Germany, paid an official visit
to India in January 1956 at the invitation of the Government of

India. At the conclusion of his visit, a joint statement was issued.
The Prime Minister of India expressed the hope that the parties
concerned would reach an early agreement about the peaceful unification of the two parts of Germany in accordance with the wishes
of the German people. Both the leaders considered possibilities of
closer economic co-operation and cultural relations between the
two countries.
The Prime Minister has accepted the invitation extended by the
Government of Federal Republic of Germany through Dr. Bleucher,
to visit the Federal Republic some time this year.
I. THE AMERICAS
(i) THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Repatriation of Chinese Nationals from the U.S.A.-As a consequence of the Agreed Announcement issued by, the Ambassadors of
China and the United States during their talks at Geneva, last
September, India was invited to assist in the repatriation of
Chinese nationals in the United States who were desirous of returning to China. We have undertaken to give this assistance in the
belief that it will help the Governments of China and the United
States to proceed further in their present efforts to reach, by negotiation, a settlement of various matters of common interest and
concern.
Air Agreement.-The conclusion of a new Air Transport
Agreement between the Government of India and the Government
of the United States, early in 1956 has happily terminated a period
of temporary arrangements and uncertainty that followed in the
wake of unsuccessful negotiations for a new Agreement, in January 1955 when the original Air Agreement of 1946 was due to expire.
General.-Cultural relations between India and the United
States continued to be maintained through a series of "exchange"
schemes and programmes, chiefly of an academic and cultural
character.
Distinguished among a large number of American visitors to
India, last year, were Mr. Harold Stassen, Director of the U.S.
Foreign Operations Administration, Mr. Thomas Dewey, a former
Governor of New York State, and Senator Estes Kefauver who
<pg29>
has announced his candidacy for the Democratic Presidential
nomination.
(ii) Canada
Atomic Reactor.-In August 1955, the Government of Canada

offered to make an atomic reactor available to us, under the
Colombo Plan, in addition to the funds for assistance in financing
our conventional development projects. In accepting the gift, the
Government of India have agreed to allow accredited foreign
scientists including those from other Colombo Plan countries in
South and South-East Asia to use the facilities that will be available at the atomic energy centre in India where the reactor will be
located. The Government of India have welcomed the reactor as a
further link between India and Canada which will bring about close
cooperation between their scientists and will serve as an invaluable
medium for the furtherance of research and the development of
peaceful uses of atomic energy.
General.-During a State visit to India in November, Mr. L. B.
Pearson, the Canadian Secretary of State for External Affairs,
declared open a dam at the Mayurakshi Multi-purposes Project towards the construction of which substantial Canadian assistance
had been received under the Colombo Plan.
The baby elephant presented by the Prime Minister to the
Granby Zoo, at the request of some Canadian boys, was given
a tremendous reception by the municipal authorities and has created much goodwill for India among Canadian citizens.
(iii) Latin America
In extension of our policy of friendliness to the peoples of
Latin America, the Government of India accepted an invitation
from the Government of Cuba to send a special envoy to attend the
installation ceremony of the President of Cuba in February, 1955,
and a similar invitation from the Government of Uruguay for the
inaugural ceremony of the new National Council, at Montevideo,
in March.
The Government of India have accorded de jure recognition to
the Government of Guatemala and have agreed in principle to an
exchange of diplomatic relations with the Government of Cuba.
Government have also recognised the new Government of the
Argentine which succeeded the Peron Government.
(iv) British West Indies.-At the invitation of the Government
of India, a five-member Trade-cum-Cultural Delegation from the
British West Indies visited India.
<pg30>
J. EXTERNAL PUBLICITY
(i) Information Activities.-In 1955-56 there was further
expansion in the activities of the Information Service of India.
Four new Information posts were created during the year. These
were at Brussels, Gangtok, Phnom Penh and Sikkim, respectively.

The External Publicity Division of the Ministry of External
Affairs and the Information Posts abroad employ a total number
of 81 technical officers: five Public Relations Officers, one Director,
one Assistant Public Relations Officer, 35 Press Attaches or Information Officers, 20 Assistant Press Attaches or Assistant Information
Officers and 19 Information Assistants.
The total expenditure of the External Publicity Division as well
as by the Information Posts abroad, including pay and allowances
of the staff, amounted to about Rs. 77,26,000 during the year 1955-56.
Out of this amount Rs. 22,89,700 were accounted for as expenditure
at headquarters and Rs. 54,36,300 were spent on the Information
Posts abroad.
Supply of authentic news and information about India is the
most vital and elementary necessity for the Information Posts
abroad. This is met by means of telegraphic morse transmissions.
During the year under review one new morse transmission was
commenced. There are now five such transmissions in operation;
two of these are General Transmissions for all publicity posts; and
the remaining three are of regional interest.
At present only 27 of the Information Posts are equipped with
the necessary apparatus to receive morse transmissions. It is, however, proposed to extend the facilities to cover as many posts as
possible. There would, nevertheless, remain certain posts which
cannot, by reason of their location, receive these transmissions
owing to technical difficulties. Among such posts are Canada, the
United States and the Gold Coast. These posts are being served
by a daily cable service.
The cable service and the morse transmissions are meant to
keep Indian missions abroad fully informed of national and international developments in which India is interested. The Information posts use the news also for issuing news bulletins and special
releases for the local press.
If it is important for our missions abroad to have authentic
information, it is equally important for the Government of India to
<pg31>
have information about political developments in other countries
as reported in the Press. Accordingly, Information Posts abroad
are required to send to the X.P. Division daily press cables. These
provide material for the Summary of the Foreign Press on India
which is published daily by the Division and distributed to various,
departments of the Government of India. It is also made available
to the newspapers in India. A fortnightly printed bulletin, "World
Press on India" is also published by the External Publicity Division.,
In addition to supplying news by daily morse transmissions and
cable service, the External Publicity Division also supplies to In-

formation Posts abroad an increasing amount of printed material,
e.g. feature stories, special articles, reports from various State Governments and Ministries, pamphlets, posters, charts and other miscellaneous publications. The External Publicity Division as well
as the Publications Division of the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting publish large number of books and pamphlets. All
these are sent to the Information Posts for free distribution within
their respective areas. In selecting the material for these publications, special stress is naturally laid on India's development plans,
Community Projects and on measures taken to ensure social and
economic progress.
The External Publicity Division supplied 130 special features,
articles to the Information Posts abroad. These posts were also
required to publish pamphlets, journals and periodicals to meet the
special needs of each region. 18 separate publications were thus
issued in important regional languages including Arabic, Dutch,
French, German, Gorkhali, Indonesian and Italian. During the
Haj pilgrimage a special pamphlet, "Tohfat-ul-Hajjaj", was published in Urdu and distributed among the pilgrims.
On Republic Day 1956 Information Posts issued special publications for the occasion.
There is an increasing demand in every country for more
information about various aspects of Indian life, its history, art,
religion and culture. In order to meet these demands, most of our
Information Posts have reading rooms and libraries. Approximately 14,000 books, in addition to Indian newspapers and periodicals,
were supplied during the year to these libraries.
In a number of countries mobile libraries have been established;
nine additional library-cum-cinema vans were sanctioned for our
<pg32>
Missions at Accra, Bangkok, Colombo, Dacca, Djakarta, Karachi,
Nairobi, Sikkim and Suva.
An index of the growing interest in India is the increasing
demand for Indian documentaries and feature films, as well as for
Indian grammophone records. Approximately 2,000 prints of 25
new documentary films and overseas edition of Indian News
Review Were supplied to our posts abroad for non-commercial exhibition. This heavy demand, in turn, necessitated supply of projectors.
Purchase of 16 new projectors was sanctioned during the year.
External Publicity Division was called upon to assist in the preparation for India's participation in a number of film festivals abroad.
There were, during the year, nine such festivals, at Rome, Cannes,
Sao Paulo, Berlin, Damascus, Tehran, Tokyo, Phnom Penh and
Mexico city.

The library of grammophone records in each of our missions
was augmented during the year by 34 new sets of selected records
of music of India. External Publicity Division also met demands
for records and musical scores of the National Anthem. These
demands came both from our Missions abroad as well as from
foreign missions in India.
In addition to libraries of books, of grammophone records and
documentary films in each of the Information Posts abroad, they
also maintain libraries of photographs and ebonoids. In 1955-56,
70,000 photographs and 7,500 ebonoids were supplied to these posts
by the External Publicity Division.
(ii) Cultural Activities.-Although the External Publicity Division is not directly responsible for the promotion of cultural
exchanges with foreign countries, the Division renders assistance in
organising exchange of goodwill missions, art exhibitions, music
and dance troupes, etc. It also assists in India's participation in
international fairs and festivals.
During the year 1955-56 India participated in the following
international exhibitions:
1. International Police Exhibition held in Paris;
2. Fete organised by Nairobi Girl Guides' Association in
Nairobi;
<pg33>
3. International Exhibition of Postage Stamps held in Prague;
4. International Exhibition held in Phnom Penh to promote
economic, technical, social and cultural welfare of
Cambodia;
5. International Show of National Costumes held in Graz
(Austria);
6. Uganda Trade Show organised by Nakivobu Stadium in
Kampala;
7. Exhibition of Photographs, Books and pamphlets, etc.
held in Dacca;
8. Celebrations in connection with the birth anniversary of
Tagore in Dacca.
An Indian Art Exhibition was sent on a tour of Bulgaria,
Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Rumania. The exhibition stimulated
very great interest in Indian art.
A cultural delegation consisting of 54 members and which

included musicians and singers visited China under the leadership
of Shri A. K. Chanda, Deputy Minister for External Affairs. The
visit lasted for about 9 weeks. Later, a Film Delegation also visited China. During their visit Indian feature films and documentaries were shown in almost all the principal cities of China and
the films evoked very great interest and enthusiasm.
During the year Press Delegations from Syria, Gold Coast and
Holland visited India at the invitation of the Government. It
will be recalled that an Indian Press Delegation had visited
Holland earlier.
The External Publicity Division published a special calendar
to mark the 2,500th birth anniversary of Lord Buddha. 13,000 copies
of this special art calendar, depicting various aspects of Lord
Buddha's life and teachings, were distributed.
K. MISCELLANEOUS
(i) Emigration.-There was no change during the year in the
administration of the provisions of the Indian Emigration Act (VII
of 1952). Emigration of unskilled workers continued to be prohibited. Indian labourers already settled in Malaya and Burma
were, as in the previous year, permitted to return to those countries
after short visits to India. Permission was also granted from time
to time to the dependents of labourers already settled in Malaya,
Burma and Ceylon and they were enabled to proceed to those countries. Emigration for the purpose of "skilled work" (as defined
in the Act) continued to be permitted by the Protectors of Emigrants
<pg34>
at the ports of embarkation on compliance with the formalities
prescribed under the Act, including signing of agreements, stipulating the terms and conditions of employment by the emigrants and
the employer in each case. Such emigration took place notably
to the Persian Gulf Area for employment in the Oil Companies
and to Burma, for employment under various Government and
Quasi-Government bodies in that country. The agreements were
executed in standard forms prescribed by the Government. The
standard forms were revised, from time to time, in the light of
experience gained in the disposal of complaints dealt with by
Emigration authorities.
The decline in passenger traffic to Malaya which was noticed
during the year 1954, continued during the year under review. No
difficulties were experienced in obtaining sea passages and therewere no longer any noticeable malpractices of passage brokers and
touts, black-marketing in tickets etc.
Efforts to prevent illicit emigration to Ceylon were intensified
during the year. A conference of officers of the Emigration and
Police Departments was held at Tanjore in October 1955, at which

important decisions were taken regarding preventive measures and
action against offenders. As a result of a conference with the
police authorities of Ceylon, the police authorities of Madras were
able to effect closer collaboration with them.
Care was taken by the Protectors of Emigrants concerned to,
ensure that Indian labourers coming from Ceylon on short visits,
did not suffer any undue hardship in the matter of their return to.
Ceylon, provided they were in possession of the necessary travel
documents.
The question of amending the Indian Emigration Act to bring it
in line with present day requirements (e.g... extension of the provisions of the Act to departure by air) was still under consideration
when the year closed. However, as a result of a number of complaints from Indian employees in West Africa and Hong Kongregarding the treatment meted out to them by their employers, it
was decided to introduce a procedure whereby prospective,
employers in those countries, wishing to take out skilled workersfrom India for employment, were required to obtain "No objection"
Certificates from the Indian Commissioners in these territories, after
signing the Standard Form of Agreement prescribed for the purpose,
before permission for their emigration was granted by Protectors of
Emigrants.
<pg35>
(ii) Haj.-This year's Haj was "Haj-i-Akbar", and as such, the
number of pilgrims who went to the Hejaz was over 9,200 as compared to about 7,300 in 1954. As the shipping company was not
in a position to provide passages for all passengers, special exemption was given to them to carry passengers in excess of the carrying
capacity of the ships. The Haj pilgrims were given the usual facilities such as exemption from income-tax certificates, permission to
take Indian currency, food rations and cloth. Medical assistance
was provided at Jedda, Mecca and Madina.
The Government of India sent a special Medical Mission of four
doctors and four compounders for rendering medical aid to the
pilgrims visiting the Hejaz. The work of the Mission was appreciated by the visiting pilgrims.
(iii) Distinguished visitors from abroad.-Among the distinguished visitors to India during the year were H.E. Col. Anwar El Sadaath,
Minister of State of Egypt; Lt.-Col. Gamal Abdel Nasser, Prime
Minister of Egypt; H.E. Mr. Pham Van Don , Dy. Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of
Vietnam; H.E. Royal Highness Sardar Mohammed Naim, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs-of Afghanistan and
H.E. Dr. Najibullah, Afghan Ambassador to the United Kingdom;
H.E. Sayed Ismail El Azhari, Prime Minister of Sudan; a Ministerial
Delegation from Ceylon led by the Hon'ble Mr. J. R. Jayawardene,
Minister of Food and Agriculture; The Liberian Delegation to

Bandung Conference led by H.E. Mr. Momolu Dukley; Delegations
of Lebanon, Syria, Ethiopia and Pakistan to Bandung Conference;
H.R.H. Amir Faisal Al-Saud, Crown Prince and Prime Minister and
Foreign Minister of Saudi Arabia: Hon'ble Mr. Mohammed Ali,
Prime Minister of Pakistan accompanied by Begum Mohammed Ali,
Hon'ble Major General Iskandar Mirza and Begum Mirza; Prince
Saif El Islam Al Hussein of Yemen; H.E. Dr. Soekarno, President
of the Republic of Indonesia; An Egyptian Trade delegation led by
H.E. Mr. Mohammed Abou Nosier, Minister for Commerce and
Industry Hon'ble U Raschid, Minister for Trade Development of
Burma; H.E. Wing Commander Gamal Salem, Deputy Prime Minister of Egypt; Their Royal Highness the Crown Prince of Laos and
Princess Savang and H.E. Katay D. Sasorith, Prime Minister of Laos;
the Rt. Hon'ble R. G. Casey, Minister of External Affairs of Australia;
the Hon'ble U Nu, Prime Minister of Burma and Madam Nu; the
Rt. Hon'ble The Earl of Home, Secretary of State for Commonwealth
Relations of U.K. Government accompanied by the Countess of
Home; the Hon'ble L. B. Pearson, Secretary of State for External
Affairs of Canada and Mrs. Pearson: H.E. Dr. Hatta, Vice-President
<pg36>
of the Republic of Indonesia; Naval Mission from Indonesia led by
Rear Admiral R. Subijako; their Majesties the King and Queen of
Nepal; H.E. Mr. N. A. Bulganin, Prime Minister of the U.S.S.R. and
H.E. Mr. N. S. Khrushchev, member of the Presidium of the Supreme
Soviet; His Majesty the King of Saudi Arabia; Her ExcellencyMadam Soong Ching Ling, Vice-Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National Peoples Congress of China; H.E. Prof. Gaetano,
Martino, Foreign Minister of Italy; Dr. Franz Bluecher, Dy. Prime
Minister of the Federal Republic of Germany; their Majesties the
Shah and Queen of Iran; the Rt. Hon'ble Selwyn Lloyd, Foreign
Secretary of the United Kingdom; the Hon'ble Mr. John Foster
Dulles, Secretary of State in the U.S.A.; and H. E. M. Christian
Pineau, Foreign Minister of France.
(iv) Consular Division.-The Division is concerned with compilation and revision of Indian Foreign Service Instruction, levy of
consular fee, all consular matters including repatriation, relief payments and recoveries; extradition and deportation and enquiries
about welfare and whereabouts of Indians abroad in respect of
Europe, South-East Asia, Arab World and Turkey; residual work
relating to the scheme of financial assistance to evacuees from
Burma.. Malaya, etc., and the long-term scheme for the maintenance,
of refugee-orphans who came to India from Burma, Malaya etc.
The work of the Division-has continued to grow in volume during the year under review.
The Special Marriage Act, 1954 (Act No. 43 of 1954) came into,
force with effect from the 1st January, 1955. This Act extends to
the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir and
applies also to citizens of India domiciled in the territories to which,

the Act extends who are outside the said territories. Under Section3(2)(b) of the Act, Marriage Officers in Indian Missions and Posts
abroad have since been appointed. Besides the Special Marriage
(Diplomatic and Consular Officers) Rules, 1955, have been framed
under Section 50 of the Act. Copies of relevant Notifications relating to the appointment of Marriage Officers and the Rules have been
supplied to Indian Missions and Posts abroad.
One hundred and twenty judicial documents, such as Powers of
Attorney, Affidavits, Certificates etc. intended for use in foreign
countries, were legalised during the year as against one hundred
and twenty-nine legalised last year. The Division dealt with
eighty-seven cases of deaths of Indian nationals abroad during the
same period as against eighty-four cases during the preceding year.
As a result of action taken by the Division, the estates left by the
deceased Indian citizens in fifteen cases were transferred to their
<pg37>
legal heirs in India. The remaining cases are still the subject of
correspondence with the foreign authorities concerned.
Thirty-seven judicial documents, e.g., Letters of Request and Commissions etc., received through various State Governments for service in Europe, South East Asia, Arab World and Turkey, were
after proper scrutiny, forwarded to the authorities concerned through
the Indian Missions abroad as against the seventy dealt with last
year. Four cases of Letters of Request, Commissions, etc. received
from abroad for service in India were also dealt with in the Division.
There were ninety-seven cases of Relief and Repatriation of destitute Indian citizens from countries like Thailand, Iraq, Persian
Gulf, Malaya etc. at a cost of Rs. 8,000 as against thirty-seven cases
at a cost of Rs. 9,000 last year. The recoveries effected from the
repatriates after their arrival in India have as usual been negligible,
the Policy of the Government of India being not to subject the
repatriates to undue hardship. The Division also dealt with two,
cases of extradition of undesirable aliens from India.
The position regarding the evacuee orphans, maintained by the
State Governments has not undergone much change. Many orphans
have been admitted by the State Governments into higher courses
of study and handicrafts which will enable the orphans to have
good start in life. The overall position of the orphans and the
institutions in which they are being maintained has been satisfactory.
Expenditure incurred by the State Governments in this respect is
shared half and half between the Government of India and the
Governments of the respective States.
(v) Diplomatic and Consular Missions in India.-At the end of
1955, there. were 14 Legations, 5 High Commissions and 25 Embassies
in India in addition to the Apostolic Internunciature. Towards the
end of this year, diplomatic relations were also established with the

People's Republic of Mongolia, who Ambassador at Peking has
been concurrently accredited to India, with headquarters at Peking.
Similarly the Indian Ambassador at Peking is to be concurrently
accredited to People's Republic of Mongolia. India has also agreed
to exchange diplomatic relations with Laos at Legation level.
The total number of foreign Consular Posts in India at the end
of the year was 87. Two new foreign Consular Posts were established at Calcutta. Five foreign Consular Posts closed down duringthe year.
(vi) Foreign Aid.-The Colombo Plan, originally scheduled for a
period of six years (July 1951-June 1957) has now been extended
upto June 1961.

INDIA
BHUTAN USA FRANCE PORTUGAL BRAZIL EGYPT AFGHANISTAN CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC BURMA CHINA NEPAL ITALY SRI LANKA PAKISTAN LATVIA AUSTRALIA NEW
ZEALAND INDONESIA UNITED KINGDOM REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE SWITZERLAND CAMBODIA
LAOS VIETNAM THAILAND PHILIPPINES JAPAN MONGOLIA KOREA IRAQ IRAN SAUDI
ARABIA YEMEN SYRIA JORDAN SUDAN NORWAY SLOVAKIA SWEDEN YUGOSLAVIA
TUNISIA ALGERIA MOROCCO KENYA UGANDA NIGER NIGERIA SOUTH AFRICA ETHIOPIA
MAURITIUS POLAND AUSTRIA GERMANY CANADA CUBA URUGUAY GUATEMALA BELGIUM
GHANA FIJI MEXICO CZECH REPUBLIC BULGARIA HUNGARY MALI HONG KONG LIBERIA
LEBANON TURKEY
Aug 15, 1955

A. UNITED NATIONS
PART III
A. UNITED NATIONS
The 10th session of the United Nations General Assembly which
was held in New York from the Sep 20, 1955, to the 20th December, 1955 commenced its proceedings in a favourable climate. In
refreshing contrast to the vehement attacks and counter-attacks
which characterised the speeches in the general debates of previous
sessions, the tone of statements made in the General debate of the
10th Session pointed to a definite improvement.
The more important decisions of the General Assembly, in so far
as India was able to contribute thereto, are described in the para-

graphs that follow.
India was one of the co-sponsors of the resolution relating to the
admission of new Members: and the entry of 16 countries augurs
well for the future, particularly as the concept of universality to
which India has consistently subscribed, has now been well established in this Organization.
On the question of the peaceful uses of atomic energy, our
strenuous efforts resulted in the General Assembly agreeing to call
an International Conference of all Members of the United Nations
and of Specialised Agencies to participate in the Conference on the
final text of the Statute of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Membership of the States participating in the preliminary negotiations was also widened by the inclusion of Brazil, Czechoslovakia,
India and the U.S. S. R. Moreover, an Advisory Committee will study
the question of the relationship of the Agency to the United Nations.
As regards the item relating to the effects of atomic radiation,
the Indian Delegation succeeded in enlarging the scope of the proposed study of the effects of atomic radiation. India has been
appointed one of the members of the Scientific Committee established by the General Assembly which is to study this problem and disseminate information pertaining to it to member states of the U.N.
or members of the specialized agencies. While the Delegation was
successful in its efforts to expand the membership of this Committee, it did not get the necessary support for its proposal to throw
the doors of this body open to States outside the present U.N,
system which may wish to transmit or receive information from it.
<pg38>
<pg39>
With regard to the question of Disarmament, the Indian Delegation succeeded by means of draft amendments in achieving the
following results:(i) The objectives laid down in the resolution adopted unanimously at the 9th Session of the General Assembly in
1955 were reiterated in the preamble of the resolution.
(ii) The resolution as adopted provides for "agreement on and
implementation of" the Eisenhower Open Skies Plan
and the Soviet proposal for establishing control points
whereas the original proposals merely provided for
implementation of these plans. This was a distinct
change because the purpose of the original draft was to
proclaim a majority decision only and to abandon the
idea of negotiated agreements.
(iii) The Disarmament Commission has been asked to take into,

account India's proposals regarding suspension of experimental explosions and an "Armament Truce" along with
the proposals made in Geneva by the British and French
Prime Ministers.
On the question of the Treatment of people of Indian Origin in
the Union of South Africa, the General Assembly adopted a resolution urging the parties concerned to pursue negotiations with a
view to bringing about the settlement of the question and inviting
them to report as appropriate, jointly or separately, to the General
Assembly at its next session.
On the question of "Apartheid" in the Union of South Africa
the resolution proposed by India and certain other States recommending the continuance of the U.N. Commission on the Racial
Situation in the Union was adopted by the Ad Hoc Political Committee by a vote of 37 in favour, 7 against and 13 abstentions. However, in the plenary, certain members changed their position, and
the paragraph relating to the continuance of this U.N. Commission
failed to secure the necessary two-thirds majority. The remaining
paragraph's commending the Commission's report and expressing
regret at the continuation of the Union Government's policy of
apartheid were adopted by the required two-thirds majority.
On the Korean question, India submitted a draft resolution which
noted with appreciation the generous offer of the Governments of
Argentina and Brazil to re-settle a number of ex-prisoners of the
Korean war and. which requested Member Governments who are
able to do so to assist in bringing about a full solution of this problem by accepting for resettlement those not covered by the
<pg40>
present offers. This resolution was adopted by the General
Assembly.
Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territories.-India continued to
be a member of the Trusteeship Council and the Committee on
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories during the year
under review and took an active part in the deliberations of these
bodies. The U.N. Visiting Mission to the Trust Territories of Togoland under British and French administration, of which the Indian
representative Shri S. K. Banerjee was the Chairman, submitted a
report to the Trusteeship Council suggesting that the wishes of the
inhabitants of Togoland under British administration as to their
future should be ascertained by a plebiscite. This suggestion was
accepted by the Trusteeship Council as well as by the General
Assembly. The General Assembly recommended to the U.K. Government to take steps in consultation with the U.N. Plebiscite Commissioner, to organise and conduct without delay under the supervision of the U.N. a plebiscite to ascertain the wishes of the majority
of its inhabitants in regard to their future. The main resolution of
the General Assembly was based on the draft submitted by India.

The life of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories has been extended by the General Assembly for
a further period of three years and India has again been elected
member of this body. During the discussion on the report of this
Committee, the Indian Delegation submitted a draft resolution concerning information on community development which emphasised the benefits resulting from community development and
other forms of co-operation in under-developed countries and asked
the Administering Powers to render information as complete and
upto-date as possible on programmes and progress in this field.
To facilitate this, certain changes were suggested in the Standard
Form used in the transmission of information under Article 73(e)
of the U.N. Charter. This resolution with certain amendments was
adopted by the General Assembly.
Administrative and Budgetary.-As a result of the continued
efforts made by our representatives, India's contribution to the U.N.
Budget has been reduced from 3.30 per cent. to 2.25 per cent. i.e.
from (Dollar)$1,308,120 to (Dollar)$1,288,300 approximately.
The Chairman of the Indian Delegation pleaded once again for
a better geographical distribution of the staff of the U.N. Secretariat and stressed in particular the desirability of recruiting more
persons from Asian and African countries and thereby give the
U.N. Secretariat "a real international personality". He further
suggested that more funds should be expended for the operation
of U.N. Information Centres in countries where information media
were not fully developed.
<pg41>
International Conference on the peaceful uses of Atomic
Energy.-Dr. H. J. Bhabha, Leader of the Indian Delegation to the
International Conference on the peaceful uses of atomic energy held
at Geneva in August 1955 presided over this Conference. This was
the largest conference so far organised by the United Nations and
was attended by 1,400 delegates and 3,000 observers. The conference dealt with the subjects on its agenda objectively and its proceedings were not marred by any unseemly controversy.
Election to U.N. Bodies.-India is one of the members of the U.N.
visiting Mission which is to visit the Trust Territories in the Pacific
early this year and submit a report later to the Trusteeship
Council.
Two members of the Indian Delegation to the 10th Session of
the General Assembly were elected to two U.N. bodies viz., the
U.N. Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions and the U.N. Administrative Tribunal.
Economic and Social Council of the United Nations.-India continued to serve on the Economic and Social Council during 1955 as

also on most of its functional Commissions.
Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East.-India participated in the 11th Session of the Economic Commission for Asia and
the Far East and seventh session of the Committee on Industry and
Trade held in Tokyo. India also took part in the various sub-committees such as on Highway, on Inland Waterways, on Iron and
Steel and in various working parties like those on Economic Development and Planning and on Housing and Building Materials
held in different countries of this region.
On the invitation of Indian Delegation, extended at the 11th
session of the Commission, the Commission accepted to hold its
12th session in India in February, 1956. The Commission will also
hold the meetings of its Committee on Industry and Trade, Railway
Sub-Committee and Electric Sub-Committee in India in the year
1956.
A training centre for water resources development has been
established at the University of Roorkee with the aid of the Economic
commission for Asia and the Far East, and the U.N.T.A.A.
Food and Agricultural Organisation (F.A.O.).-The following
international training centres were held in India with the cooperation of the F.A.O.:
Soil Fertility (Himayatsagar-Hyderabad) from the 18th July to
the 15th October, 1955.
<pg42>
Rice Breeding (Central Rice Research Institute, Cuttack) for 3
months from the 1st September, 1955.
Agricultural Extension Service in Bhopal from the 5th-15th
December, 1955.
A seminar on Forest Research Workers (F.R.I.D., Dun) was held
in India in co-operation with the F.A.O. from the 12th October to
the 10th December, 1955.
International Labour Organisation (I.L.O.).-India provided
training facilities for foreign nationals under the expanded technical programme of the I.L.O.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO).-India took an active part in the activities of
the UNESCO particularly in its fellowship and scholarship programme. Many foreign nationals visited India under this programme. The UNESCO has accepted India's invitation to hold its
next General Conference in Delhi in 1956.
World Meteorological Organisation (W.M.O.).-The 2nd Regional

Association of the World Meteorological Organisation was held in
New Delhi in February 1955 and Dr. S. Basu, Director General of
Observatories, was elected its President.
India has actively been participating in the Expanded programme of the United Nations Technical Assistance Administration.
Many Indian Officials were sent abroad for training under this programme. At the same time, many officials of other countries came
to India for training and observation of the working of various projects. A team of senior Indian Officers was sent to the U.S.S.R.
to explore the possibilities of utilising the Russian aid to the
U.N.T.A.A. for the economic development of the under-developed
countries.
The United Nations Regional Cartographic Conference for Asia
and the Far East was held at Mussoorie (India) in February, 1955
in which delegates from all over the world participated.
A seminar on the education of the blind child and adolescent was
also held at Mussoorie during this year.
India has been arranging regular quarterly courses of statistical
education at Calcutta for the last 3 years in co-operation with the
International Statistical Institute.
India was represented on the meetings of many international
organisations such as the General Assembly of the International
<pg43>
Institute for the Unification of Private Law, the International
Bureau of Military Documentation, the International Technical
Conference to study the problems of the International conservation of the living resources at sea, etc.
B. ASIAN-AFRICAN CONFERENCE
At the invitation of the Prime Ministers of Burma, Ceylon,
India, Indonesia and Pakistan, a Conference of Asian-African countries was held in Bandung (Indonesia) in April, 1955. Twentynine countries of Asia and Africa participated in the Conference.
The object of the Conference was to promote goodwill and co-operation, to consider common social, economic and cultural problems,
to consider problems of special interest to Asian and African people
such as racialism, colonialism etc. and to view the position of Asia
and Africa in the world and the contribution they could make to
the promotion of world peace and co-operation.
The deliberations of the Conference resulted in the historic
Joint Communique on economic and cultural co-operation, colonialism, nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction and on
the promotion of world peace and co-operation. The communique
also incorporates the Five Principles or the PANCH SHEELA

which India regards as the basis of her relations with other countries.
The Conference was a world event which attracted great attention, marking the coming together, for the first time in history, of
self-governing and independent nations of Asia and Africa. It
generated goodwill and friendship among the Asian-African countries and helped to establish personal contact among the leaders
of these countries. The psychological impact of this Conference
on the peoples of Asia and Africa in particular is bound to have
far-reaching consequence. The communique issued at the end of
the Conference received world-wide attention.
USA
PERU INDIA BRAZIL NORWAY SLOVAKIA SWITZERLAND SOUTH AFRICA KOREA ARGENTINA
UNITED KINGDOM JAPAN RUSSIA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC BURMA INDONESIA
PAKISTAN
Sep 20, 1955

APPENDIX I INDIAN MISSIONS ABROAD
Jan 01, 1955
APPENDIX I
INDIAN MISSIONS ABROAD
EMBASSIES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

Afghanistan
Argentina
Belgium
Brazil
Burma
China
Czechoslovakia
Egypt
Ethiopia
France
Germany

12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Italy
Japan

Also Head of the Indian Military
Mission, Berlin,

Ambassador resident in London.

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
HIGH

Mexico
Nepal
Netherlands
Poland
Switzerland
Thailand
Turkey
United States of America
U.S.S.R.
Yugoslavia

Ambassador resident in Washington.
Ambassador resident in Moscow.

COMMISSIONS

1.
2.
3.
4.

Australia
Canada.
Ceylon
New Zealand

5.

Pakistan

6.

United Kingdom

High Commissioner resident in Canberra.
Deputy High Commissioners at Dacca
and Lahore and Assistant High
Commissioners at Hyderabad and
Rajshahi.
<pg45>

LEGATIONS
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.

Austria
Bulgaria
Cambodia
Chile.
Denmark
Finland
Hungary
Jedda (Saudi Arabia)
Jordan
Luxemburg
Lebanon
Libya
Norway
Philippines
Rumania
Sweden
Syria
Vatican

SPECIAL MISSIONS
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Berlin
Bhutan
Sikkim
Sudan (Khartoum)
United Nations

COMMISSIONS
1.
2.
3.

Aden
British East Africa
British West Indies (including
British Guiana)

Minister resident in Berne.
Minister resident in Belgrade.
Minister
Minister
Minister
Minister

resident
resident
resident
resident

in Buenos Aires.
in Stockholm.
in stockholm.
in Moscow.

Minister resident in Baghdad.
Minister resident in Brussels.
Minister resident in Cairo.
Minister resident in Cairo.
Minister resident in Paris.
Minister resident in Belgrade.
Minister resident in Berne.

4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

Fiji
Gold Coast
Hong Kong
Mauritius
Malaya
Nigeria
Central African Federation.

Commissioner resident in Accra.
Commissioner resident in Nairobi.

CONSULATES-GENERAL AND CONSULATES
1.
2.
3.

Cairo.
Basra
Belgian Congo

Consul-General resident in Nairobi.
<pg46>

4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

Copenhagen
Geneva
Hamburg
Hanoi (Vietnam)
Helsinki
Kobe
Lhasa
Medan
Muscat
New York
Ruanda Urundi
Saigon
San Francisco
Shanghai
Tananarive (Madagascar)
Vientiane (Laos)

Consul-General resident in Nairobi

VICE-CONSULATES
1.
2.
3.

Jalalabad (Afghanistan)
Kandahar (Afghanistan)
Zahidan (Iran)

AGENCIES
1.
2.
3.
4.

Malaya
Gyantse
Gartok
Yatung

INDIA
AFGHANISTAN ARGENTINA BELGIUM BRAZIL BURMA CHINA NORWAY SLOVAKIA
EGYPT ETHIOPIA FRANCE GERMANY INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ IRELAND UNITED
KINGDOM ITALY JAPAN MEXICO NEPAL RUSSIA POLAND SWITZERLAND THAILAND
TURKEY USA YUGOSLAVIA AUSTRALIA CANADA NEW ZEALAND PAKISTAN BANGLADESH
AUSTRIA BULGARIA CAMBODIA CHILE DENMARK SWEDEN FINLAND HUNGARY SAUDI
ARABIA JORDAN LEBANON LIBYA PHILIPPINES SYRIA BHUTAN SUDAN FIJI HONG
KONG MAURITIUS GHANA NIGER NIGERIA KENYA CONGO VIETNAM OMAN CENTRAL
AFRICAN REPUBLIC MADAGASCAR LAOS
Jan 01, 1955

APPENDIX II FOREIGN MISSIONS IN INDIA

Jan 01, 1955
APPENDIX II
FOREIGN MISSIONS IN INDIA
(i)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

EMBASSIES
Afghanistan
Argentina
Belgium
Brazil
Burma
China
Czechoslovakia
Egypt
Ethiopia
France
Federal Republic of Germany
Indonesia.
Iran
Iraq.
Italy
Japan
Mexico
Nepal
Netherlands
Poland
Thailand
Turkey
United States of America
U.S.S.R.

25.

(ii) HIGH COMMISSIONS
1. Australia
2. Canada
3. Ceylon
4. Pakistan
5. United Kingdom
(iii) LEGATIONS
1. Austria
2. Bulgaria
3. Cambodia
4. Chile
5. Denmark
6. Finland
7. Apostolic Internunciature.
8. Hungary
9. Norway
10. Philippines
11. Rumania
12. Switzerland
13. Syria
14. Saudi Arabia
15. Sweden.

(iv) FOREIGN CONSULAR
Country
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

Afghanistan
Austria
Austria
Austria
Belgium
Belgium
Belgium
Bolivia
Brazil
Brazil
Burma
Burma
China

Location
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay

Yugoslavia

OFFICES IN INDIA
Status.
Consulate
General.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate General.
Consulate General.
Consulate.
Consulate General.
Consulate (Vacant)
Consulate.
Consulate General.
Vice-Consulate.
Consulate General.

<pg48>
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.

China
Colombia
Colombia
Costa Rica
Costa Rica
Cuba
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Denmark
Denmark
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
Egypt
El Salvador
Finland
Finland
France
France
France
France
Germany
Germany
Germany
Greece
Greece
Haiti
Indonesia
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Italy
Italy
Japan
Japan
Liberia
Luxemburg
Monaco
Monaco
Nepal
Netherlands
Netherlands
Netherlands
Netherlands
Nicaragua

Calcutta
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Madras
Calcutta
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Bombay
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Calcutta
Bombay
New Delhi
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Bombay

Consulate General.
Consulate (Vacant)
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate General.
Consular Agency (Vacant)
Consulate General.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate General.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate General.
Consulate General.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate General.
Consular Agency.
Consulate.
Consulate General.
Consulate General.
Consulate.
Consulate General.
Consulate General.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate General.
Consulate General.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate General.
Consulate General.
Consulate.
Vice Consulate.
Consulate General.
Consulate.
Consulate
Consulate General.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate.

<pg49>
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.

Nicaragua
Norway
Norway
Norway
Norway
Panama
Peru

Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta

Consulate.
Consulate General.
Consulate General.
Vice Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate General.
Consulate General.

69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.

Spain
Spain
Spain
Sweden
Sweden
Sweden
Switzerland
Switzerland
Switzerland
Switzerland
Syria
Thailand
Turkey
Turkey
U.S.A.
U. S. A.
U. S. A.
Venezuela
Yugoslavia

.

(v) NEW DIPLOMATIC
(1)
(2)
(3)

Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Calcutta
Bombay
MISSIONS

Consulate.
Vice Consulate.
Vice Consulate.
Consulate General.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate General.
Consulate.
Consular Agency.
Consular Agency.
Consulate General.
Consulate General.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate General.
Consulate General.
Consulate General.
Consulate General.
Consulate General.

OPENED IN INDIA DURING THE YEAR
1955-56.-

Legation of Cambodia, New Delhi.
Legation of Rumania, New Delhi.
Legation of Bulgaria, New Delhi.

(vi) NEW FOREIGN CONSULAR MISSIONS OPENED IN INDIA DURING THE
YEAR 1955-56.(1) Consulate for Finland at Calcutta.
(2) Consulate for Turkey at Calcutta.
INDIA
AFGHANISTAN YUGOSLAVIA ARGENTINA BELGIUM AUSTRALIA BRAZIL USA BURMA
CANADA CHINA NORWAY PAKISTAN SLOVAKIA EGYPT ETHIOPIA AUSTRIA FRANCE
BULGARIA GERMANY CAMBODIA INDONESIA CHILE IRAN DENMARK IRAQ FINLAND
ITALY JAPAN HUNGARY MEXICO NEPAL PHILIPPINES POLAND SWITZERLAND
THAILAND SYRIA TURKEY SAUDI ARABIA SWEDEN BOLIVIA COLOMBIA COSTA!!CUBA
DOMINICA ECUADOR EL SALVADOR GREECE HAITI ISRAEL LIBERIA MONACO
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC NICARAGUA PANAMA PERU SPAIN VENEZUELA
Jan 01, 1955

APPENDIX III TREATIES, CONVENTIONS AND AGREEMENTS

APPENDIX III
TREATIES, CONVENTIONS AND AGREEMENTS CONCLUDED
OR RENEWED BY INDIA WITH OTHER COUNTRIES DURING
1955-56

1. Trade Agreement with Austria signed on Jul 02, 1955 and
29th December 1955 at Vienna.
2. Trade Agreement with Czechoslovakia signed on 3 June 1955
at Prague.
3. Trade
New Delhi.

Agreement with Italy signed on 14 December 1956 at

4. Trade
New Delhi.

Agreement with Norway signed on 24 June 1955 at

5. Trade
at New Delhi.

Agreement with Poland signed on 31 December 1955

6. Trade Agreement with Sweden signed on 31 May 1955 at.
New Delhi.
7. Trade
New Delhi.

Agreement with Indonesia signed on 16 August 1955 at

8. Trade
Baghdad.

Agreement with Iraq signed on 4 January 1956 at

9. Trade
Karachi.

Agreement with Pakistan signed on 19 July 1955 at

10. Cultural Agreement with Indonesia signed on 29 December
1955 at New Delhi.
11. Loan Agreement with Burma signed on 17 October 1955 at
New Delhi.
12. Agreement with Pakistan regarding resumption of rail traffic
via additional rail links signed on 15 April 1955 at Karachi.
13. Pant-Mirza Agreement regarding shrines and holy places
signed on 17 May 1955 at New Delhi.
14. Treaty of Friendship with Egypt signed on 6 April 1955 at
Cairo.
15. Air Agreement with Iraq signed on 27 July 1955 at Baghdad.
<pg50>
<pg51>
16. An interline agreement between the Air India International
and the Main administration of Civil Air Fleet attached to Council
of Ministers of USSR on Commercial Corporation (Aeroflat) was
signed on 20 September 1955 at Moscow.
17. Agreement between the Indian Airlines Corporation and the
General Department of the Civil Air Fleet attached to the Council
of Ministers of the USSR relating to regular air transportation between New Delhi and Moscow signed on 20 December 1955 at New
Delhi.

18. Air Transport Agreement with the United States signed on
3 February 1956 at New Delhi.
19. Air Agreement with Japan signed on 26 November 1955 at
New Delhi.
20. A Protocol with the People's Republic of China regarding
the handing over to the Government of China of the postal, telegraph
and public telephone services and the Rest Houses operated by
the Government of India in Tibet region of China
signed on 1 April
at Lhasa.
INDIA
AUSTRIA USA NORWAY SLOVAKIA CZECH REPUBLIC
INDONESIA IRAQ PAKISTAN BURMA EGYPT RUSSIA

ITALY
JAPAN

POLAND
CHINA

SWEDEN

Jul 02, 1955

APPENDIX IV INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS OF WHICH INDIA IS A MEMBER

Jan 01, 1955
APPENDIX IV
INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS OF WHICH INDIA IS A
MEMBER
1. United Nations General Assembly.
2.

Interim Committee of the General Assembly.

3.

United Nations Commissions and Committees:(a) International Law Commission.
(b) Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories.
(c) Peace Observation Commission.
(d) Committee on Contributions.
(e) Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions.
(f) United Nations Administrative Tribunal.
(g) Special Committee on the review of the decisions of the
United Nations Administrative Tribunal.
(h) Advisory Committee on the International Conference on
the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy.
(i) Scientific Committee on the effects of atomic radiation.
(j) Committee to consider the question of convening a General Conference to review the U.N. Charter.

4. United Nations Trusteeship Council. India was also a member
of one of the United Nations Visiting Missions to the Trust Territo-

ries in West Africa.
5. United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) and
its following functional commissions:(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)

Commission on International Commodity Trade.
Commission on Human Rights.
Commission on Narcotic Drugs.
Population Commission.
Social Commission.
Statistical Commission.
Transport and Communications Commission.
<pg52>
<pg53>

6. United Nations Economic Commission for Asia and the Far
East (E. C. A. F. E.), its committee and sub-committees.
7. India is also a member of the following Specialised Agencies.
of the United Nations:(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)

Food and Agricultural Organisation (F.A.O).
General Agreement on Tariff and Trade (G.A.T.T.).
International Bank for Re-construction and Development (I.B.R.D.).
International Civil Aviation Organisation (I.C.A.O.).
International Labour Organisation (I.L.O.).
International Monetary Fund (I.M.F.).
International Telecommunication Organisation (I.T.U.).
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (U.N.E.S.C.O.).
Universal Postal Union (U.P.U.).
World Health Organisation (W.H.O.).
World Meteorological Organisation (W.M.O.).

8. International Association for Bridges and Structural Engineering, Zurich.
9. International Astronomical Union, Brussels.
10. International Cargo Handling Co-ordination Association,
London.
11. International

Commission on Irrigation and Drainage, Paris.

12. International

Commission on Large Dams. Paris.

13. International

Committee of the Red Cross, Geneva.

14. International
macy, Brussels.
15. International

Committee of Military Medicine and PharConference of Social Work, Paris.

16. International Cotton Advisory Committee, Washington17. International

Council of Archives, Paris.

18. International

Council of Scientific Union, London.

19. International

Criminal Police Commission, Paris.

20. International

Custom Tariff Bureau, Brussels.

21. International

Electro-Technical Commission, Geneva.

22. International

Federation for Documentation, The Hague.
<pg54>

23. International Federation for Housing and Town Planning,
The Hague.
24. International

Federation of University Women, London.

25. International

Hospital Federation, London.

26. International
Rome.
27. International
28. International
International Union

Institute for the Unification of Private Law,
Institute of Administrative Sciences, Brussels.
Institute of Scientific Travel Research of the
of Official Travel Organisation, Geneva.

29. International

Materials Conference, Washington.

30. International

Organisation for Standardisation, Geneva.

31. International

Railway Congress Association, Brussels.

32. International

Scientific Radio Union, Brussels.

33. International

Tea Committee, London.

34. International

Tin Study Group, The Hague.

35. International

Union of Aviation Insurers, London.

36. International

Union

for the Protection of Nature, Brussels.

37. International

Union

of Biological Sciences, Paris.

38. International

Union

of Crystallography, Cambridge.

39. International

Union

of

Geodesy and Geophysics, Paris.

40. International

Union

of

Geography, New York.

41. International

Union

of

History of Sciences, Paris.

42. International

Union

of

Official Travel Organisation, Geneva.

43. International

Union

of

Pure and Applied Chemistry, Paris.

44. International

Union

of

Pure and Applied Physics, Paris.

45. International
Delf, Netherlands.

Union of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics,

46. Permanent International Association of Navigation Congress,
Brussels.
47. Permanent International Association of Road Congress, Paris.
48. Union International Centre Le Cancer, Paris.
49. World Union of Free Thinkers, Lourain, Belgium.

INDIA
USA SWITZERLAND
LATVIA ITALY
Jan 01, 1955

BELGIUM

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

UNITED KINGDOM

FRANCE


