1952-53

Content
Jan 01, 1952
REPORT
1952-53
THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS

REPORT OF THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS, 1952-53
The report falls into five parts:Part I describes the administrative structure and problems of
organization at headquarters, and India's representation
abroad;
Part II deals with points, of special interest in
where India is represented;
Part

III

Part IV
Part

deals with International Conferences;

deals with Emigration; and

V with Information Services.

INDIA

Jan 01, 1952

Administration
Jan 01, 1952
PART I
ADMINISTRATION

those countries

(A) Organization of the Ministry
A chart showing the administrative organization of the Ministry
can be seen at Appendix 'A'.
The Secretary-General is responsible for supervision and coordination of the work of the Ministry as a whole. Work is divided
between the other officers on a functional as well as on a regional
basis. The Foreign Secretary deals with the Far-East, the Middle
East, the North-East Frontier, Continental Europe, the Americas,
the United Nations Organization, and Administration. The Commonwealth Secretary deals with the Commonwealth countries (except
Canada), South-East Asia and Africa. The Director of the Historical
Division is in charge of the Research and Reference Sections of the
Ministry and of the Library. There are four Joint Secretaries, 8
Deputy Secretaries and 24 Under/Assistant Secretaries among whom
work is similarly divided.
Having regard to the increasing rang of the Ministry's work and
responsibilities, the present strength is quite inadequate. Proposals
for the reorganization of the Ministry are under consideration.
Another serious administrative problem affecting the Ministry is
the want of sufficient accommodation. Three Divisions are located in
206 M of E. A.
<pg2>
two separate buildings at a distance from the Secretariat, and both in
the Secretariat and in the outlying offices, there is insufficient accommodation for officers and sections. The possibility of securing some
additional accommodation is being examined.
Consular Division.-The Consular Division, which was first
constituted in August 1951, has continued to function with two
Branches. The Division has been carrying out the work of compilation of revised Chapters of Consular Instructions, interpretation of
these instructions and other co-ordination work in regard to questions
on legal and quasi-legal matters raised by the various Indian Missions
abroad. The Division has kept watch over the working of the
Consular Offices and levy of fees by them for different Consular and
notarial functions performed. It arranged to secure information
about the demise of Indian nationals abroad, the properties left
behind by them and their transfer to the legal heirs, etc. It also
attended to repatriation, relief payments, recoveries, extradition,
deportation, etc., in respect of Europe, South East Asia, Arab World
and Turkey.
Historical Division.-The Historical Division continued its work
during 1952-53 on the accustomed lines. In consequence of the
purchase of Baroda House by the Northern Railway, the Division
moved during September 1952 into 26, Feroz Shah Road, together
with the Conference Branches and the Research and Intelligence

Branch.
One of the Research Officers left, on being appointed Information
Officer; another was sent on deputation to South-East Asia for about
2 1/2 months. An Assistant Research) Officer was given leave to go to
the U.S.A. on a scholarship. A new post of Assistant Research
Officer was sanctioned and filled through the U.P.S.C. As the Director
is leaving at the end of the year, a Foreign Service Officer has been
selected to succeed him.
The Division produced a large number of papers for the territorial
sections of the Ministry.
Library.-Considerable additions were made to the Library and
a good deal of progress was made in the classification and cataloguing
of the books and maps.
Research and Intelligence Branch.-The R. and I. Branch, which is
under the supervision of the Director, performed its work (the preparation of a Monthly Intelligence Summary) steadily during the year.
<pg3>
(B) Missions Abroad
During the year under review the Ambassador of India at Moscow
was concurrently accredited as Minister to Hungary; the Ambassador
as Cairo as Minister to Libya and the Commissioner at Port Louis
as Consul-General in Madagascar. A separate Legation under a
Charge d'Affaires of the rank of First Secretary was opened at
Damascus, and a Consulate-General at Meshed. It has also been
decided to appoint a Commissioner at Hong Kong. The Indian
Missions in Germany and Japan were raised to Embassies.
The minimum period of continuous service abroad prescribed for
officers and staff to qualify for home leave or transfer remained at
three years in "ordinary" localities, and two years in "special" localities where conditions of life are difficult.
(C) Accommodation for Missions
Sanction has been accorded this year to the purchase of a house
for the Indian Ambassador at The Hague. The construction of houses
at Nairobi is proceeding. The construction of additional buildings
at Singapore has been held up as legal proceedings against the
squatter who is occupying the site have not been completed. It was
not possible to start work at Karachi this year, but plans have been
prepared and it is hoped to do a substantial amount of building at
Karachi in the coming year.
Proposals for purchases of property and land at some other posts
are under consideration.
(D) Foreign Missions in India

Diplomatic missions of Germany and Japan were set up in India
during this year. This brings the total number of countries having
diplomatic representation in India to 42.
(E) Indian Foreign Service
Five candidates were recruited to the Indian Foreign Service
through the open competitive examination held by the Union Public
Service Commission in 1951. Of these, three are receiving training
in the United Kingdom; one in Switzerland and one in the U.S.A.
The sanction of the Cabinet to the formation of Branch B of the
Indian Foreign Service has been obtained and the scheme is in process of formulation. The new service will include a number of junior
appointments at headquarters and abroad.
<pg4>
Pending the formal establishment of an Inspectorate, two senior
officers of the Government of India visited some of the Missions in
Europe to advise Government on certain outstanding administrative
questions. Their recommendations are receiving consideration.
(f) Economy Measures
Every effort was made to cope with the increasing volume of work,
without a corresponding increase in the number of senior officers.
The temporary post of Special Secretary was abolished and the posts
of Legal and Treaties Adviser and of two Statisticians have not been
filled. Two Assistants have however, been appointed against the
Post of two Statisticians. In addition, two posts of Stenographers,
1 of Jemadar and 2 of Peons were abolished, Personal staff for the
Deputy Minister was found from within the normal strength, without any additional posts being created. Vacancies in the Establishment at Headquarters and abroad, and reduction in expenditure on
transfers from abroad, are expected to lead to a saving of over Rs. 5
lakhs. Postponement of certain schemes is expected to yield a
further saving of Rs. 17.61 lakhs.
(G) Expenditure
The total expenditure in 1952-53 according to the revised estimates is expected to amount to Rs. 857.054 lakhs. Included in this
amount are the following items of expenditure which are either fixed
in nature or have little relation to the normal activities of this
Ministry:1. Tribal Areas including the Assam Rifles, and provision for
Economic Development Schemes (Rs. 24.81) and Community Projects (Rs. 8.85 lakhs)-Rs. 309.93 lakhs.
2. Subsidies to neighbouring states and the Chandernagore
Administration-Rs. 42.96 lakhs.

3. Contributions to the UNO and Delegations there to-Rs. 72.35
lakhs.
4. Expenditure on demarcation of boundaries between India
and Pakistan, recovery of abducted women and implementation of the Prime Ministers' Agreement-Rs. 20.29
lakhs.
5. Passport and Emigration Establishments-Rs 15.10 lakhs.
6. Political pensions and cost of repatriation of Indians-Rs.
1.84 lakhs.
7. Miscellaneous expenditure on pilgrimages and evacueesRs. 3.11 lakhs.
<pg5>
If the expenditure on the special items enumerated above
totalling Rs. 465.58 lakhs is excluded, the expenditure on items
strictly pertaining to this Ministry works out to Rs. 392.27 lakhs.
This includes an expenditure of Rs. 52.08 lakhs on the High Commissioner's Office, London, and Rs. 66.85 lakhs on the pay and allowances of officers and staff and other expenses (including reorganization of the External Publicity, Division) at the headquarters of the
Ministry.
Excluding the expenditure at headquarters and in the High
Commission's Office in London, the expenditure incurred on our
Missions and Posts abroad comes to Rs. 273.34 lakhs. Spread over
61 Missions, this gives an average of Rs. 4.48 lakhs per Mission. Out
of this expenditure, an average of Rs. 1.34 lakhs per Mission is spent
on pay and allowances of Heads of the Missions and other officers.
The expenditure on rent for office and residential accommodation
totals. 34.53 lakhs.
CANADA
USA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC INDIA TURKEY RUSSIA HUNGARY EGYPT LIBYA
MAURITIUS MADAGASCAR SYRIA HONG KONG GERMANY JAPAN KENYA REPUBLIC OF
SINGAPORE PAKISTAN SWITZERLAND UNITED KINGDOM
Jan 01, 1952

Treaties, Agreements and Miscellaneous

PART II
Treaties, Agreements and Miscellaneous
(1) Afghanistan.-The Treaty of Trade and Commerce with
Afghanistan, signed in 1950, came into force on the Mar 24, 1952.
(2) Burma.-A Treaty of Friendship between India and Burma
was ratified at Rangoon on the 31st January 1952. It was registered
with the U.N. Secretariat on the 7th November 1952.
(3) Egypt.-A Bilateral Air Agreement between India and Egypt,
signed at Cairo on the 14th June 1952, came into force during the
year.
(4) Indonesia.-A Treaty of Friendship between India and
Indonesia, which was signed on the 23rd March 1951, was ratified by
the Indonesian Parliament during the year. The instruments of
ratification are expected to be exchanged shortly.
(5) Iran.-An Indian Air Delegation was sent to Tehran in
March 1952, for the conclusion of a Bilateral Air Agreement with
Iran. These negotiations are continuing. The agreement is expected to be signed shortly.
(6) Iraq.-A Treaty of Friendship was signed at Baghdad on the
10th November 1952.
Negotiations are in progress for concluding a Trade Agreement.
The question of concluding an Air Agreement with Iraq is also
Under consideration.
<pg6>
(7) Japan.-The Government of India terminated the state of
war between India and Japan on the 28th April 1952. The Government of India concluded a separate bilateral Treaty of Peace with
Japan. It was signed on the 9th June 1952, and the exchange of
instruments of ratification took place on the 27th August.
(8) Muscat and Oman.-The text of a Treaty of Friendship,
Commerce and Navigation between the Government of India and
the Sultan of Muscat has been agreed upon.
(9) Norway.-A Tripartite Agreement between the United
Nations, the Government of Norway and the Government of India,
concerning the economic development of India, was signed on the
17th October 1952 at New York.
(10) Pakistan.-The Indo-Pakistan Trade Agreement for 1951
expired on the 30th June 1952. A fresh Trade Agreement for 1952-53
was signed by the two Governments on the 5th August 1952.

(11) Philippines.-A Treaty of Friendship between India and the
Philippines has been concluded. It will come into force after
ratification.
(12) Syria.-A Treaty of Friendship and Commerce was signed
in New Delhi on the 25th February 1952. The instruments of ratification were exchanged in New Delhi on the 5th December 1952, and
the Treaty came into force from that date.
(13) Turkey.-The instruments of ratification of the Treaty of
Friendship signed at Ankara on the 14th December 1951 were exchanged in New Delhi on the 25th July 1952. The Treaty came into
force on the 9th August 1952.
Negotiations for a trade agreement are in progress.
(14) United States of America.-Negotiations have been going on
for the last few years for a Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and
Navigation, between India and the United States of America. It is
now proposed that the Treaty, when concluded, should be called a
Treaty of Friendship and Establishment.
(15) Cultural Scholarships.-The Government of India's Cultural
Scholarships Scheme, which was started in the year 1949, with the
object of promoting cultural relations between India' and other
countries of Asia and Africa and of providing facilities for higher
education to students from those countries has received warm appreciation abroad. With a view to extending the Scheme to other
countries and also to widen its scope, the number of scholarships has
<pg7>
been increased from 70 to 100. These scholarships have been awarded to both non-Indian students and students of Indian origin domiciled in Asian and African countries.
(16) Kashmir.-The United Nations Security Council continued
its efforts to settle the Kashmir dispute. Its representative, Dr.
Frank P. Graham, held meetings with the representatives of the Governments of India and Pakistan from May 29 to July 16 1952, at New
York and from August 26 to September 10, 1952, at Geneva. The
results of the negotiations were submitted to the Security Council
in Dr. Graham's Third and Fourth Reports. After considering the
Reports and the views of the Governments of India and Pakistan,
the Security Council adopted the Anglo-U.S. Resolution on December
23. 1952. India did not accept the Resolution, as it was wholly
opposed to her basic position on fundamental issues, but expressed
her willingness to continue negotiations with a view to exploring
all avenues for a peaceful settlement. Further discussions with Dr.
Graham took place at Geneva during February 1953.
(17) Recovery of Abducted Women and Children.-The abducted
Persons (Recovery and Restoration) Act, 1949, has been further

amended by the Abducted Persons (Recovery and Restoration),
Amendment Act, 1952-No. LXXVII of 1952-so as to be valid up to
the end of February 1954. The validity of the Act has been extended
because there is still a large number of abducted persons to be recovered an both sides.
During the year under report, 1,289 abducted persons were recovered in India and 474 in Pakistan. The decline in the figures as
compared with those of the last year is due to the fact that the
recovery activities in India were suspended for about four months
during the year as a result of the Full Bench judgment of the
Punjab (I) High Court declaring the Act inconsistent with the provisions of Article 22 of the Constitution. The constitutional validity
of the Act was, however, upheld by the Supreme Court, after which
the activities were resumed.
A. United Kingdom and Ireland
United Kingdom.-The transfer of all Agency work other than
pensions work from the Commonwealth Relations Office to the High
Commission of India in London is expected to be completed by the
31st March 1953.
Shri V. K. Krishna Menon was succeeded by Shri B. G. Kher as
High Commissioner for India in the United Kingdom on the 14th
July 1952.
<pg8>
The Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Economic Conference was
held in London in November 1952. Shri C.D. Deshmukh, Finance
Minister, led the Indian Delegation in the absence of the Prime
Minister.
Ireland.-Shri B.G. Kher has been concurrently accredited as
Ambassador of India to Ireland.
B. Europe
France (French Possessions in India). Chandernagore was transferred to the Indian Union de jure on the 9th June 1952, on the ratification of the Treaty of Cession of Chandernagore by the French
Parliament. For the present, the territory is being administered by
the President under Article 243 of the Constitution through an
Administrator, assisted by an Advisory Council.
As regards the remaining 4 French Settlements in India the
Government of India have formally proposed to the French Government that negotiations may be started on the basis of a direct transfer of these Settlements to India, without a referendum. Measures
are being taken to check smuggling from the French Possessions into
India.

Finland.-A proposal to appoint an honorary Consul-General for
India in Finland is under the consideration of the Government of
India.
Gernmany.-Shri S. Dutt has been appointed Ambassador of India
at Bonn and Head of the Indian Military Mission at Berlin.
The Netherlands.-A bronze bust of Mahatma Gandhi was installed at the Peace Palace at The Hague on the 13th November 1952.
Portugal (Portuguese Possessions in India).-The Government of
India have sent a Note to the Portuguese Government requesting
that negotiations may be started for the transfer of Goa, Daman and
Diu to India. The Government of India have also sent several representations to the Portuguese Government regarding the various legislative measures promulgated by them which discriminate against
Indians.
Sweden.-A Swedish Archaeological Expedition consisting of 11
members came to India in December 1952 for research.
Switzerland.-Shri M. Asaf Ali was appointed Minister of India
in Switzerland (with the personal rank of Ambassador) in succession
to Shri N. Raghavan. He was concurrently accredited as India's
Minister to the Holy See and Austria.
<pg9>
A proposal to open a Consulate-General at Geneva is under the
consideration of the Government of India.
U.S.S.R.-Shri K. P. S. Menon succeeded Dr. Radha Krishnan as
India's Ambassador at Moscow, and presented his credentials to the
President of the Supreme Soviet of the U.S.S.R. on the 18th October,
1952.
The Vatican.-Shri Asaf Ali has been appointed Minister to the
Vatican in succession to Shri N. Raghavan.
Yugoslavia.-A Yugoslav Good-will Mission consisting of high
ranking political figures paid a visit to India in December 1952.
C. Africa
East Africa.-At the request of the Government of Tanganyika,
arrangements were made to select a few Indian doctors through the
Union Public Service Commission for appointment in the service of
that Governments.
Egypt.-Shri K. M. Panikkar assumed charge as Ambassador to
Egypt.
Ethiopia.-Our Minister attended, at Asmara, the celebrations
connected with the federation of the territory of Eritrea with

Ethiopia.
Libya.-The Governments of India and Libya agreed to establish
diplomatic relations at Legation level. The Indian Ambassador at
Cairo has been concurrently accredited as Minister to Libya.
Madagascar.-It has been decided to open a Consulate-General in
Madagascar. The Indian Commissioner in Mauritius will be concurrently Consul General in Madagascar.
Union of South Africa.-The Union Government continued to
implement As policies of economic and residential segregation of nonEuropeans as envisaged in the Group Areas Act. Further notifications, and regulations were issued under this Act during the year
under review.
West Africa.-The Indian Commissioner in British East Africa
paid a short visit to the Gold Coast and Nigeria in July-August 1952.
It is proposed to open an Indian Mission at Accra with jurisdiction
over the Gold Coast and Nigeria.
Two Ministers of the Government of Nigeria paid a short good-will
visit to India during November 1952. They were state guests during
their stay and travel in India.
<pg10>
D. Middle East
Afghanistan.-Two trained army horses from the Army Remount
Depot, Saharanpur, were sent to Kabul in November, 1952 and presented to His Majesty the King of Afghanistan.
In response to an invitation of the Afghan Government, an Indian
hockey team and a party of wrestlers visited Afghanistan during
August, 1952, to participate in the Afghan Jashan Celebrations.
At the request of the Afghan Government, a further batch of
teachers is being selected for teaching English in the Afghan schools.
As the Government of Pakistan had denied facilities to Indian
aircraft for a direct flight from Delhi to Kabul, a complaint was
made to the I.C.A.O. Council at Montreal in April 1952. After discussions, Pakistan offered two alternative routes: (a) Delhi-LahoreKandahar-Kabul (avoiding the Peshawar area), or, (b) India-KarachiKandahar-Kabul (avoiding the Quetta area). These routes have been
accepted by the Government of India and the Council of ICAO has
been informed accordingly.
Haj.-Arrangements were made for about 8,000 Indian pilgrims
to visit the Hejaz on pilgrimage during the year.
Iran.-A Consulate-General was opened at Meshed in December

1952.
To help Iran combat the locust menace, the Government of India
has sent materials worth Rs. 76,000 to that country.
A direct radio-telephone service between India and Iran was inaugurated on the 1st March, 1952.
A party of 2 Iranian veterinary professors and 8 veterinary
students visited India in April 1952, for a study tour of about 3 weeks
of some of the Veterinary Institutes in India.
Iraq.-The Governments of India and Iraq have agreed in principle to raise the status of their respective legations to that of
Embassies.
Pakistan.-The Plenipotentiaries of the Governments of India
and Pakistan met in New Delhi, on the 21st August, 1952, and finally
accepted the boundary lire between West Bengal and East Bengal
along the river Ganga, which formed the subject of Dispute No.1
referred to the Bagge Tribunal.
As a result of the initiative of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, a Working Party consisting of engineers
designated by India and Pakistan met at Washington in May-June,
1952, and at Karachi in December, 1952, for the purpose of studying,
<pg11>
together with the Bank's engineers, Possible technical measures to
increase the supplies of water available to the two countries from
the Indus system of rivers for the purposes of economic development. They expect to complete their work sometime towards the
end of the year through a final meeting at Washington in September
next.
In April, 1952, Pakistan decided to replace the Permit System
between India and West Pakistan by a Passport-Cum-Visa System,
and also to apply that system to travel between East Pakistan and
India, which had hitherto been free. Considerable discussions and
correspondence took place between the two Governments, as a result
of which an understanding on the main features of the system to be
introduced by the two countries was reached. The system came into
force on the 15th October, 1952. Implementation of the scheme led
to the setting up of a Special Section in the Ministry and of Visa
Offices at Karachi, Lahore and Dacca. Arrangements were also made
with State Governments on payment of contributions, for issue of
special passports valid for travel to Pakistan only.
A second conference with Pakistan to review the working of the
Passport System between the two countries, was held in New Delhi
in January 1953. Its agreed conclusions still await ratification by
the two Governments. If they come into force they will make travel

between India and Pakistan much more easy than before.
The Agreement reached between the Prime Ministers of India
and Pakistan in April, 1950, regarding the rights and protection of
minorities in the two countries, continues to be in force, and the
various Organizations and agencies set up thereunder are functioning.
Before the introduction of a Passport-Visa system between India
and Pakistan, there was considerable passenger traffic of all kinds
between West Bengal and East Bengal. From the 1st January 1952
to the 15th October, 1952 (when the Passport-Visa system came into
force) 17.05 lakhs of Hindu and 7.98 lakhs of Muslim passengers
travelled by rail from East to West Bengal and 17.72 lakhs of Hindu
and 9.03 lakhs of Muslims travelled from West to East Bengal. These
figures include persons migrating from one country to the other. In
September and October, 1952, because of fears of the effects of the
Passport-Visa system, the migration of Hindus from East Bengal
developed into an exodus. After the system was introduced on 15th
October 1952 the traffic was very greatly reduced.
The other important matters dealt with during the year under
report were the demarcation of the Indo-Pakistan boundary, the
evacuee property question and anti-Indian propaganda in Pakistan.
<pg12>
Persian Gulf.-The question of appointing a Trade Agent at
Bahrein is under consideration. The Indian Charge d'Affaires at
Baghdad paid periodical visits to Bahrein and Kuwait, and maintained contacts with Indian nationals there.
Syria.-A Legation has been opened at Damascus. The Indian
Ambassador at Cairo has been appointed Minister to Syria. In his
absence, a Charge d' Affaires holds charge of the Legation.
E. North-East Frontier
Assam Tribal Areas (North-East Frontier Agency).-During the
year under review progress has been made in strengthening the administration of the tribal areas. The District Headquarters worked
speedily to extend the administration to the interior and a new administrative centre has been established at Sepla in the Se La SubAgency. Some new roads were constructed and existing roads extended and improved where necessary, Some of the important roads,
are:Lokra-Kimun Road; Harmutty-Barpani-Doimukh Road; ChardaurBhakhpung Road; Mokokchung-Tuensang Road; Sadiya-Badaro Bare
Camp Road; Pasighat-Rotung Road; Namtola-Mon Road.
The work of constructing buildings needed for the N.E.F. Administration and development schemes made satisfactory progress.

On the suggestion of the Government of Burma, the Government
of India agreed to revive the annual border meetings between representatives of the two governments to settle tribal disputes and other
matters connected with the Indo-Burma border. The first meeting
was held at Rangoon from the 8th December, 1952. The conference
was successful, and effective steps will be taken by both Governments
to maintain control over the tribal people and to prevent them from
indulging in head-hunting activities.
Trade Depots have been established in the interior of the. tribal
areas to facilitate supply of essential articles for the people at a
reasonable price. Air-dropping of supplies was also arranged for
areas where road transport was not feasible.
A Development Plan for the N.E.F. Agency has been finalized in
consultation with the Planning Commission. The Plan contains
schemes relating to roads, buildings, forests, agriculture, education,
medical and public health development. A Community Development
Block has been established at Pasighat for the N.E.F. Agency tribal
areas.
<pg13>
The Prime Minister visited Assam from the 19th to the 25th
October, 1952. During his visit to the N.E.F. Agency Areas he went
to the three District Headquarters of the Agency: Charduar, Ziro
and Pasighat. The visit was welcomed by the tribal people and their
chiefs.
Bhutan.-At the invitation of the Government of Bhutan, the
Political Officer in Sikkim attended the installation ceremony of the
new Maharaja of Bhutan at Paro (Bhutan) in October, 1952.
Throughout his journey the Political Officer was very well received.
His visit has strengthened still further the friendly relations which
exist between India and Bhutan.
Nepal.-Owing to a split in the Nepali Congress Party which had
formed a Ministry in November 1951, the Prime Minister tendered
the resignation of his Ministry on the 10th August, 1952. His
Majesty the King of Nepal therefore took direct control on the 14th,
August and is running the Administration with, the help of 5
counsellors.
The Government of India continue to help the Government of
Nepal with advice on the reorganization of the administration and
the development of the country. The Chief Election Commissioner
of the Government of India has visited Nepal.
Sikkim.-Arrangements are in progress for the first elections to
the State legislature, as a further step towards the association of the
people in the administrations.
The Dewan, whose services were lent to the State in 1949, conti-

nues to administer the State.
The preparation of a Development Plan for the State is under
contemplation.
Tibet.-The Indian Mission at Lhasa was, during the year, converted to a Consulate General. The Indian Trade Agencies at
Yatung, Gyantse and Gartok continue to function.
(F) South-East Asia
Burma.-The Burmese Prime Minister, the Hon'ble U Nu, visited
India in November 1952 to attend the enshrinement of the relics of
the two principal disciples of Lord-Buddha.
A Rehabilitation Survey Party, deputed by the Government of
Burma to study rehabilitation centres and, cottage industries in
India, came to India in April, 1952, on a study tour of about four
weeks and Visited centres such as Faridabad, Nilokheri, Bombay,
Gandhidham, Madras and Calcutta.
<pg14>
About 200 Indian doctors were recruited for service in Burma by
the Government of Burma on terms approved by the Government of
India.
A party from the Ministry of National Planning of the Government of Burma came to India on a study tour of about a month and
visited small industries and hydroelectric projects at Bombay,
Poona, Bangalore and Mysore.
Following the decision of the Chieftains of the Shan States to
surrender their administrative powers to the Government of Burma,
a Burmese mission headed by U Myint Thein, Judge, Supreme
Court, visited India for a month in December, 1952, to study the
manner in which the integration of Indian States and the financial
settlements, etc., with them have been effected. The mission had discussions with officials of the Ministry of States and visited, among
other places, Jaipur, Baroda, Bombay and Gwalior.
The process of discharging Indian nationals from the service of
the Government of Burma continued during the year. Arrangements
for assisting these persons in securing employment through the
Employment Exchanges were continued and most of them were reemployed by Governments or, private bodies in India.
About 173 Indian nationals, who were rendered destitute in
Burma, were repatriated at Government expense during 1952.
Ceylon.-In September, 1952, Exchange Control was tightened
up in Ceylon and the limit on remittances to India reduced.
Pressure for the Ceylonization of trade continued throughout the
year. No change of policy was shown in the administration of the

Immigrants and Emigrants Act. The Indian High Commissioner in
Ceylon continued to represent individual cases of hardship ad hoc
to the authorities in Ceylon.
2,37,034 applications for citizenship, involving nearly 8 lakhs of
persons of Indian origin, were made to the Commissioner for Registration till the 5th August, 1951--the last date fixed for the submission of these applications. Till the 31st December, 1952, 4,498
applications, covering 15,569 persons, were granted. At. the close of
the year, an amendment was made in the Indian and Pakistani
Residents (Citizenship) Act, which in effect, denies citizenship rights
to several thousand persons in Ceylon.
Indo-China.-As a sequel to India's policy of not recognising the
three Associated States of Viet-Nam, Laos and Cambodia practical
difficulties have arisen in sending a new Consul-General to IndoChina. The Consulate-General, therefore; remains in the charge of
a Vice-Consul for the present.
<pg15>
Malaya.-Arrangements are being made to constitute a Scholarship Fund in Malaya for the benefit of students of Indian origin for
higher studies in the University of Malaya. The Representative of
the Government of India in Malaya will be the Trustee of the Fund
and he will be assisted by a representative committee. The Fund
will be constituted with the following:(i) Rs. 80,000 received from the Indian Relief Committee,
Malaya;
(ii) About Rs. 3 1/2 lakhs paid last year by the British India
Steam Navigation Company being the refundable but
unclaimed balances of quarantine charges lying with
them:
(iii) India's share of the assets in the Indian National Army
and Indian Independence League Funds, seized in
Malaya soon after the termination of the last World
War, when they are finally divided between India and
Pakistan.
2. As a result of the efforts of the Indian Representative in
Malaya, the Government of Malaya have agreed to utilize their
share (13/14th) of the balances in the Indian Immigration Fund
(now estimated to be worth six million Straits dollars) for settling
Indian labour on land in the Peninsula. The Government of Singapore have also given up for the present the idea of putting their
share of the Fund to other uses and have decided to utilize it for
the repatriation to India of indigent Indian labourers.
Thailand.-It has been decided to send an eminent Indian scholar
every year to Thailand to deliver three lectures on cultural and

economic subjects of Indo-Thai interest. The expenditure will be
met from the interest accruing from the balances in the former
Indian National Army and the Indian Independence League Fund.
Dr. R. C. Majumdar of Calcutta has been selected this year.
(G) Far East
China.-The relations between the People's Republic of China
and India continued to be friendly. An Indian Cultural Delegation
visited China during the first half of 1952 and the exchange of Cultural Delegations between the two countries has further promoted
their friendly relations.
The efforts of the Government of India to secure representation
for the People's Republic of China in the United Nations continued.
<pg16>
Hong Kong.-The problem of constitutional reform in Hong Kong
was under consideration with the British Government. They have
authorized the Governor of Hong Kong to introduce legislation to
increase from 2 to 4 the number of elected members of the Urban
Council, on which there is already a majority of non officials.
The Government of India are shortly appointing a Commissioner
to represent them in Hong Kong.
Japan.-With the termination of the state of war with Japan,
the Indian Liaison Mission at Tokyo was made an Embassy. The
Japanese Government opened an Embassy in New Delhi and Consulates-General at Bombay and Calcutta.
(H) South Pacific Region
Fiji.-The post of the Commissioner for the Government of India
in Fiji has been vacant since July, 1952. It is expected to be filled
shortly.
New Zealand.-Shri Duleepsinghji, High Commissioner for India
in Australia, who is concurrently accredited to New Zealand, presented his credentials to the Governor-General of New Zealand on
the 7th April, 1952.
(I) North America
Mexico.-Shri G. L. Mehta, Ambassador at Washington, has been
concurrently accredited as Ambassador to Mexico.
United States of America.-Shri G. L. Mehta assumed charge as
Indian Ambassador at Washington, vice Shri B. R. Sen who has been
appointed Ambassador at Rome.
(J) South America

Argentina.-Shri Ali Yavar Jung assumed charge us Indian
Ambassador at Buenos Aires.
Brazil.-H. H. Raja Joginder Sen Bahadur of Mandi assumed
charge as Indian Ambassador at Rio de Janeiro.
Chile.-Shri Ali Yavar, Jung, Ambassador at Buenos Aires, has
been concurrently, accredited as Indian Minister to Chile.
USA
AFGHANISTAN BURMA INDIA EGYPT INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ JAPAN OMAN NORWAY
PAKISTAN PHILIPPINES SYRIA TURKEY SWITZERLAND IRELAND UNITED KINGDOM FRANCE
FINLAND GERMANY THE NETHERLANDS PORTUGAL SWEDEN AUSTRIA RUSSIA YUGOSLAVIA
ERITREA ETHIOPIA LIBYA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC MADAGASCAR MAURITIUS SOUTH
AFRICA NIGER NIGERIA GHANA KUWAIT BHUTAN NEPAL CHINA CAMBODIA LAOS
THAILAND HONG KONG FIJI NEW ZEALAND AUSTRALIA MEXICO ITALY ARGENTINA BRAZIL
CHILE
Mar 24, 1952

International Conferences
PART III.
International Conferences
India took an active part in the United Nations Organization and
the Specialized Agencies and continued to be a member of other
<pg17>
International Organizations and was concerned with the following
International Conferences:1. Seventh Session of the General Assembly of the United
Nations;
2. Committee on Information from the Non-Self-Governing
Territories;
3. International Law Commission;
4. Ad Hoc Committee of the General Assembly eon Administrative Unions affecting Trust Territories;
5. Peace Observation Commission;

6. Committee on Contributions;
7. Fiscal, Commission;.
8. Statistical Commission;
9. Transport and Communications Commission;
A Social Commission;
11. Commission on Human Rights;
12. Commission on Narcotic Drugs;
13. Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East;
14. Fourteenth Session of the Economic and Social Council
(India was not a member but was represented by an
Observer).
India was also concerned with a number of other conferences of
International Organizations and Specialized Agencies, viz., Food and
Agricultural Organisation, United Nations Educational Social and
Cultural Organisation; World Health Organisation; International
Organisation; Universal Postal Union; International Telecommunication union; International Labour Organisation; International
Civil Aviation Organisation; international Bank; International Monetary Fund. world Metreological Organisation; International Union of
Official Travel Organisation; International Governmental Maritime
The Seventh Session of the United Nations General Assembly was
held at New York from the Oct 14, 1952. The Assembly
adjourned on the 22nd December 1952, to reconvene on the 24th
February 1953 to dispose of uncompleted items. The main question
before the Session was that of Korea. The Indian delegation made
an effort to find an acceptable solution of the deadlock on the question of the repatriation of prisoners of war and to bring to an end
<pg18>
the conflict in Korea. The proposals sponsored by India received the
support of 54 member nations. Unfortunately, however, the Central
People's Government of the People's Republic of China did not accept
them. Other important political questions discussed during the,
Session included the treatment of people of Indian origin in South
Africa, the race conflict in Africa, and the Tunisian and Moroccan
questions.
On the treatment of people of Indian origin in South Africa, the
General Assembly passed a resolution by an overwhelming majority,
establishing a United Nations Good Offices Commission consisting of
the representatives of Cuba, Syria and Yugoslavia, to arrange and
assist in the negotiations between the Government of the Union of

South Africa and the Governments of India and Pakistan, and at the
same time called upon the Government of the Union of South Africa.
to suspend the implementation or enforcement of the provisions of
the Group Areas Act.
The race conflict in South Africa resulting from the policies of
apartheid of the Government of the Union of South Africa was also
discussed and the Assembly passed a resolution establishing a Commission to study the racial situation in the Union of South Africa and
to report its conclusions to the Assembly at its 8th Session.
India was re-elected a member of the 14-Member Peace Observation Commission of the General Assembly for the calender years 1953
and 1954, and was also elected to the Economic and Social Council for
a period of three years beginning on the 1st January 1953.
Dr. S. Radha Krishnan, Vice President of India, was unanimously
elected President of the 7th Session of UNESCO.
Dr. Radha Binod Pal was elected a member of the International
Law Commission for the unexpired period of the term of Shri B. N.
Rau, who has been appointed a Judge of the International Court of
Justice.
The term of the Committee on Information from the Non-SelfGoverning Territories, was again extended by the Assembly for a
period of three years and India was re-elected a member for the whole
period.
INDIA
USA KOREA CHINA TUNISIA SOUTH AFRICA CUBA SYRIA YUGOSLAVIA PAKISTAN
Oct 14, 1952

Emigration
PART IV.
Emigration
There was no change in the emigration policy of the Government
of India during the year. The emigration of unskilled labour continued to be prohibited except for specified categories, under special
or general orders of exemption. The emigration of skilled workers
<pg19>

continued to be regulated under Chapter IV of the Indian Immigration Act. Permission was granted for the recruitment of about 250
doctors and a number of lecturers for Burma.
A conference of the Central and Madras Government officials war.
held at Madras, on the Nov 17, 1952, to review the progress
made in checking illicit emigration to Ceylon, and to consider further
measures.
A notification prohibiting emigration of unskilled labour to Malaya
was issued in September 1952, under Section 30-A of the Indian
Emigration Act, replacing the notification previously issued in July
1938 under Section 13. The change was intended mainly to confer
powers on the Government to exempt certain categories of hard
cases.
The Government of India have accepted in principle a proposal
of the Government of North Borneo for the emigration of about 10,000
Indian families for permanent settlement in that country. Before
considering the matter further in detail and seeking the approval of
Parliament, the Government of India propose to send a delegation to
North Borneo to make a study of conditions and to assess the prospects of successful settlement for Indians.
The demand for deck sea-passages to Malaya exceeds the accommodation available on the two ships sailing between Madras and
Malaya. There have been a number of complaints of black marketing
and other malpractices on the part of passage-brokers, touts and
others.
To overcome these difficulties a Procedure has been evolved 'No
objection' certificates for particular sailings are now issued on a
"first come, first served" basis. Advance booking of deck passages is
also possible. Intending passengers have, however, very often to
wait up to three months for passages. This appears inevitable so long
as the shipping position does not improve.
INDIA
BURMA USA
Nov 17, 1952

Information Services
Jan 01, 1952
PART V.

Information Services
The year witnessed a considerable expansion of external publicity.
The office at Damascus, sanctioned during the previous year, has been
replaced by a Legation. A new publicity post at Bonn (West
Germany) was established. Smaller Information Offices have been
sanctioned for Salisbury (Southern Rhodesia) and Accra (Gold
Coast).
The missions at Lisbon, San Francisco, Goa and Johannesburg
had been provided with skeleton publicity staff.
<pg20>
The publicity organisation in the United States was strengthened
by appointing a fourth Information Officer attached primarily to the
permanent Indian Delegation to the United Nations.
A senior officer has been posted as the Indian Public Relations
Officer for the whole of the Middle East, with his headquarters at
Cairo.
Twenty-six regular publicity posts, as against 20 during the
previous year, continued to function during the year:
1. Ankara.
2. Baghdad.
3. Bonn.
4. Buenos Aires.
5. Cairo.
6. Dacca.
7. Damascus,
8. Djakarta.
9. Kabul.
10. Karachi.
11. Kathmandu.
12. Lahore.
13. London
14. Nairobi.
15. New York.
16. Ottawa.
17. Paris.
18. Peking.
19. Pondicherry.
20. Rangoon.
21. Rio de Janeiro.
22. Singapore.
23. Sydney.
24. Tehran.
25. Tokyo
26. Washington.
A large number of pamphlets, brouchures, etc., was brought out
during the year and bulk distribution was arranged. Among other

important pamphlets, which are under production, mention might be
made of "The Background to India", "Children's India", "Women
<pg21>
Legislators in India", "At Pilgrimage to Sanchi", "India in 1952", etc.
The Republic Day Celebrations received special attention at all Information Posts and a special bulletin was issued on the occasion.
The distribution of Indian newspapers and periodicals through
publicity posts overseas was considerably enlarged. Outside talent
continued to be used for the production of feature and special articles.
there has also been an all-round increase in the scope and coverage
of our ebonoid service and in the supply of photographs.
An addition to the existing net-work of news transmissions is
expected shortly. This will bring the American countries. which
until now were being fed with cables into the morse net-work.
A delegation of important journalists from Iran was invited to
visit India for five weeks. Another Press delegation from Australia
is expected to tour India before the close of the current year.
Publicity abroad through the medium of films was expanded considerably. Nearly 25 documentary films produced by the Films
Division of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting were distributed to 37 Indian missions abroad. In addition, overseas editions of
Indian News Reviews were distributed to selected missions. An
attempt has also been made to popularize Indian feature films abroad
by distributing a few Hindi films which were purchased for library
copies.
The libraries of Indian missions abroad were supplied with a large
number of selected books. In addition to reference books. books on
history, culture and art by well-known Indian authors' are being
regularly supplied to these libraries.
About 1,700 gramophone records of Indian music of various types
were distributed to Indian missions. Orders have been placed for
another 4,000 records for distribution before the end of this year. An
exhibition of Indian arts, organized by the All-India Fine Arts and
Crafts Society' was sent to China, Japan and Australia and the
results have been gratifying. In addition. smaller exhibitions were
organized by several Indian missions.
15,000 copies of an Indian art calendar were produced as an experiment. The calendar contained colour reproductions of paintings by
modern Indian artists. Over 11,000 of these have been sent to Indian
missions for distribution.
GIPD--N S-206M of E.A.14-3-53-1,500

SYRIA
USA GERMANY GHANA PORTUGAL SOUTH AFRICA INDIA EGYPT TURKEY IRAQ ARGENTINA
INDONESIA AFGHANISTAN PAKISTAN NEPAL UNITED KINGDOM KENYA CANADA FRANCE
REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE AUSTRALIA IRAN JAPAN CHINA
Jan 01, 1952


