1962-63

Content
Jan 01, 1962
ANNUAL REPORT
OF THE
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
FOR
1962-63
REPORT
1962-63
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART I

Administration
(i) Headquarters

PAGE

. . . . . . . . . .

1

(ii) Rationalisation of the methods of work and connected matters

2

(iii) Indian Foreign Service

3

(iv) Missions Abroad

3

(v) Inspectorate

4

(vi) Expenditure

4

(vii) Indian Frontier Administrative Service

6

(viii) Assam Rifles

6

(ix) North East Frontier Agency

7

(x) Nagaland

8

(xi) Goa, Daman and Diu

8

(xii) Pondicherry, Karaikal, Yanam and Mahe

9

PART II

A-States in Special Treaty Relations with India :(i) Bhutan

11

(ii) Sikkim

11

B-India's neighbours:-(i) Afghanistan

12

(ii) Burma

12

(iii) Ceylon

13

(iv) China (See under

East Asia)

13

(v) Nepal

13

(vi) Pakistan

14

C-South East Asia, Australia and New Zealand

21

D-East Asia

24

E-West Asia

30

F-Africa

32

G-Europe

36

H-The Americas
(i) North America

39

(ii) Central and South America

40

I-External Publicity

41
(i)
(ii)

J-Miscellaneous :(i) Central Passport and Emigration Organisation

46

(ii) Haj

49

(iii) Legal and Treaties Division

50

(iv) Consular Division

50

(v) Economic and Co-ordination Division

54

(vi) Diplomatic Missions and Consular Posts in India

54

(Vii) Distinguished visitors from Abroad

55

PART III
A-United Nations

57

B-International Conferences

63
APPENDICES

(i) Indian Missions abroad

64

(ii)

Indian Information Units abroad

68

(iii) Foreign Diplomatic Missions in India

69

(iv)

70

Foreign Consular Offices in India

(v) Treaties, Conventions and Agreements concluded or renewed by
India with other countries during 1962-63

73

(vi) International Organisations of which India is a member

74

INDIA
BHUTAN
USA

AFGHANISTAN

BURMA

CHINA

NEPAL

PAKISTAN

Jan 01, 1962

Administration
PART I
Administration
Organisation of the Ministry
(i) Headquarters.-The Ministry of External Affairs is responsible
for the conduct of India's relations with foreign countries. It also
deals with the country's representation at the United Nations Organisation and advises other Ministries and State Governments in
their relations with foreign Governments and institutions. Within

AUSTRALIA

NEW ZEALAND

India, the Ministry is responsible for the administration of the North
East Frontier Agency, Pondicherry and Goa. The administration of
the Indian Emigration Act of 1923, the Reciprocity Act of 1943, the
Port Haj Committee Act of 1932, the Indian Merchant Shipping Act
in so far as it relates to pilgrim ships, the Indian Pilgrim Shipping
Rules of 1933, and the protection of Pilgrims Act of 1887 (Bombay)
also forms the responsibility of the Ministry of External Affairs.
The Minister of State looks after the Eastern, the Western and
the Administration Divisions and also deals with matters relating to
Pondicherry, Goa and other former French and Portuguese possessions in India. The Deputy Minister deals with all the other Divisions, except China Division, Pakistan Division and the United
Nations and Conference Division which are dealt with directly by
the Minister of External Affairs.
The Secretary-General is the principal official adviser to the
Minister on matters relating to foreign policy and is responsible for
the supervision and coordination of the work of the Ministry as a
whole.
The Foreign Secretary is in charge of the Eastern Division, China
Division, the Western Division and the United Nations and Conference Division.
The Commonwealth Secretary is in charge of the Southern and
the Pakistan Divisions.
The Special Secretary, in addition to, being in general charge of
the administration of the Ministry and the Indian Missions abroad,
deals with the work of the Africa and West Asia Division. In
important matters of policy relating to administration, the Special
Secretary works in close collaboration with the Foreign Secretary
and the Commonwealth Secretary.
<pg1>
<pg2>
The three Secretaries and the Secretary, Ministry of Commerce
and Industry and the Joint Secretary (Administration), constitute
the Foreign Service Board which is responsible for all diplomatic,
commercial and consular postings and transfers, and for promotions
and confirmations of Officers of the Indian Foreign Service Branch
(A) and Grade I of the Indian Foreign Service Branch (B). The
Foreign Secretary is Chairman of the Board.
The Ministry comprises 14 Divisions. Six Territorial Divisions
deal exclusively with India's. relations with foreign countries, each
Division dealing with a number of countries grouped on a geographical or `territorial' basis. The United Nations and Conference
Division deals with all matters pertaining to the United Nations.
Five `specialist' Divisions-Protocol, Passport and Emigration, External Publicity, Historical and Legal and Treaties-serve the Ministry

as a whole. The Administration Division deals with all matters pertaining to administration, personnel and supplies and services. The
Economic and Coordination Division is, under the guidance of the
Secretary-General, responsible for the coordination of political and
economic policies affecting India's relations with the outside world.
(ii) Rationalisation of the methods of work and connected
matters.-Based on the recommendations of the Re-organisation
Committee, the pattern of work in four Territorial Divisions in the
Ministry was changed with effect from Mar 01, 1962. Cases are
initiated by Under Secretaries/Attaches in order to promote speed
and efficiency in work.
As a result of the reduction of posts in 7 Missions, Posts, a saving
of Rs. 103,000 has been effected.
A new "Local Cadre Scheme" has been introduced in the High
Commission of India, London. The new cadre is intended to cover
the staff belonging to "Office Grades", namely, Clerical Officers, Executive Officers, High Executive Officers, Senior Executive Officers and
Assistant Secretaries. The remaining grades such as "Minor and
Manipulative Grades" are at present outside the ambit of the proposed cadre.
During the year under review the Vigilance Unit dealt with 31
vigilance cases, 57 cases of complaints, and 4 cases of appeal, review
etc. Of these 11 vigilance cases, 25 cases of complaints and 2 cases
of appeal, review etc. were finally settled.
A `Purchase Unit' has been created in the Ministry on the advice
of the Experts/Advisory Committee, constituted under the direction
of the Prime Minister, to consider in detail, the question of standardi<pg3>
sation of furniture/furnishings for supply to Indian Missions/Posts
abroad and to explore the possibilities of meeting all such demands
from India.
(iii) Indian Foreign Service.-The permanent strength of the
Indian Foreign Service during the year remained unchanged and
presently stands at 233. In addition, there are 15 supernumerary and
85 temporary posts in the various grades. Excluding the 26 posts of
Heads of Mission and Post abroad, which can be filled by non-officials at the discretion of the Prime Minister, the net permanent
strength of the Indian Foreign Service for purposes of recruitment
is 207 plus 15 supernumerary posts. Apart from a 10% quota,
reserved for being filled by promotion of officers of Grade I of the
Indian Foreign Service Branch (13) and Information Services, recruitment to the IFS is made in the Junior Scale of the Service,
through an annual competitive examination conducted by the Union
Public Service Commission. During the year 1962 fifteen candidates
including 3 Scheduled Castes and 2 Scheduled Tribes candidates,
were recruited on the basis of the results of the Union Public

Service Commission examination held in 1961. Fifteen candidates
are proposed to be recruited in a similar manner in 1963.
Indian Foreign Service Branch (B).-The present permanent
strength of the Indian Foreign Service (B) is 1842. In addition, there
are 620 temporary posts.
(iv) Missions Abroad.-At the beginning of 1962, there were 126
Indian Missions and Posts abroad. These were 63 Embassies (17 concurrently accredited), 12 High Commissions (2 concurrently accredited), 9 Commissions, 6 Legations (all concurrently accredited), 4
Trade Commissions, 14 Consulates-General (2 concurrently accredited), 8 Consulates, 4 Vice-Consulates, 3 Special Missions and 3
Agencies.
During the year four new Embassies (at Cuba, Denmark, Algiers,
Togo) and four new Consulates (at Odessa, Las Palmas, Ghent,
Djibouti), including two Honorary Consulates, have been established.
It has also been decided to establish Consulates-General in North
Korea and South Korea and a resident Mission in Tunis (Tunisia).
The Trade Commission in Kuwait has been converted into a Consulate-General. Consequent upon the West Indies and Uganda becoming independent sovereign states, the Indian Commissions in Trinidad
and Kampala have been re-designated as High Commissions. It is
also proposed to establish an Indian Trade Agency at Bahrein.
During the year the three Trade Agencies at Gartok, Gyantse and
<pg4>
Yatung, and the Consulates-General at Lhasa and Shanghai,. were
closed down. The Indian Ambassadors in Brazil and the Soviet
Union have been concurrently accredited as Ambassadors to Bolivia
and Mongolia respectively, and the earlier arrangement, under
which our Ambassadors in Chile and China were accredited to these
countries respectively, has been altered. A full list showing the
location etc. of the Indian Missions and Posts abroad is at Appendix
I.
During the year progress was made with the various construction
programmes in Indian Missions abroad. The Turkish Government
has allotted an alternative plot of land in lieu of the plot of land
resumed by it. Construction has begun.
Construction of a hospital with 10 beds and 8 staff quarters at
Kathmandu has been started.
The building of the High Commissioner's residence at Lagos is in
progress.
The Government of India have applied for 10-48 acres of land at
Islamabad-the site of the new capital of Pakistan. It is proposed
to construct there the Chancery, the High Commissioner's residence and residences of other officers and staff.

As scheduled, the construction of the Chancery building at Tokyo
was completed in January 1962. Construction of nine staff quarters
behind the Chancery building has been taken up and will be completed by March 1963.
(v) Inspectorate.-In pursuance of the decision that the Secretaries should undertake Inspection Tours of our Missions in countries
abroad, the Special Secretary, Shri B. F. H. B. Tyabji, undertook the
second part of his Inspection-cum-Orientation tour of West Asia
in May-June 1962.
(vi) Expenditure.-Under the Revised Estimates, the expenditure
of this Ministry in 1962-63 is expected to be Rs. 41.89 crores, and
falls under seven Demand Heads as shown below:
(in crores of Rupees)
Rs.
(1) Tribal Areas (North East Frontier Agency)
10.89
(2) Naga Hills Tuensang Area
4.22
(3) External Affairs
8.71
(4) Pondicherry
3.95
(5) Dadra and Nagar Haveli Areas
0.14
(6) Goa, Daman and Diu
5.28
(7) Other Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry of External Affairs 8.70
-----TOTAL
41.89
-----The expenditure on 88 Missions and Posts abroad amounts to
Rs. 4.75 crores. This works out to an average of Rs. 5.40 lakhs per
Mission. Of this, an average of Rs. 1-66 lakhs per Mission is spent
on the pay and allowances of the Officers and Rs. 1.74 lakhs per
Mission on the pay and allowances of the staff, about Rs. 1 lakh on
office and residential accommodation and the balance on contingent
and other expenditure.
The sanctioned grant under "Standing Charges" and the anticipated requirements for the year 1962-63 are indicated below, along
with the corresponding figures of the Revised Estimates for the year
1961-62:(Figures in Lakhs)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------Revised Original Revised
Estimates grant require1961-62 for
ments
1962-63 for
1962-63
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Rs.
Tribal Areas

Rs.

Rs.

140.63 165.97 176.96

External Affairs

392.08 413.12 397.40

Other Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry of External
Affairs
2.88 2.89 2.77
-------------------------TOTAL
535.59 581.98 577.13
--------------------------The broad distribution of the figures is as follows:(i) Assam Rifles
99.76 119.21 129.2
3
(ii) Political and Administrative charges in Tribal
Areas
17.25 22.16 22.20
(iii) Social and Developmental Services in Tribal
Areas and Miscellaneous Expenditure
23.62
(iv) Ministry of External Affairs (Headquarters)
(v) Missions and Posts abroad

105.77

265.76

(vi) Emigration & Passsport Establishment
(vii) Special Diplomatic Expenditure
(viii) Other Miscellaneous Expenditure

24.60 25.53

281.56 265.72

8.86
10.00

8.78

9.09

10.00 10.00

1.69

(ix) Other Revenue Expenditure-Loss by Exchange
and expenditure on Pilgrimage beyond India

111.08 111.14

2.88

1.70

1.45

2.89

2.77

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------The anticipated saving of Rs. 4.85 lakhs in the Revised Estimates
for 1962-63 (as compared to the sanctioned grants is due to (i) Saving of Rs. 15.84 lakhs in Missions and Posts abroad on account of
Economy measures and reduction in the share of India's contribution to the United Nations Organisation and (ii) reduction in expenditure under "Loss by Exchange on Local Transactions" offset by
increased expenditure under "Assam Rifles" due to revision of pay
scales and conversion of temporary posts Into permanent ones in the
<pg6>
Political and Administrative Organisations in the North East Fron-

tier Agency.
The comparative figures: of the Revised Estimate's for 1961-62 and
1962-63 show that in the current year there will be an increase in
expenditure of Rs. 41.54 lakhs. The excess is mainly due to:(i) Extra expenditure caused by the grant of enhanced dearness allowance to Central Government employees with
retrospective effect.
(ii) The conversion of a large number of temporary posts into
permanent ones in N.E.F.A., Missions abroad and Headquarters and consequent transfer of expenditure thereon from Part II to Part I of the Budget Estimates.
(iii) Revision of pay scales of the Assam Rifles and grant of
rations at the Army Scale.
The present permanent strength of Officers and Establishments is
as under:------------------------------------------------------------------------Officers
Establishments
------------------- -----------------1961-62 1962-63 1961-62 1962-63
-------------------------------------------------------------------------Headquarters
194
194 1089
1205
Missions
256
278
453
545
Assam Rifles: (Five Battalions)
North East Frontier Agency
Administrative Wing
37
37
708
914
Development Wing
36
40
870
874
---------------------------------------------------------------------------(vii) Indian Frontier Administrative Service.-The substantive
strength of the cadre at the end of the year was one post in the
Supertime Grade, 36 posts in the Senior Grade (including Selection
Grade) and 33 posts in the Junior Grade. Apart from officers in the
North East Frontier Agency and Nagaland, there were 6 officers in
Manipur, 6 in Jammu and Kashmir, 2 in Tripura, one each in Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, the Laccadives, the Tribal Research and
Orientation Centre at Ranchi and the Ministry of Defence, 3 in the;
Ministry of External Affairs and one in the National Defence
College at the end of the year.
(viii) Assam Rifles.-The command, and control set-up of the
Assam, Rifles was reorganized and the post of Inspector General was
<pg7>
upgraded to that of a Major General. Three Range Headquarters
were set up to administer Assam Rifles Battalions deployed in (a)
NEFA (b) Nagaland and (c) Manipur, Tripura and Assam, the first
two under Brigadiers and the last under a Colonel.

The personnel of the force did exceptionally well in operations in
NEFA.
The Assam Rifles Act was amended so as to (a) extend its application to the whole of India, (b) confer certain Magisterial powers
on Commandants and Assistant Commandants in respect of offences
committed by riflemen; and (c) confer certain Police powers on All
Ranks. of Assam Rifles.
The pay scales and rates of pension and dearness allowance for
the Assam Rifles were enhanced. The Force was authorised Army
field scales of rations in NEFA and Army peace scales of rations in.
Nagaland as also a high altitude allowance, special grants to families
of personnel reported missing during operations, ex gratia, grants
in addition to pension entitlements and postal concessions in NEFA
and Nagaland.
(ix) North East Frontier Agency.-The North East Frontier
Agency Administration continued its efforts to implement various
shemes of development.
The draft plan outlay for the year 1962-63 was of Rs. 141 lakhs.
21,073 square miles of territory, with a population of 2.30 lakhs, were
covered by 33 National Extension Service Blocks.
Twenty-four new Lower Primary Schools and 2 new Nursery,
Schools were opened. One Middle School was raised to High School
level and 5 Lower Primary Schools were raised to Middle School
level.
Five new Health Units, Were raised increasing the total number,
to 92. Ten teams were organised under the National Smallpox
Eradication Programme.
Rs. 12.61 lakhs was realised as revenue by the Forest Department.
After the Chinese aggression, control over the western half of
the Kameng Frontier Division, Taksing, Limeking and Naba centres
of Subansiri Frontier Division, Mechuka and Manigong centres of
the Siang Frontier Division and Kibithoo, and Walong in the Lohit.
Frontier Division was lost to the aggressor. Nearly 10,500 persons.
were evacuated to the plains and accommodated in refugee camps
at Dibrugarh, Jorhat, Nowgong, Gauhati, Mangaldai and Lekhabali
These camps are now in the process of being wound up and with the,
restoration of civil administration in the areas Vacated by the Chinese
the evacuees are moving back to their homes.
<pg8>
The local people have been giving full help to the Administration
in fighting the Chinese aggression as we as in evacuation measures,
and in the re-establishment of civil administration.
(x) Nagaland The State of Nagaland Bill, 1962, and the Consti-

tution (Thirteenth Amendment) Bill, 1962, bringing the State of
Nagaland into being, were passed by Parliament. The State will
come into being from a date to be notified by the Government.
In the meantime, the Interim Body of Nagaland has started functioning as a de facto Legislative Assembly and the Executive Council
as a de facto Council of Ministers. A Secretariat for Nagaland has
been established with a Chief Secretary and four Secretaries. in
charge of the Departments of General Administration, Development,,
Finance and Law.
New Directorates of Education, Agriculture, Public Health and
Forests have been set up to plan and implement schemes of development on an intensive basis. An allotment of Rs. 2.32 crores was:
made by the Planning Commission for expenditure on Plan schemes,
during 1962-63. 15 National Extension Service Blocks were functioning in Nagaland and covered the entire area of the State.
(xi) Goa, Daman and Diu.--The Military Administration of the
Union Territory was replaced on 8 June 1962 by civil administration;
when Shri T. Sivasankar assumed charge as Lieutenant Governor
of Goa, Daman and Diu.
All Portuguese military and civilian detenus who were kept in
detention were released land they left Panjim for Karachi by air in
May 1962. The same month, the Portuguese authorities also released
2239 Indian nationals interned by them in their territories abroad.
Of these, 286 Indian nationals have since returned to India. The
Government of India have protested to the Portuguese Government
against their failure to implement the terms of the Agreement
between the two Governments in regard to facilities to be accorded
to Indian nationals who are being expelled from Portuguese territories.
Special grants were made for the relief and rehabilitation of
residents of the Union Territory who suffered as a result of damage
caused by the retreating Portuguese armies. These consisted of
repayable loans upto Rs. 2,25,000 and ex gratia grants upto
Rs. 1,50,000 which were sanctioned in April 1962.
Work relating to the reconstruction of roads and bridges and
improvements of communications continued during this period. The
Borim. bridge is being reconstructed at a cost of Rs. 13.9 lakhs. In
addition a detailed plan for the development of the Union Territory
<pg9>
has been formulated with an outlay of Rs. 107.51 lakhs for the yew
1962-63. Urgent steps are being taken to develop agriculture, fisheries
and industries. Schemes for the development of the iron ore industry and of the Marmagoa Port are being actively considered by Government. Land reforms have been introduced in Daman as a result
of which cultivating tenants have been given occupancy rights. A
Committee has been appointed to examine the question of land

reforms for Goa and Diu. National Extension and Community Development work has already commenced in the rural areas.
The pattern of education in Goa has been reorganised. Education
has been made free and compulsory at the primary level for children
from 6 to 11 years of age. The Higher Secondary School system is
to be introduced gradually. Two Degree Colleges, affiliated to the
University of Bombay, have already been established.
Dr. P. D. Gaitonde and Dr. A. Colaco were nominated as members
of the Lok Sabha by the President on 20 June 1962. Democratic
institutions are being gradually introduced and elections to 159 village panchayats were held on 24 October 1962, on the basis of adult
franchise. The Lieutenant Governor has set up an Informal Consultative Council consisting of 24 members to advise him generally on
administrative and other matters. The first meeting of the Council
was held on 24 September 1962.
Steps are bing taken for the economic and administrative integration of these territories with the rest of India on a phased basis so
as to ensure minimum dislocation of work and a smooth and gradual
transition.
The Goa, Daman and Diu (Laws) Regulation, 1962, promulgated
on 22 November 1962, extended 105 Indian enactments to the Union
Territory.
(xii) Pondicherry, Karaikal, Mahe and Yanam.-The Instruments
of Ratification of the Treaty of Cession signed on 28 May 1956, ceding
full sovereignty over these territories to India, were exchanged in
New Delhi by the Prime Minister of India and the French Ambassador on 16 August 1962. So, with effect from that date, these areas
became an integral part of the Indian Union.
The following constitutional and legislative measures have been
taken:
(a) The Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1962
specified the former French Establishments of Pondicherry, Karaikal, Mahe and Yanam as a Union Territory
and conferred powers on the President for making regulations for their peace, progress and good government.
<pg10>
Provision was also made for a Legislative Assembly and
a Council of Ministers for this territory.
(b) The Pondicherry (Administration) Act 1962 (No. 49 of
1962) provided, inter alia, for the continuance of existing
officers. and laws as well as for the extension of jurisdiction of the High Court at Madras to Pondicherry.

(c) The Citizenship (Pondicherry) Order, 1962 (No. G.S.R. 1640
of 1962) conferred Indian Citizenship on all persons born
in the Union Territory except those who opt for retain-ing their French nationality before 15 February 1963.
Since the de facto transfer of Pondicherry on 1 November 1954,
every effort has been made to bring this territory within the orbit
of the Five Year Plans.
During the Second Plan period a sum of Rs. 33.923 million was
spent on development and there will be a total outlay of Rs. 101.7
million in the Third Plan period.
Several woodworking, leather manufacturing and other small
scale industries and a Re-rolling Mill, three Textile Mills, a Sugar
Mill, and an Umbrella Ribs Manufacturing Factory, in the public
sector, have been established. The construction of a Pier in Pondicherry has been completed. The other important schemes of development, viz., Tagore Arts College, Polytechnic, Expansion of General
Hospital, Children's Diseases Hospital, T. B. Sanatorium, and T.B.
Clinic are in different stages of execution.
According to the Revised Estimates for 1962-63, the revenues of
these territories are estimated at Rs. 2.41 crores and the expenditure
at Rs. 3.94 crores.
INDIA
CHINA PAKISTAN USA UNITED KINGDOM ALGERIA CUBA DENMARK DJIBOUTI KOREA
TUNISIA KUWAIT UGANDA BRAZIL BOLIVIA MONGOLIA CHILE NEPAL JAPAN LATVIA
RUSSIA
Mar 01, 1962

A.-States in Special Treaty Relations with India.
PART-II
A.-States in Special Treaty Relations with India.
(i) Bhutan.-Bhutan's membership of the Colombo Plan had been
sponsored by India and a Bhutanese delegation participated as an
Observer, at the meeting of the Colombo Plan Consultative Committee
at Melbourne (Australia) in November 1962.
An Agreement for the exchange of mails between India and
Bhutan was signed in New Delhi on Sep 11, 1962.

Satisfactory progress was made in the implementation of Plan
projects in the second year of the First Five Year Plan. The total
financial provision for the Plan is Rs. 17.48 crores. The Government
of India gave Rs. 187 lakhs during the financial year 1961-62 and
Rs. 135 lakhs during the first nine months of the current financial
year. Construction of the 108-mile Phuntsoling-Paro Road, the first
access road linking India to Bhutan, was completed. Four other roads
are under construction and preliminary survey work has been completed for building three more roads.
The Bhutan Government have set up a Transport Division and a
Department of Agriculture. Experimental agricultural forms have
been opened and a few poultry and dairy farms have also been
established. Plans for undertaking surveys for afforestation are in
hand. A team from the Geological Survey of India, with its headquarters at Samchi is engaged in prospecting for copper, gypsum,
limestone, dolmite and coal. Commercial exploitation of these minerals is expected to be undertaken shortly. A team from the Indian
Central Water and Power Commission has conducted investigations
for micro-hydal schemes at five centres. Health centres and dispensaries have been opened in various parts of Bhutan. It has been
decided to establish a hospital with 100 beds at Thimphu. More
Lower Primary and Middle schools have been opened during the
second year of the Plan.
As in previous years, scholarships for Degree/Diploma courses as
well us for high school studies were given to Bhutanese students at
a cost of Rs. 2.93 lakhs.
(ii) Sikkim.-The Second Plan, coinciding with India's Third Five
Year Plan, made steady progress. Notable success was achieved in
the fields of road-construction, mining education and transport. The
<pg11>
<pg12>
ten-mile Chungthang-Lachung Road was completed. The project for
the construction of a twelve-and-a-half-mile aerial ropeway between
Gangtok and the Sikkim-Tibet border is nearing completion.
Budget provision for development projects during the financial
year 1962-63 was of the tune of Rs. 125 lakhs.
Seven new scholarships for Degree/Diploma courses and two
scholarships for High School studies in India were given to
Sikkimese students. During the year, expenditure on scholarships
came to Rs. 1.84 lakhs.
For exploiting the considerable copper deposits in the state, the
Sikkim Mining Corporation was established with an authorised capital of rupees one crore. The Government of India and the Sikkim
Durbar will share the capital outlay at the rates of 49 per cent and

51 per cent respectively. The Government of India have so far released Rs. 23.97 lakhs to the Sikkim Durbar for meeting the cost of their
shares of the Sikkim Mining Corporation.
B. INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS
(i) Afghanistan.-Close and friendly relations between India and
Afghanistan continued to develop. India participated in the Afghan
Jeshan (Independence) celebrations held at Kabul in August 1962.
The Indian contingent included musicians, artistes and a hockey
team. Dr. Tara Chand, M.P., visited Afghanistan, on an invitation
from the Royal Afghan Government, to attend the 900th celebrations
of the Death Anniversary of Shaikhul Abdullah Ansari Harvi during
September-October 1962.
An Indian trade delegation, led by the Minister of International
Trade, Shri Manubhai Shah, visited Kabul for review of the IndoAfghan Trade Agreement of 1960. Discussions were cordial and the
results satisfactory.
Some fourteen Indian teachers are serving in Afghanistan, teaching English in various schools.
(ii) Burma.-Relations with Burma continued to be friendly.
The Government of Burma rendered valuable assistance in the
release and repatriation of four airmen of the LAY who had been
captured by hostile Nagas.
In June 1962, I.N.S. GODAVARI and I.N.S. KHUKRI, two frigates
of the Indian Navy, visited Rangoon. Four Officers of the Burmese
Navy joined our ships as observers in the summer exercises.
<pg13>
The President has invited General Ne Win, Chairman of the
Revolutionary Council of Burma, to pay a State visit to India.
General Ne Win has accepted the invitation. The visit is likely to
take place in the first half of March 1963 or soon after.
(iii) Ceylon.-Relations with Ceylon continued to be close and
friendly. Increased facilities were given to Ceylonese personnel for
technical training in India. On an invitation from the Prime Minister of Ceylon, the Prime Minister, accompanied by Shrimati Indira
Gandhi and the Commonwealth Secretary, visited Ceylon from 13 to
16 October 1962.
The Commonwealth Secretary had informal discussions with
officials of the Ceylon Government on the problem of people of
Indian origin in Ceylon.
INS "TIR" visited Colombo from 14 to 19 March and Trincomallee
from 26 to 31 July 1962, on a. goodwill mission.

(iv) China.-(See under East Asia)
(v) Nepal.-Relations between India and Nepal continued to be
friendly.
The agitation by some Nepalese Congress workers in India for
the restoration of democratic institutions in Nepal was exploited by
some sections of the Nepali Press to create misunderstanding between
Nepal and India. The Government could not, under their legal
system, impose any restrictions on freedom of expression, but all
Government authorities had instructions to deal severely with those
who committed any breach of the Indian laws applicable in these
matters.
The visit of His Majesty the King of Nepal to India in April 1962
and of Shri Rishikesh Shah, the Foreign Minister of Nepal, In
September 1962, proved useful in removing misunderstandings and
led to the strengthening of traditional ties of goodwill and friendship
between the two countries.
As in previous years, Indian artistes visited Nepal on the occasions
of India's Republic Day, Independence Day and Gandhi Jayanti.
On an invitation extended by the Government of India, a delegation of students and teachers from Nepal visited India on an educational tour.
The Chief Conservator of Forests and a few other officers of the
Government of Nepal visited the Forest Research Institute at Dehra
Dun in August-September 1962.
<pg14>
The usual facilities for the training and education of Nepalese in
technical and academic institutions in India were given during the
year.
Indian economic and technical aid to Nepal achieved satisfactory
results. In the Third Plan period (1961-66) the aid promised by
India to Nepal is Rs. 18 crores. During the financial year 1961-62, an
expenditure of approximately Rs. 2.65 crores was incurred on Plan
projects, India also provided training to the nominees of Nepal in
Indian institutions under the Technical Co-operation Scheme of the
Colombo Plan. India is also executing two River Valley projects,
Kosi and Gandak, the benefits from which will accrue to both Nepal
and India.
India's aid to Nepal, also included cash grants to educational and
health institutions, provisions of stores and services of high level
experts, advisers and experienced and trained technical, personnel
for the execution of the projects.
Some of the major projects executed by India so far in Nepal are:
(i) Tribhuvan Raj Path (Rs. 4.40 crores), (ii) Aerial survey and

mapping (Rs. 1.58 crores), (iii) Irrigation, drinking water, power
supply and drainage (Rs. 1.47 crores), (iv) Construction of roads
under a tripartite agreement (Rs. 0.84 crores), (v) Village development (Rs. 0.77 crores) and (vi) Agricultural development (Rs. 0.14
crores).
The follow ing aid Agreements were signed., with Nepal during
the year: (1), Kathmandu Water Supply (Rs. 79 lakhs), (2) Minor
Irrigation and Water Supply (Rs. 50 lakhs), (3) Maternity and
child, Welfare Centre (Rs. 2 lakhs), (4) Dakshin Kali Road (Rs. 11
lakhs) and (5) Construction of G.P.O. Building (Rs. 6 lakhs).
A decision was taken to wind up the Regional Transportation
Organisation in consonance with the desire of the three parties concerned, viz., Nepal, the USA and India.
A team of Indian Achaeologists toured the Lumbini-Kapilvastu
area for four months to carry out excavations.
A micro-filming unit of the National Archives of India stayed in
Nepal for two months for filming old and rare manuscripts.
The Government sponsored visits to Nepal of Shri Nilakanta
Shastri, Professor (if Ancient Indian Culture, Dr. A. Ghosh, Director
of Archaeology and Dr. P. V. Bapat.
(vi) Pakistan.-(a) Indus Water Treaty.--The Permanent Indus
Commission submitted- to the- Government of India and to the
Government of Pakistan its Annual Report for the year ending
<pg15>
31 March 1962. The Commission held three meetings and conducted
four inspection tours of works and sites on the Indus Basin in India
and Pakistan, during April-December 1962.
The third annual instalment of the fixed. Indian contribution
towards the cost of replacement works in Pakistan equal to
œ6,206,000 was paid, to the World Bank on, 1 November 1962 for the
credit of the Indus, Basin Development Fund.
(b) India-Pakistan Border Conference.-The 35th Conference
of Chief Secretaries took place at Dacca on 1 and 2 August 1962
and resulted in the resumption of demarcation of the West Bengal
Tripura-East Pakistan borders. The recommencement of the demarcation from 1 November 1962 has improved, to some extent, the
relations of officers at the District level. A meeting of the Officers
Commanding who had originally, decided on a working boundary
in the Latitilla area of Assam,. contributed to the lessening of tension
in that "disputed area". Subsequently, however, the situation in
this area deteriorated. Besides the boundary dispute, the Conference
discussed various other problems arising from contacts between the
nationals of the two countries, such as border incidents, cattle-lifting, pound charges and communication problems. The Conference

was conducted in a friendly and cordial atmosphere and, within its
limited scope, achieved satisfactory results.
(c) Border incidents.-As in the previous years, a number of
border incidents occurred on the eastern sector, the majority of
these being of the nature of dacoities and cattle-lifting by Pakistani
nationals. Some of the more serious violations of the Indian border,
effected with the aid of the Pakistan Border Forces, were: (i) continued encroachment by the East Pakistan Rifles at Daikhata in the
District of Jalpaiguri (West Bengal) since June 1962, despite strong
protests to the Pakistan authorities; (ii) breaches of the status quo
by the Pakistani Forces in the Latitilla area, south of Patharia
Reserve Forest on the Assam-East Pakistan border. Pending demarcation in this area. Border Forces on either sides have been following a working boundary agreed to by the Commanders in November
1959, but the Pakistani forces violated this Agreement; and (iii)
encroachment by Pakistan in Tripura in the "disputed area", between
Asalong and Ranga Feni, on the upper reaches of the Feni river.
The Pakistan Forces established two border posts at Asalong
Tilla and Chelakappa in June 1962, and later strengthened
these. In September 1962, East Pakistan Rifles unlawfully occupied
Brajendranagar, near Chotakhil, north of the River Feni. In the
face of continued encroachment of Indian territory by Pakistan and
the refusal of the Pakistan authorities to settle the matter by discus<pg16>
sion, it was decided in September 1962, to establish an Indian post
in the disputed area, to counter the illegal Pakistani claim. This
was resisted by Pakistan and there were exchanges of fire on several
occasions. Subsequently the matter was settled at a meeting held
in Chittagong on 15 October 1962, wherein it was agreed that Border
Forces of India and Pakistan would be withdrawn, simultaneously,
from the disputed area, and that pending final settlement, no patrolling would be indulged in by either side in the disputed area.
Pakistani vacation of encroachment in the Chotakhil area was also
agreed upon at this meeting.
The situation on the western sector remained as before. The
Ground Rules Agreement an the West Pakistan-Punjab border, was
reaffirmed with major amendments in 1961. An important provision
of this Agreement, which provided for complete grounding and
demolition by 31 December 1962 of the towers and structures specifield in the Agreement, falling within the 150 yards belt on either
side of the de jure boundary, was clearly violated, when Pakistan
at first failed and then refused to ground three of the five towers
within 150 yards of their boundary, on their side. A strong protest
was lodged with the Pakistan Government against this clear breach
of the provision of an Indo-Pakistan Agreement.
At a conference of border officials of the Punjab and West
Pakistan held at Lahore in July 1962, certain decisions were reached
about apprehension of smugglers and other criminals operating on
the Punjab-West Pakistan border.

(d) Implementation of India-Pakistan Border Agreements of
September 1958, October 1959 and January 1960:(i) September 1958 and October 1959 Agreements.--On the
eastern sector, the resumption of the demarcation work on 1
November 1962 was a further, step towards implementation of these
Agreements. However, the exchange of territories, including areas
in-adverse possession of either country, can only take place when
demacration on the various sectors of the India-East Pakistan
border has been completed. The suspension of demarcation work
during the last field season-November 1961 to May 1962-naturally
delayed this. On the India-East Pakistan border, demarcation of
approximately 1659 miles out of a total of approximately 2520 miles,
had been completed by 31 May 1962.
(ii) January 1960 Agreement.--This Agreement covers the entire
India-West Pakistan border. As regards the Punjab-West Pakistan
sector, the Agreement has already been implemented.
<pg17>
(e) Demarcation of Boundaries.-The demarcation of the Rajasthan-West Pakistan border of 644 miles had been completed by
placement of pillars. The map sheets have also been finalised by
the Survey authorities of India and Pakistan and will now be signed
by the plenipotentiaries of the two countries.
Demarcation of the Gujarat-West Pakistan, sector is expected to
commence in the next field season from November 1963.
(f) Kashmir--At the beginning of 1962, Pakistan sought a meeting of the Security Council to consider the Graham Report which is
four-year old, on the plea that a grave threat to peace existed,
because of the delay in settling the Kashmir issue. The Security
Council met briefly on 1 February 1962, adjourning for a substantive
discussion an a later date, to be fixed after the elections in India
were over.
Continued insistence by Pakistan resulted in a resumed meeting
of. the Security Council on 27 April 1962. The Permanent Representative of Pakistan alleged that there was a grave threat to peace
In Kashmir in the statements of some Indian leaders and drew the
attention of the Security Council to the possibility of further
aggression by the tribesmen and people of Pakistan, If the Security
Council did not take the realities of the situation into account. He
sought the assistance of the Security Council in implementing the
UNCIP Resolutions of 13 August 1948 and 5 January 1949.
India's representative refuted these statements and drew pointed
attention to the threat held out by the Pakistani representative. He showed how Pakistan had not only refused to vacate
aggression, but had committed fresh aggressions against India. He
also referred in detail to the changed circumstances, including nego-

tiations between China and Pakistan to demarcate a part of the
border of the Indian Union, and showed how, because of Pakistan's
intransigence, the UNCIP Resolutions had become obsolete.
The Security Council resumed the Kashmir debate on 15 June
1962, but adjourned again on 22 June after a. resolution sponsored
by Ireland was vetoed by the Soviet Union. This was the first time
in the history of the discussion on the Kashmir situation that the
Council adjourned without adopting any resolution.
On 29 November 1962, the President of Pakistan and the Prime
Minister of India agreed in a joint statement "to make a renewed
effort to resolve outstanding differences between their two countries
on Kashmir and other related matters, so as to enable India and
Pakistan to live side by side in peace and friendship."
<pg18>
In Pursuance of the decision announced in the join statement of,
29 November 1962, Sardar Swaran Singh, Union Minister for
Railways, accompanied. by, advisers, reached Rawalpindi on 26
December to initiate discussions with Mr. Z. A. Bhutto, the Pakistan
Minister for Industries and his advisers. The two Ministers held
five meetings between 27, 28 and 29 December. The discussions were
marked by a spirit of cordiality and understanding. In a joint
communique issued at the end of the talks, the two Ministers made
an appeal for a voluntary moratorium on statements, criticism or
propaganda likely to prejudice the success of negotiations.
The talks were resumed in New Delhi on 16 January 1963.
Between 16 and 19 January, the two Ministers held-ten meetings, at
which various aspects of the. Kashmir problem were discussed. The
advisers, who assisted their Ministers at some of these meetings also
met among themselves a number of times to give detailed consideration to the problem of Kashmir and to seek an agreed approach to its
settlement. The discussions were frank and cordial and the attitude
of the two sides was constructive throughout. At the end of the
talks, Mr. Bhutto invited Sardar Swaran Singh to visit. Karachi to
continue the discussions with a view to finding an equitable and
honourable solution to the Kashmir problem and other related
problems, that would enable India and Pakistan to live side by side
in peace and friendship.
Pakistan agreed in May 1962 to negotiate with China regarding
part of the border of Kashmir with Sinkiang. As Pakistan has no
border with China, the Government of India protested to both China
and Pakistan over the illegality of their negotiations, reaffirmed
India's sovereignty over the territory concerned and declared that
India would not recognise any demarcation of the borders by- them.
However, on 26 and 28 December 1962, it was announced that China
and Pakistan had agreed in principle on the location and alignment
of the boundary actually existing between the two countries and
intended to, sign a border agreement on this basis. The Indian
delegation, then at Rawalpindi, expressed "surprise and regret" at

the nature and timing of this announcement. This was followed by
protests which the Government of India lodged with the Governments of China and Pakistan reaffirming India's sovereignty over
Jammu and Kashmir and repudiating the validity of any agreement between parties who had no legal or constitutional locus standi
in respect of Indian territory.
To the end of December 1962, Pakistan Armed Forces or their
agents were responsible, for 473 incidents involving firing along or
across the ceasefire line and the Jammu and Sialkot border, as
against 461 such incidents during the corresponding period of 1961.
<pg19>
As in previous years Pakistan troops or police and armed civilian
gangs in Pak-invaded Kashmir, trained, equipped and protected by
Pakistan Armed Forces, were involved in these incidents. Pakistani
subversion and sabotage activities were frustrated and 12 infiltrators,
intercepted.
(g) Stoning of the Indian Chancery in Karachi in 1961.Rs. 8,428.81 nP. was claimed from the Government of Pakistan as
compensation for the damage caused by Pakistani demonstrators to
the Indian Chancery building at Karachi on 25 February 1961. The
Government of Pakistan have since paid the above amount in full
settlement of the claim.,
(h) Co-operation on rivers in the Easter-- Zone of India and
Pakistan.-The last meeting of the Water Resources Experts of
India and Pakistan was held at Dacca (East Pakistan) from 27
December 1961 to 8 January 1962. Clarifications/supplementations/
elucidations on the data already exchanged were sought and
furnished by correspondence by the leaders of the two delegations.
(i) Trade.-Five "Review Conferences" on the implementation of
the Trade Agreement concluded between India and Pakistan in
March 1960 had been held alternatively in New Delhi and Karachi.
At the last Review Conference held in November 1962, it was
revealed that under Protocol One of the Agreement, India exported
to Pakistan goods worth Rs. 1076.31 lakhs till 30 September 1962.
The main items of exports were bidi leaves, steel, iron and coal.
The value of goods imported from Pakistan was Rs. 931.05 lakhs
The main items of import from Pakistan were raw cotton and jute
cuttings.
(j) Migrants' Property in East Pakistan.-Movable.-According to the Prime Ministers' Agreement of 1950 a migrant from
East Pakistan is to be accorded every facility to remove as much of
his personal effects and household goods as he may wish to carry
with him to India. Despite this specific provision in the Agreement
complaints from migrants that they were not being afforded these
facilities by the Pakistan authorities continue to be received. All
such complaints were taken up with the Government of Pakistan,
but without any success.

Immovable.-Though under the Prime Ministers' Agreement of
1950, the ownership of immovable properties still rests with the
migrants, the Government of Pakistan have neither paid compensation for immovable properties acquired or requisitioned by them
nor permitted the remittance of rents from these properties to India.
<pg20>
These rents can only be kept in non-resident blocked accounts opened
in Pakistan with the prior permission of the State Bank of Pakistan.
The Government of Pakistan contend that rents from immovable
properties are of a "capital" nature and as such are not permitted to
be remitted from Pakistan under the Exchange Control Regulations
of that country. The Government of India have been constantly
impressing upon the Government of Pakistan that rent is a "current"
and not a "capital" item and as such the State Bank of Pakistan
should permit remittance of rents to India through normal banking
channels according to international practice. The Government of
Pakistan do not accept this and the deadlock continues.
(k) Minorities in Pakistan.-The condition of the minority community in Pakistan, as in the last year, continues to be unsatisfactory.
There were serious communal riots in Rajshahi, Pabna and Noakhali
Districts in East Pakistan during the year and the minority community suffered losses in life and property. Furthermore, reports
of offences against the person and property of the members of the
minority community continued to be received throughout the year.
In spite of the stringent policy of the Government of India on
grant of migration certificates, the migrant traffic from Pakistan to
India continued unabated. In addition to the regular migrant traffic,
Santhal and Rajbanshi families, comprising about 11,000 persons,
sought refuge in India from East Pakistan in 1962.
(1) Payment of Pensions, Provident Fund and Gratuities.-In
accordance with the terms of the Indo-Pakistan Financial Agreement
of July 1959, the High Commissions of India and Pakistan issued a
Press Note on 1 January 1961, advising the claimants concerned to
submit their applications to the Pakistan High Commission, New
Delhi/Deputy High Commission, Calcutta, or the Indian High
Commission, Karachi/Deputy High Commission, Dacca, as the case
may be.
The Indian High Commission in Karachi received 929 claims up
to the end of September 1962. Payments have been made to 200
persons and will be made soon to 283 more persons. The Deputy
High Commission in Dacca received claims from 189 persons and
after their verification 64 persons are now in receipt of monthly
payments. 92 more cases have since been verified for payment.
This is in contrast to the non-implementation of the Agreement by
the Pakistan High Commission In India. No payments have been
made by them. The Pakistan Deputy High Commission in Calcutta

has received claims from 537 persons but payments are being made
only in 43 cases.
<pg21>
(m) Shrines, Holy Places and Pilgrimages.-The second meeting
of the Indo-Pakistan Joint Committee on Shrines has not yet taken
place. A formal invitation for the proposed meeting was extended to,
the Government of Pakistan in February 1962, but despite reminders,
the Government of Pakistan have not yet responded to the
invitation.
During 1962, sixteen officially sponsored pilgrim parties from
West Pakistan, comprising 1013 Muslim pilgrims, visited shrines in
India while during the same period eleven officially sponsored pilgrim parties from India, comprising 2967 pilgrims, visited shrines in
West Pakistan.
(n) Permission for the Movement of Wheat seeds from Pakistan
to East Pakistan in Transit through India.-In view of the unsually
serious floods in East Pakistan, the Government of India agreed, as
a special case, to the request of the Government of Pakistan for rail
transit movement of 1200 tons of wheat seeds from West Pakistan
to East Pakistan over the Indian railway system.
Furthermore, the Government of India donated Rs. 17,500
worth of materials suitable for Lungis and Sarees (approximately
10,000 yards for Thombu Lungis and 5,600 yards for Sarees) for
flood relief assistance to the Government of East Pakistan in Dacca.
(o) The Indo-Pakistan Passport and Visa Scheme.-The restrictions unilaterally imposed by the Government of Pakistan in
September 1960 on travel of Pakistani nationals holding `B' and
`C' visas to India continue.
The Pakistan Government have been approached several times
to simplify the Indo-Pakistan Passport and Visa Scheme on the
basis of reciprocity but there has been no favourable response.
However, the Indian High Commission has once again taken up
the matter with the Pakistan Government and have expressed their
readiness to negotiate other measures of liberalisation of Visa rules
relating to travel between India and Pakistan. It has also been
suggested that the Government of Pakistan may agree to discuss
this matter with the High Commissioner for India in Pakistan as a
first step.
A team consisting of officers of this Ministry and the Ministry
of Home Affairs visited our Missions in Pakistan to carry out a
detailed inspection of the working of the Passport and Visa sections.
The suggestions of the team are being implemented.
C. SOUTH-EAST ASIA, AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND
(i) Australia.-The Australian Government expressed their.

sympathy with India in the matter of Chinese aggression.
156 E.A.-4
<pg22>
Mr. E.G. Whitlam, Deputy Leader of the Opposition in Australia,
visited India in June 1962.
Mr. R. T. Pollard and Mr. F. Crean, Labour M.Ps, visited India
in August 1962.
(ii) Cambodia.-At the invitation of the President of India, His
Royal Highness Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Head of State of the
Kingdom of Cambodia, accompanied by members of the Royal
Family, Ministers and staff, paid a State visit to India from 24
January to 8 February 1963. A joint communique was issued on the
conclusion of his stay in New Delhi.
At the invitation of the Government of India a Cambodian goodwill delegation, consisting of ten members, visited India during
December 1962-January 1963.
(iii) International Commissions for Supervision and Control.Commission in Laos.--A Government of National Union was formed
in Laos on 23 June 1962, and on 9 July 1962 the Royal Government
of Laos presented a Statement of Neutrality to the Geneva Conference. The 13 other Members of the Conference signed a Declaration
on the Neutrality of Laos and undertook to recognize and respect
the sovereignty, independence, neutrality and territorial integrity of
Laos. Having regard to this Declaration, all the 14 Member
Nations of the Geneva Conference signed a Protocol which lays
down, inter alia, the future task of the Laos Commission. The
Protocol had stipulated a maximum time-table for the withdrawal of
all foreign forces from Laos which had to be completed by 7 October
1962. The other important provisions of the Protocol relate to the
release of foreign military persons and civilians captured or interned
during the course of hostilities, supervision and control of the ceasefire in Laos, prohibition of further introduction of foreign troops, and
investigation by the Commission of violations of the provisions of the
Protocol.
Commissions in Vietnam and Cambodia.-The International Commissions for Supervision and Control in Vietnam and Cambodia
continued to exercise their responsibilities to maintain peace in the
area during the period under review. In June 1962 the International
Commission in Vietnam submitted a Special Report to the Co-Chairmen of the Geneva Conference on Indo-China, embodying its findings
on complaints received from both South Vietnam and North Vietnam
regarding contravention of the provisions of the Geneva Agreement.
The, Indian Chairman and the representative of Canada on the
Commission signed the majority report, whereas the representative
of the Polish People's Republic signed a dissenting report.
<pg23>

(iv) Indonesia.-A team of IAF officers flew the AVRO-748 to
Indonesia in August 1962, and gave many demonstration flights. The
visit was a great success and considerable interest was shown in the
aircraft.
The Fourth Asian Games were held in Djakarta during August
1962. An Indian team participated successfully in many of the
items. However, there were some ugly incidents connected with
the controversy over the refusal of the Indonesian Organising
Committee to allow Israel and Formosa to participate in the Games.
The attitude of the Senior Vice-President of the Federation, Mr.
Sondhi, angered Indonesians and, in spite of the clarifications made
by the Indian Embassy in Djakarta and the Ministry of External
Affairs that the Government of India had nothing to do with the views
expressed by Mr. Sondhi in his own personal capacity, there were
demonstrations outside the Indian Embassy, and some property was
damaged. On the following day, the Indian football team was booed
and jeered, and discourtesy shown when the Indian national anthem
was played. Strong protests were made about these incidents by our
Ambassador. The Indonesian Government expressed their regret, and
promised compensation for the damage caused to the Embassy.
(v) Malaya.-Relations with Malaya continued to be friendly.
Tunku Abdul Rahman, Prime Minister of Malaya, and his party
consisting of 12 members, visited India in October 1962. The Tunku
condemned the Chinese aggression, and expressed his sympathy
and support for India in unequivocal terms. A "Save Democracy
Fund" has been started in Malaya by the Prime Minister, and
already rupees one million have been received by the Government of
India.
Three ships of the Indian Navy, including the aircraft carrier
Vikrant, visited Penang from 21 to 25 July.
A team of IAF officers flew the AVRO-748 to Malaya during
August 1962. The visit was a great success.
As in previous years, a number of Malayan personnel were trained
in India and several Malayan students were admitted to medical and
other colleges in India.
(vi) New Zealand.-The New Zealand Government expressed
their full sympathy with India in the crisis caused by Chinese
aggression.
An Indian music and dance troupe paid a 13-day visit to New,
Zealand during October 1962 at the invitation of the New Zealand.
Broadcasting Corporation. It was the first such visit by an Indian
<pg24>
cultural troupe for many years and the performances were well
received.

(vii) Singapore.--Mr. Lee Kuan Yew, the Prime Minister of
Singapore, visited India twice in April and September 1962.
The three ships of the Indian Navy also visited Singapore in
July 1962.
(viii) Philippines.-The Philippine Government expressed their
sympathy with India in regard to the Chinese aggression.
(ix) Thailand.-The Thai Government expressed their full sympathy and support for India with reference to the Chinese aggression.
The Supreme Patriarch of Thailand toured India from 7 to 27
April.
The King of Thailand has accepted an invitation to visit India.
Kumari Kamala and her dance troupe gave performances at
Bangkok.
D. EAST ASIA
(i) China.--During the year China intensified her aggressive
military activities all along the Indian border. Chinese forces crossed
the frontier in the north-west corner of NEFA on 8 September 1962
and after a series of probing attacks mounted on 20 October 1962 a
large-scale attack on Indian territory in both the Western and the
Eastern Sectors.
Anti-Indian propaganda in the Chinese and Tibetan press reached
its peak during the year. This was stepped up towards the last few
months in support of the Chinese massive aggression.
Early in 1962 Chinese troops intensified their aggressive forward
patrolling in the Western Sector of the India-China boundary. On
30 April 1962 the Government of China repeated their threat that
they, would order the extension of patrolling along the entire
boundary. They also continued to set up a number of new aggressive
military posts in the Ladakh region. To eliminate the possibility of
military clashes the Government of India once again suggested on
14 May 1962 that, as an interim measure in the Ladakh region, Indian
forces should withdraw west of the Chinese claim line as shown on
Chinese maps and Chinese forces should withdraw east of the traditional international boundary. This would create the proper atmosphere for peaceful talks on the boundary question between the two
Governments. India was further willing to permit the continued use
of the Aksai Chin road for Chinese civilian traffic. This proved India's
earnest desire to settle the boundary question.
<pg25>
In their reply dated 2 June 1962, however, the Chinese Government brusquely, rejected the offer. Also, while notes were being still

exchanged on the renewal of the Sino-Indian Trade Agreement of
1954, the Government of China, in May 1962, in sharp contrast to
their repeated declaration that they desired to renew the Agreement,
suddenly withdrew their Trade Agencies in Kalimpong and Calcutta.
The Government of India had always provided the Chinese Trade
Agencies with requisite facilities for their functioning. On the other
hand the Government of China had denied even normal facilities to
Indian Trade Agencies in Tibet, and held out veiled threats when
reasonable time for withdrawal was sought. The experience of Indian
Trade Agencies in Tibet, and the systematic Chinese aggression
made it clear from the beginning that China had no intention of conforming to the provisions of the 1954 Agreement. By their actions
the Chinese Government had shown their complete disregard of
the letter and the spirit of the Agreement as well as of the Five
Principles of peaceful co-existence enunciated in the Preamble to the
Agreement. The Agreement itself lapsed on 2 June 1962.
Cases of violation of Indian air space by Chinese aircraft also
increased during the year. The Government of India lodged serious
protests against this. The Chinese Government resorted to sending
notes alleging "intrusions" on the part of Indian aircraft over territories which are parts of India.
In July 1962 Chinese troops encircled an Indian post in the Galwan
Valley. There were clashes in the Pangong Lake area. In a note
dated 26 July 1962 the Government of India referred to the tense
situation prevailing in Ladakh and indicated their willingness to enter
into discussions on the India-China boundary question on the basis
of the report of the officials submitted in December 1961 as soon as
the present tensions have been eased and a suitable climate for talks
and discussions is created. On 22 August, the Government of India
suggested that discussions should be held between the two Governments for the definition of measures to restore the status quo of the
boundary in the Ladakh region which had been altered by force since
1957, and to remove the current tensions in this area so as to create
an appropriate climate for purposeful discussions. In their reply
dated 13 September 1962 the Chinese Government demanded that
Indian troops should withdraw from all sectors of the India-China
boundary and asserted that the Indian Government had attached preconditions to negotiations.
While notes on the holding of preliminary discussions were still
being exchanged, Chinese troops suddenly marched across the wellestablished and hitherto peaceful international boundary in the Eastern Sector. Even then the Government of India continued to maintain a moderate attitude and requested the Government of China on
<pg26>
6 October 1962 to correct the situation created by the presence of
Chinese troops south of the Mc Mahon Line, to withdraw these forces
and undo the wilful and deliberate alteration, of the status quo in a
new sector of the boundary.

Till 8 September 1962 no Chinese forces had crossed the traditional frontier between India and China in the Eastern Sector along
the highest watershed ridge in the region. The massive attacks
simultaneously mounted by China in the Eastern and Western Sectors
of the India-China border on 20 October 1962 destroyed all hope of
settling the India-China differences in accordance with normal international practices.
On 24 October 1962, four days after the Chinese massive attack,
the Chinese Government proposed that the two countries should
agree to respect `the line of actual control' as defined by China and
that the armed forces of each side should withdraw 20 Kilometers
from this line and disengage. When these Chinese proposals which
were plainly terms of surrender were not accepted by India, China
continued her invasion of Indian territory and launched further
massive attacks on Jang, Walong, Tawang, Se La, Bomdi La and other
places in NEFA and on Indian posts in the Chip Chap, Galwan and
Chang Chenmo valleys and the Pangong-Spanggur Lake areas in
Ladakh.) After over-running large areas of Indian territory, the
Chinese Government announced, on the morning of 21 November
1962, a unilateral cease-fire which was obviously calculated to retain
the gains of their latest aggression.
The wording of the Chinese statement was deliberately vague and
ambiguous. Although clarifications were sought, it was clear that the
Chinese Government had no intention of defining, with any degree
of precision, the base line from which they proposed to carry out
Withdrawals in both the Western and Eastern Sectors. The line that
they referred to as the `line of actual control' of 7 November 1962
was by all indications in the Western Sector the line which the
Chinese forces had reached only as a result of their latest massive
aggression launched from 20 October. In the Eastern Sector it
differed in some places from the highest watershed which is the
natural frontier. Though put in the garb of a cease-fire declaration,
this was the same as the earlier three-point proposal.
The Prime Minister of Ceylon called a Conference of six nonaligned countries-Burma, Cambodia, Ceylon, Indonesia, Ghana and
the United Arab Republic-in Colombo from 10 to 12 December 1962
to discuss ways and means to assist in arriving at a peaceful settlement of the differences between India and, China in regard to the
border question. The Conference announced that "its purpose was
<pg27>
not to consider the merits and demerits of the dispute but to provide
for an exchange of views in order to assist the two countries to resume direct negotiations with a view to arriving at a peaceful settlement."
The proposals made by the Colombo Conference, which the Hon'
ble Sirimavo B. D. Bandaranaike had been asked to convey personally to the two Governments of India and China, were received by the
Prime Minister on .17 December through His Excellency Mr. G. S.

Peiris, Ceylon's Ambassador to Burma and Personal Envoy of the
Prime Minister of Ceylon. In her letter dated 15 December 1962 to
the Indian Prime Minister, enclosing a copy of the proposals, the
Prime Minister of Ceylon expressed her desire to come to India
personally to discuss the proposals. This was welcomed and accordingly after visiting Peking the Prime Minister of Ceylon arrived in
New Delhi on 10 January 1963. She was accompanied by the Hon'ble
Mr. Felix R. Dias Bandaranaike, M.P., Minister without Portfolio and
Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister of Defence and External
Affairs. To explain the proposals of the six non-aligned countries,
delegations from the United Arab Republic and Ghana also joined
the Ceylon Prime Minister in New Delhi. The UAR delegation was
headed by His Excellency Mr. Ali Sabry, President of the Executive
Council of the UAR, and included His Excellency Mr. Moustafa
Kamal Mortagy, Minister Plenipotentiary in the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs. The Ghana delegation was led by His Excellency Mr. Kofi
Asante Ofori-Atta, Minister of Justice, and included His Excellency
Mr. A. K. Puplampu, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs.
Detailed discussions on the proposals were held between the three
visiting delegations and the Prime Minister and his colleagues on 12
and 13 January 1963. At these discussions the proposals of theColombo Conference were examined and the Government of-India
requested the leaders of the three delegations for certain clarifications.
These clarifications were given by the three delegations.
The leaders of the delegations were informed by the Prime
Minister that India was prepared to take such measures as may benecessary to ensure peace consistent with the honour and self-respect
of India. The Prime Minister informed the leaders of the three delegations that the Government of India welcomed the initiative of the
Colombo Conference countries. The Ceylon Government were, after
consideration of the Colombo Conference proposals and clarification
by the Indian Parliament, informed that the Government of India
accepted the proposals in toto.
Since October 1962 the Indian Consulates-General in Lhasa and
Shanghai had been subjected to a number of additional restrictions<pg28>
Ever since 1959 the movements of Indian staff there had been restricted and they had been denied any contacts with the local population. They were also not permitted to move beyond the municipal
limits of the city. The telegraphic contact with the Indian ConsulateGeneral in Lhasa was completely cut off between 9 and 25 October
1962. The telephonic communications of the Consulate-General were
also interfered with during this period and outsiders were forbidden
to enter the premises of the Consulate-General. Supplies of essential
commodities such as milk, eggs and firewood were stopped.
In view of the restrictions and curbs imposed by the Chinese
Government it was finally decided by the Government of India to
withdraw the Indian Consulates-General at Shanghai and Lhasa with

effect from 15 December 1962 as these Consular Posts were no longer
able to perform their normal duties. The Chinese Government were
informed of this decision and requested to take similar action in respect of the Chinese Consulates-General at Bombay and Calcutta.
Indian Consulates-General at Lhasa and Shanghai were closed on
15 December and Officers and staff members returned to India thereafter. The Chinese closed their Consulates-General at Bombay and
Calcutta and their officers and staff members left for China.
Tibetan refugees.-The total number of Tibetan refugees in India
is about 35,000. It is proposed to settle most of them as agriculturists
on a semipermanent basis as and when suitable land becomes available for the purpose. One such scheme for settlement on land for
3,000 refugees in Mysore State is now nearing completion. Besides,
5,000 Tibetan refugees are in the process of being settled on land
and it is hoped to settle another three to five thousand more during
the course of the next year.
Of 150 Tibetan refugees who were given training in various vocational trades, 110 have found employment and others are likely to
be absorbed shortly. 25 Tibetan refugee girls are under training as
nurses and 10 already trained have found employment. 14 young
Tibetan refugees are working as social welfare workers in various
Tibetan refugee camps.
1,500 Tibetan youths are receiving education in the three Residential Schools at Mussoorie, Simla and Darjeeling. Arrangements have
also been made to impart education to Tibetan youth at the sites
where their parents or guardians are employed as workers. There
are also three nurseries, one at Dharamsala and two in Simla, looking
after a total of some 800 Tibetan children.
In keeping with the wishes of the Dalai Lama, 3,000 Refugee
Lamas are provided with facilities to pursue and practise their religious studies in Buxa, Dalhousie, etc.
<pg29>
Aged and infirm refugees are being looked after and those who
are not earning are provided free rations and other facilities. Various
voluntary agencies are also helping the Tibetan refugees with donations both in cash and kind.
(ii) Japan.-Indo-Japanese relations remained close and friendly.
A group of five students, led by an Assistant Professor of Asia
University, Tokyo, visited India in March 1962 for two months for
studying the economic conditions and the progress of development
plans in India.
A reporting team of the Broadcasting Corporation of Japan visited
India in July.
An Indian delegation visited Japan in May-June 1962 to attend

the Second General Conference of the International Fire Chiefs Association of Asia held in Tokyo.
An Indian delegation led by Rear-Admiral D. Shankar from the
Ministry of Defence visited Japan to investigate the possibility of
Japanese collaboration in the manufacture of electronic equipment
and components in India.
A trade delegation sponsored by the Engineering Export Promotion Council visited Japan on its return journey from South American
countries.
The Government of Japan offered two Research scholarships to
Indian students to study in Japan.
Distinguished Indian visitors to Japan during the year included
Shri B. P. Sinha, Chief Justice of India; Shri Morarji R. Desai, Minister of Finance; Shri S. K. Dey, Minister for Community Development,
Panchayat Raj and Co-operation; Dr. Sushila Nayar, Minister of
Health; Shrimati Lakshmi N. Menon, Minister of State for External
Affairs and Shrimati Violet Alva, Deputy Chairman of Rajya Sabha.
Mr. Hajime Fukuda, Minister for International Trade and Industry,
Government of Japan, visited India in November 1962 to discuss the
scope for expanding trade between India and Japan. He also inaugurated the Indo-Japanese prototype training centre at Calcutta on 17
November 1962.
(iii) Korea.-The Democratic People's Republic of Korea.-The
Government of India and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
156 EA-5.
<pg30>
established in March 1962, consular relations at the level of ConsulGeneral. Consequent on this, the Trade Representative of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea in New Delhi was redesignated as
Consul-General.
Republic of Korea.-An Agreement was reached between the
Republic of Korea and the Republic of India on the establishment of
consular relations and on the exchange of Consular representatives at
the level of Consul-General.
A delegation consisting of three senior officers of the Korean
Housing Corporation, a semi-Government Organisation of the Republic of Korea, visited Delhi in August 1962, and made a general study
of housing in India.
A goodwill and cultural mission from the Republic of Korea visited
India in September 1962.
An Orphan's Choir consisting of 34 children from South Korea

visited India in October 1962, and held performances at Calcutta and
Delhi. The proceeds of the shows were donated to charitable institutions in India.
Shri K. Gopinatha Pillai, Officiating Fisheries Development
Adviser, visited South Korea in October to attend the 10th Session
of the Indo-Pacific Fisheries Council, an Inter-Governmental Organisation of 18 countries.
Brig. Gen. KIM Jung Moo, Director-General of Cabinet Plans
and Control, Republic of Korea and his party visited India from
7 to 9 November, 1962 to study the actual operation of planning and
budgeting of the Government of India.
(iv) Mongolian People's Republic.-Shri P. K. Banerjee, Charge
d'Affaires, of the Indian Embassy at Peking, accompanied by the
Press Attache, visited Mongolia in July 1962 to participate in the
celebrations of the 41st Anniversary of the Mongolian People's
Republic.
At the invitation of the Chairman of the Great People's Hural of
the Mongolian People's Republic, a Parliamentary delegation, consisting of 10 members of Parliament, led by Shri Hukam Singh,
Speaker of the Lok Sabha, visited the Mongolian People's Republic
in September/October 1962.
E. WEST ASIA
India's relations continued to be friendly with the countries of
West Asia. Shri B. F. H. B. Tyabji, the then Special Secretary, undertook his second re-orientation tour of West Asia and visited Tehran,
Baghdad, Jerusalem, Amman, Damascus, Nicosia and Beirut from
10 May to 1 June 1962. He discussed common problems with the
<pg31>
leading figures. He also presided over a conference at Beirut of
Heads of Indian Missions in Iran, Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, the U.A.R.
and Saudi Arabia, which considered measures to improve India's
relations-political, economic, social and cultural-with these countries.
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Minister, visited Baghdad, Beirut
Cairo and Damascus in July 1962 and his visit helped promote understanding of India's secular policy and stand on Kashmir.
(i) Aden.-Relations with Aden have remained friendly and cordial. Shri V. K. Joshi, Minister of Aden, visited Delhi in October
1962.
(ii) Iran.-Indo-Iranian relations remained cordial. Exchange of
scholars between India and Iran continued, as in previous years.
(iii) Iraq.-The Government of India continued to extend techni-

cal aid to, Iraq in the shape of loan of technical experts to that country. Training for Iraqi experts in various fields was also provided in
India. At the invitation of the Government of Iraq, Shri Dinesh
Singh, Deputy Minister, attended the celebrations connected with
the Anniversary of 14 July Revolution on behalf of the Government
of India.
Mr. Mohd. Salman, Iraq Oil Minister, visited India in October
1962. A delegation of three high ranking Iraqi Administrative Officials came to India in October 1962 to study training facilities for
Indian officials.
At the invitation of the Iraqi Government an official delegation
consisting of Shri Nur-ud-Din Ahmed, Mayor of Delhi and Dr. Tara
Chand, M.P., participated in the Millenary celebration of the City
of Baghdad and commemoration of the Iraqi philosopher Al-Kindi,
held in Baghdad in December 1962.
(iv) Jordan.-Relations with Jordan continued to be friendly.
(v) Kuwait.-Shri I. S. Chopra, Ambassador in Lebanon, represented India at the National Day celebrations in Kuwait. Relations
with Kuwait continued to be friendly and cordial. India's Trade
Commission at Kuwait was upgraded to a Consulate-General with
effect from 9 June 1962.
(vi) Lebanon.-India's relations with Lebanon continued to be
cordial.
(vii) Palestine Refugees.-The Government of India have again
pledged their annual contribution of Rs. 1 lakh to the United Nations
for the relief of the Palestine refugees.
<pg32>
(viii) Turkey.-At a brief ceremony in the Zoological Park, New
Delhi on 10 December 1962, a gift of four animals was made by the
Government of India to the Turkish Ambassador for the Izmir Zoo
in Turkey.
(ix) Saudi Arabia.-Relations with Saudi Arabia continued to be
friendly. The Government of Saudi Arabia offered 24 scholarships
for Indian students to study theology in Medina University.
(x) Syria.-Relations with Syria continued to be friendly.
(xi) The Yemen.-In September 1962, a revolution took place in
the Yemen, and the Imamate was converted into a Republic. India
accorded recognition to the new Arab Republic of Yemen in October
1962.
F. AFRICA
(i) Algeria.-India accorded recognition to Algeria on 2 July

1962 and established diplomatic relations with that country at Embassy level. Shri S. Sen presented his credentials as India's first
Ambassador to Algeria on 18 December 1962.
As a gesture of goodwill, the Government of India sent a gift of
tents and medicines worth Rs. 60,000 for the relief and rehabilitation
of Algerian refugees returning to their homeland from Morocco and
Tunisia.
(ii) Cameroons.-A goodwill mission from the Federal Republic.
of Cameroons led by H. E. Mr. Nzo Ekhah Nghaky, Deputy Foreign,
Minister, visited India from 30 September to 3 October 1962. They
had discussions with the representatives of the Government of India
on matters relating to the development of cultural and commercial
relations as well as technical and economic co-operation between
the two countries. The two Governments agreed to establish diplomatic relations at Embassy level.
(iii) The Congo.-The Government of India actively assisted and
gave full support to the United Nations in its efforts to find a solution to the Congo problem. Indian troops (in all about 6,000) and
aircraft continued to remain in the service of the UNCC. India has
also been paying to the United Nations its share of the expenditure
on the Congo Operations which amounted to Rs. 1,24,95,530 upto
30 June 1962.
In August 1962 U Thant, Secretary-General of the United Nations,
put forward a plan for reintegration of the province of Katanga with
the rest of the Congo. As the plan embodied those proposals which.
<pg33>
had the greatest chance of general acceptance and had been accepted
by the Central Congolese Government, the Government of India supported the plan. This plan is being implemented.
(iv) Ethiopia.-Relations with Ethiopia continued to be cordial.
Mrs. Lakshmi Menon, Minister of State, visited the country in
December 1962.
(v) Ghana.-The new High Commissioner of Ghana, H. E. Major
S. K. Anthony, presented his credentials on 5 April 1962.
Shri A. K. Sen, Minister of Law and Shri R. K. Nehru, SecretaryGeneral, visited Ghana in November 1962.
(vi) Kenya.-Shrimati Lakshmi Menon, Minister of State, visited
Kenya in December 1962.
(vii) Libya.-India continued to meet Libyan requests for professors and doctors.
(viii) Madagascar.-The Government sent materials in April
1962, worth Rs. 4,500/- as relief to the victims of cyclonic devasta-

tions.
(ix) Morocco.-Relations with Morocco continued to be cordial
A baby elephant has been sent as a gift to Princes Lalla Amina.
The Trade Agreement between India and Morocco was renewed.
(x) Nigeria.--The Prime Minister visited Nigeria from 23 to 27
September 1962. The Prime Ministers of India and Nigeria discussed
a wide range of matters of mutual interest, and noted with satisfaction the co-operation in many fields between India and Nigeria. The
Prime Minister of Nigeria has accepted an invitation to visit India.
H. E. Mr. Benedict Cyril Ikem Obanye has been accredited as
High Commissioner of the Federation of Nigeria and he presented
his credentials on 31 October 1962.
(xi) South Africa.-The South African Government continue to
proclaim group areas, under the Group Areas Act, for the different
racial groups in every one of the urban areas of South Africa. The
chief sufferers continue to be the South Africans of Indian origin
and the Cape Coloured Community. There appears, however, to be
a slight shift in Government policy. The Minister of Community
Development, Mr. Botha, told the Transvaal Nationalist Congress
<pg34>
that it was a firm principle of the Government in the implementation
of the Group Areas Act not to remove any person, irrespective of
his race, from one area to another unless alternative accommodation
was available. Nor would it be used to deprive the present generation of Indian traders of their livelihood.
The Minister of Community Development has since specified about
800 stands in the Johannesburg townships of Fordsburg, Burgersdorp
and Newtown, where occupation by a member of any particular race
group can be controlled by permit. Many of the stands are occupied
by Indians. Though the proclamation does not specifically say so, it
is believed that the area is being defined so that Indian traders can
be allowed to, continue trading there. The Government have started
to issue Group Area notices requiring Indian traders to vacate the
residential parts of their premises.
As in previous years, the Government of India have offered scholarships to students from the Republic of South Africa under the
General Scholarships Scheme.
In accordance with paragraph 3 of the United Nations resolution
(No. 1662 XVI) on the "Treatment of people of Indian origin and
Indo-Pakistan origin in the Republic of South Africa", the Government of India addressed a letter to the Government of the Republic
of South Africa expressing readiness to enter into negotiations. As
the South African Government failed to comply with the resolution,
the Government of India reported to the General Assembly at its

17th session that no progress had been made and the situation continued to require the attention of the General Assembly.
Recently, the Government of India agreed to the merger of the
two items-(i) "The question of Race conflict in South Africa resulting from the policies of Apartheid" and (ii) "The treatment of people
of Indian origin in South Africa". Together with 43 other nations.
India secured the inclusion of the item on the "Treatment of people
of Indian origin in South Africa" as part of an item entitled "The
policies of apartheid of the Government of the Republic of South
Africa". The General Assembly has now passed a resolution calling
for diplomatic and economic sanctions by countries against South
Africa and requesting the Security Council to take appropriate measures, including sanctions, to secure South Africa's compliance with
the past resolutions. of the General Assembly and the Council and,
if necessary, to consider the expulsion of South Africa from the
United Nations.
<pg35>
(xii) The Sudan.-Relations with the Sudan continued to be
cordial. Indian technical personnel on deputation in the Sudan continue to remain there as requested by the Sudan Government.
(xiii) Tanganyika.-Shrimati Lakshmi Menon, Minister for State
in the Ministry of External Affairs, represented the Government of
India at the Republic Day celebrations of Tanganyika in December
1962.
(xiv) Togo.-On 18 October 1962, Shri P. N. Haksar, India's High
Commissioner at Lagos, presented his credentials to the President
of Togo, to which country he is concurrently accredited.
(xi) Tunisia.-India participated in the International Fair held
in Tunisia.
(xvi) Uganda.-Uganda became independent on 9 October 1962.
India was represented at the independence celebrations by Shri
Dinesh Singh, Deputy Minister and Shri N. P. Alexander, Deputy
Secretary, as well as India's diplomatic representatives in Nairobi
and Kampala.
The Indian Mission in Kampala has been raised to the level of a
High Commission following Uganda's independence and a High Commissioner resident in Kampala will soon be appointed. Shrimati
Lakshmi Menon, Minister of State, visited Uganda in December 1962.
(xvii) The United Arab Republic.-India's relations with the
United Arab Republic remain warm and cordial as before, because of
similarity of views on many major issues confronting the world.
At the invitation of the Government of the United Arab Republic,
Dr. R. N. Chaudhry attended the Centenary celebrations of Professor
Theodar Bilharz, the discoverer of the Trematode worms which cause

Bilharziasis.
As in the past, the Government of India continued to look after
the interests of the United Arab Republic in France and her territories.
(xviii) Upper Volta.-On 30 July 1962, Dr. N. V. Rajkumar,
Indian Ambassador at Dakar, presented his credentials to the President of Upper Volta, to which country he is concurrently accredited.
(xix) Zanzibar.--The Government of India arranged for the
sending of multi-vitamin and macaprine tablets worth Rs. 2,700/through the Indian Red Cross Society to victims of flood devastations
in Zanzibar.
<pg36>
(i) Austria.-Shri A.K. Sen, Minister of Law, visited Austria.
(ii) Belgium.-The Vice-Consulate of India in Antwerp was
closed on 18 December 1961. It was decided to appoint an Honorary
Consul-General at Chent.
The Belgian Foreign Trade Office offered five fellowships for
Indian technicians for post-graduate Industrial Training during 196263, which were accepted. Nine other scholarships offered by the
Belgian Government are being utilised during the academic year
1962-63.
(iii) Cyprus.--Archbishop Makarios, President of Cyprus, paid a
State visit to India from 31 October to 15 November 1962. During the
visit, the President discussed the current international situation and
questions of mutual interest with the Prime Minister. The President
extended the sympathy and support of his country to India in the
situation created by the Chinese Aggression.
(iv) Czechoslovakia.--Shri A. K. Sen, Minister of Law, visited
Czechoslovakia.
The Government of India accepted an offer of 5 scholarships from
the Czechoslovak Government for post-graduate study and research
by India students in Czechoslovakia during the year 1962-63.
(v) Denmark.--Shri K. M. Kannampilly assumed charge as
Ambassador of India in Copenhagen on 8 October 1962. Formerly,
the India Ambassador in Stockholm had been accredited concurrently to Denmark also.
In return for the collection of India books presented to the Royal
Library in Copenhagen last year, the Government of Denmark presented a collection of Danish classical literature to the National
Library of Calcutta in October 1962.

(vi) France.--Following the Commonwealth Prime Ministers
Conference in London, the Prime Minister visited Paris from 20 to
22 September 1962, and had talks regarding the international situation and on subjects of mutual interest with President de Gaulle and
the French Prime Minister Pompidou.
The French Government have made a gift of enamel doors,
designed and painted by le Corbusier, for the State Assembly building
at Chandigarh (Punjab).
<pg37>
The following scholarships offered by the Government of France
were utilised during 1962-63:(i) 12 scholarships for higher studies; (ii) 2 scholarships for
young Indian Catholic Priests; (iii) 35 scholarships for
specialised training in science subjects; and (iv) 10
scholarships for specialized training in humanities.
In addition, a number of trainees were sent to France for training
under the Indo-French Technical Co-operation Agreement of 1962.
As a reciprocal gesture, the Government of India have offered to
French nationals three fellowships of a duration of two years each.
(viii) Federal Republic of Germany.-The Lord Mayor of Frankfurt and Mrs. Bockelmann visited India from 14 March to 1 April
1962, as guests of the Government of India.
At the invitation of the Amateur Athletic Federation of India, a
West German Athletic team visited India for three weeks in OctoberNovember 1962.
Shrimati Vijayalakshmi Pandit visited the Federal Republic of
Germany from 28 October to, 8 November, 1962.
At the invitation of the Government of India, His Excellency Dr.
Heinrich Luebke, President of the Federal Republic of Germany,
accompanied by Dr. Gerhard Schroedar, Foreign Minister, visited
India from 26 November to 5 December, 1962.
The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany offered 49
scholarships to Indian nationals for practical training in Germany for
one and a half to two. years during 1962-63.
(viii) Hungary.--Shri A. K. Sen, Minister of Law, visited
Hungary.
(ix) Netherlands.-On the occasion of the visit of Her Royal
Highness Princess Beatrix of Netherlands to India, the Government
of India was offered a special fellowship for study in the Netherlands. The fellowship has been accepted by the Government of

India.
(x) Poland.-His Excellency Mr. Adam Rapacki, Foreign Minister
of Poland, paid a visit to India from 19 to 26 January 1963 and took
advantage of the opportunity to discuss the current international
situation and matters of mutual interest with the Prime Minister
of India and his colleagues.
An offer of four fellowships for studies in National Economic
Planning was received from the Polish Government.
An exchange of two scholars between India and Poland was
decided upon for the year 1962-63.
(xi) Rumania.-His Excellency Mr. Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dhej,
President of the Council of State of the People's Republic of Rumania,
accompanied by His Excellency Mr. Ion Gheorghe Maurer, Chairman
<pg38>
of the Council of Ministers, and His Excellency Mr. Corneliu Manescu,
Minister for External Affairs, paid a State visit to India from 12 to
20 October 1962. The Rumanian leaders discussed the international
situation and questions of mutual interest with the Prime Minister
and some Ministers of the Government of India.
(xii) Spain.-An Honorary Consulate of India was established at
Las Palmas with effect from 13 July 1962 to look after the interests
of Indian nationals in the Canary Islands.
(xiii) The Soviet Union--Mr. Anastas Mikoyan, First Deputy
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union, visited
New Delhi for two days in July 1962. He had talks with the Prime
Minister and his colleagues on matters of mutual interest including
questions relating to, development projects in India undertaken with
Soviet aid.
An Indian Parliamentary delegation of ten members, led by
Sardar Hukam Singh, Speaker of the Lok Sabha, visited the Soviet
Union in September-October 1962.
Shri S. K. Dey, Minister for Community Development, Panchayati
Rai and Co-operation, visited the Soviet Union.
At the invitation of the Government of the-Soviet Union, the
Secretary-General of the Ministry of External Affairs paid a goodwill visit to the Soviet Union from 18 to 26 January 1963.
An Indian Consulate was opened in Odessa.
A Shipping Agreement between India and the Soviet Union was
signed in New Delhi on 20 November.
(xiv) Sweden.-The Swedish Government, acting through the

Swedish Institute for Cultural Relations, awarded one scholarship
for studies in Sweden during the academic year 1962-63.
Another offer of ten scholarships for studies in Sweden, beginning
in the year 1962-63, from the Swedish Agency for International Assistance has also been accepted. An equal number of these scholarships
is contemplated for the year 1963-64.
(xv) The United Kingdom.-The Prime Minister attended the
annual Commonwealth Prime Ministers Conference held at London
between 10 and 19 September 1962. The question of the United
Kingdom's entry into the European Common Market overshadowed
all other topics discussed at the Conference. It was felt by all participating members, except the United Kingdom, that, if possible, there
should be another meeting of the Prime Ministers before Britain
<pg39>
ultimately joined the European Common Market. It was also felt
that a special system of guarantees to the members of the Commonwealth should be evolved in the event of the United Kingdom joining the European Common Market.
The newly independent countries, Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago
were admitted as members of the Commonwealth.
Close association between India and the United Kingdom in
economic, political and educational fields continued as in the past.
Mr. Duncan Sandys, Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations, arrived in India on 24 November 1962 and had talks with the
Prime Minister. A long-term Agreement for procurement of defence
equipment required by India from Britain was signed on 27 November 1962, in New Delhi by Mr. Sandys and Shri Y. B. Chavan, the
Defence Minister of India.
(xvi) Yugoslavia.-His Excellency Mr. Edvard Kardelj, VicePresident of Yugoslavia, accompanied by Madame Kardelj and His
Excellency Mr. Kiro Gligorov, Finance Minister, paid a goodwill
visit to India from 18 to 26 December 1962.
It was decided to exchange 5 scholars between India and Yugoslavia under the Cultural Agreement of 1960.
H. THE AMERICAS
North America.
(i) The United States of America.-Shri B. P. Sinha, Chief Justice
of India, visited the U.S.A. in May 1962. Shri S. K. Dey, Indian
Minister for Community Development, Panchayati Raj and Cooperation, who led the Indian delegation to the Conference on Middlelevel
Manpower held in Puerto. Rico, visited the U.S.A. after the Conference. Shrimati Violet Alva, Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha,

and Shrimati Lakshmi N. Menon, Minister of State for External
Affairs, also visited the U.S.A. in July 1962.
The American Research ships "Argo" and "Horizon" participated
in the seismical study of the bed of the Indian Ocean in September.
The following Indo-US Agreements were signed:
(i) Indo-US Supplementary Agreement of 14 November 1962
for the procurement of defence equipment and arms
from the United States; (ii) Agreement of 21 November
1962 regarding Peace Corps Volunteers coming to India;
<pg40>
and (iii) PL-480 Agreement of 26 November 1962 for the
purchase of cotton.
Visitors to India from the United States included a party of 11
Senators led by the Senate Majority Leader of the U.S.A., Senator
Mansfield. 26 officials led by Mr. Averell Harriman, American Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, and Mr. Paul Nitze,
American Assistant Secretary of Defence, and the Hon'ble Luther
H. Hodges, Secretary of Commerce of the Government of the U.S.A.
(ii) Canada.-A party of seventeen officers of the National Defence
College of Canada visited India for a week in May 1962. A Canadian
Army officer attended the Indian Defence Services Staff College at
Wellington and an Indian Army Officer attended the Canadian Army
Staff College at Kingston.
Eleven Indians attended the Second Commonwealth Study Conference held in Montreal in May 1962.
Dr. S. Bhagavantam, Scientific Adviser to the Defence Ministry
and Major-General B. D. Kapur, Chief Controller of Research and
Development, attended the Commonwealth Defence Science Conference held in Canada in May 1962.
Central and South America.
(i) Bolivia.-Shri V. H. Coelho, Indian Ambassador in Brazil,
has been concurrently accredited to Bolivia.
(ii) Brazil.-Shri B. S. Murthy, Deputy Minister for Community
Development, led an Indian delegation to the Conference on Social
Work in Petropolis in August 1962.
An Indian Parliamentary delegation led by Shri S. V. Krishnamurthy Rao, Deputy Speaker of the Lok Sabha, attended the 51st
Inter-Parliamentary Conference held in Brazilia during OctoberNovember 1962.
(iii) Cuba.-A charged, Affaires in the Embassy of India, Havana

(Cuba), started a resident Mission at Havana from 15 September
1962.
(iv) Mexico.-President Adolfo Lopez Mateos, of Mexico visited
India from 6 to 10 October 1962. It was agreed to exchange industrial
and trade delegations. A Mexican trade delegation arrived in January
1963.
(v) Panama.-Shri P. L. Bhandari, Ambassador of India in
Mexico, has been concurrently accredited as Ambassador to Panama.
<pg41>
I. EXTERNAL PUBLICITY
(i) General.-Apart from meeting the challenge of Pakistan
propaganda campaign, the External Publicity Division had, during theyear, to deal with intensive propaganda drives by China and Portugal.
Production of pamphlets was undertaken on a scale hitherto unattempted. The volume of distribution of these pamphlets, special
releases and feature articles also increased enormously. The format
of the daily morsecast transmissions was altered to make them more
readily assimilable in the daily news bulletins and printed periodicals brought out by the Indian Information Posts abroad.
It was felt that the distribution of material in the English language
alone was not adequate. Plans were made and implemented to make
Paris, Cairo and Buenos Aires production centres for all publicity
material in French, Arabic and Spanish respectively.
These new demands for publicity material did not represent, how-ever, any diminution in India's participation in international cultural
events, such as film festivals, book exhibitions and trade fairs. In.
collaboration with the Ministry of Scientific Research and Cultural
Affairs a number of outstanding cultural visitors from different parts
of the world were invited to India.
(ii) Production of Material.-More material had to be produced
at the Headquarters and new procedures evolved to distribute it.
Whereas in the past a few score copies of each pamphlet used to
suffice for most of the Missions, indents from foreign Missions were forhundreds and in certain cases even thousands. A special ad hoc lump
sum provision for publicity on Kashmir was obtained. Likewise, a
special grant for production of publicity material has been sought for
the next financial year. A large number of pamphlets was produced
during the year. Majority of these related to the perennial Kashmir
problem, but later in the course of the year, more stress was placed
on the India-China border problem. In addition to the regular supply
of selected Press Information Bureau releases, press releases. texts
of important speeches of the Prime Minister and others and background material on Kashmir and India-China border dispute, about
36 feature articles on a variety of subjects were sent out for publicity
abroad. This was in addition to numerous photo features and special
material provided to Missions abroad for use by radio and television

organisations.
On the basis of the material supplied from the Headquarters and
culled from various other sources, the Information Posts abroad continued to issue regular bulletins. Special handouts were also issued
in respective local languages by many Missions on important issues,
to serve as background material for the local press.
<pg42>
About 30 Posts published an annual review to commemorate the
Republic Day. These Republic Day specials are not only distributed
in the country of their production but are supplied to various other
Posts which, for reasons of economy or lack of manpower, cannot
bring out their own annual. Important publications produced at
the Headquarters were translated in a number of foreign languages,
principally in French, Spanish and Arabic, and distributed in regions
where these languages are understood. Supply of readily useful
publicity material pertaining to developments in India, suitable for
reproduction in bulletins and brochures and also for the local press
through daily Morse Transmissions, constituted, a sustained effort
with extended scope.
The Monthly Foreign Affairs Record and the Daily World Press
Review continued to be prepared at the Headquarters. The distribution of the former was extended. Reprints of earlier publications oil
the Kashmir problem and the India-China border problem were also
made available for supplementary distribution.
During the last two months of 1962, 31 pamphlets, mostly in the
English language, on the Sino-Indian boundary question were brought
out or obtained from the Directorate of Publications Division for
distribution abroad. Feature articles and special directives for the
guidance of Indian Missions abroad were also produced.
Several brochures produced by the Director of Publications,
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting as well as the Ministry of
Scientific Research and Cultural Affairs dealing with economic and
cultural subjects were supplied to Indian Missions abroad for wide
distribution.
(iii) Books and Libraries.-There was considerable expansion or
the libraries maintained by Indian Missions abroad. About 6399 copies
of 173 titles by Indian and foreign authors were added. Besides the
books in English language, books produced in Hindi and various regional languages of India were included in the supply. 4441 books
in English and other Indian languages were sent to Missions for presentation to important individuals, institutions and educational bodies.
Rs. 1,20,000 were spent on supplies to Missions of Indian newspapers and periodicals for display in the Information Service of India
libraries and for selective local distribution.
(iv) Film Exhibitions and Audio-Visual Publicity.-Selected docu-

mentaries and Indian newsreels were supplied regularly to all Indian
Missions abroad. Orders for general distribution of 20 documentaries
<pg43>
were placed with the Films Division. In addition, requests for additional prints of documentaries already supplied or prints in replacement of old unserviceable prints from various Missions were promptly
met.
The programme of presentation of prints of documentary films to
foreign Governments and prominent organisations was intensified.
Thirty documentary films were presented to the Ramakrishna Mission
in Durban for publicity in South Africa. At the request of the Education Minister of Mauritius, 40 prints of 31 different documentaries
were presented to the Mauritian Government. In part implementation of the Cultural Exchange Programme Agreement between India
and the Soviet Union, documentaries were presented to the Soviet
Ministry of Higher Education. Two films were presented to the
Bhoodan Shramdan Society of Ceylon and one to an Agrentinean
School of Dancing. A copy of the documentary Taj Mahal was
presented to the Mongolian Ambassador in Delhi in implementation
of one of the provisions of the Cultural Agreement between the two
countries. Six different themes were furnished to the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting for production of documentaries conceived especially from the external publicity angle. The line of
approach, synopsis and background material in respect of these films
were also supplied.
Steps were taken to, build up a stock of Indian feature films for
exhibitions on a zonal basis in various parts of the world. A stock
of 21 films has already been built up and the scheme put into operation, Negotiations with private producers are afoot for acquiring
another fifteen outstanding feature films for this purpose. Two documentary films, "Nehru the Man of the Two Worlds", produced by
BBC and a Czech cinemascope film on Kashmir, were previewed and
selected for purchase. Negotiations for acquiring prints of these films
are under way.
Indian documentary films have been a success in many parts of the
world and are being increasingly used for television purposes, notably
by Irani Television and the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation.
Latin American countries, the United States, Britain, Thailand and
Australia have also, shown marked interest in our documentary films
for use by their television circuits. Nigerian Television network
decided to devote a total of 26 hours to a programme of Indian documentaries. Seven such programmes of one hour each have already
been televised. In the interest of publicity, supply of 35mm documentary films and Indian newsreels was maintained for exhibition in
cinema houses in Nepal, free of royalty charges. A proposal to circulate these films in Burma, Thailand, Ceylon, Mauritius and Cambodia is being actively pursued.
<pg44>

Extensive film coverage was arranged for the visits of the President of Mexico., the President of Rumania, the Prime Minister of
Malaya, the President of Cyprus, the Crown Princess of the Netherlands and the President of the Federal Republic of Germany. Extensive film coverage was also made of the visit of the Prime Minister to
Ceylon.
India participated in 22 International Film Festivals during the
course of the year. A Festival of Indian Films was organised in Cairo
in collaboration with the UAR Ministry of Culture and National
Guidance and eight outstanding Indian feature films and several
Government of India documentaries were provided.
Nearly 34,200 full-size photographs were supplied to our Missions
abroad. After the operation in Goa, Daman and Diu, over 1000 photographs were supplied to the Press Adviser to the Military Governor
in Goa for local publicity.
Numerous requests from different parts of the world for photographs for use in publications and their exhibition on television circuits were complied with. Five hundred photographs about our
Jawans, on active duty on the northern borders of India as well as
200 copies of the India-China boundary map were distributed to the
Indian Posts for publicity abroad. About 23,000 photographs relating
to the resistance offered by Indian Jawans to the Chinese aggressors
and the contribution of the civilian population to the war effort Were,
sent to the Indian Missions abroad. Blocks and ebonoids were supplied instead of photographs to some of the Posts in South East Asia
where adequate block-making facilities are lacking.
Large-size well-mounted photographs on the theme of Indian textiles and costumes were sent to Mexico for display at an exhibition
jointly sponsored by the Indian Embassy and the Department of Asian
Studies, Mexico.
A photographic exhibition entitled "A Decade of Planned Progress
in India" was held in Istanbul. India also participated in an International Students Photographic Contest and Exhibition in Karachi as
well as in a display of children's paintings in Sweden.
A varied selection of gramophone records and tape recordings was
sent to Indian Missions. These were used extensively in radio and
television programmes as also at functions organised by Missions and
various institutions in their regions.
(v) Research and Reference.-The Division's Research and Reference Section met numerous requests from Missions abroad for information on various Indian subjects in addition to queries from within
<pg45>
India and from officials of the Ministry. Nearly 45,000 Indian and
foreign press clippings were classified and indexed. Chinese agression
against India figured prominently in these clippings.

(vi) Press and Public Relations.-The volume of work in respect
of keeping the press in India and abroad (the latter through the resident correspondents in India of various newspapers and journals)
posted with important developments in India's external relations,
increased appreciably, especially after China's massive invasion.
Apart from the daily briefings arranged by the Press Relations Section, constant liaison was maintained with the accredited correspondents stationed in Delhi for providing them background material as
well as specific information on developments of the day. Besides
attending to oral queries, 246 press releases were issued on topical
subjects.
The Press Relations Wing dealt fully with twenty-eight State
visits to India by foreign dignitaries, and gave facilities to about 275
visiting Press/Television correspondents, cameramen and photographers.
Greater stress was laid on public relations by the Information
Posts abroad.
(vii) Change in Cadre.-The year under review witnessed the
following further changes in the cadre in consequence of the reorganisation of the Information Service of India and its gradual integration with the Indian Foreign Service:(1) Posts of Press Attaches at Stockholm and Bangkok were
converted into Senior Scale Indian Foreign Service Posts
and Indian Foreign Service Officers appointed against
them.
(2) Four permanent posts of Assistant Press Attaches at Bonn,
Brussels, Jeddah and Cairo were converted into Junior
Scale Indian Foreign Service Posts, and Indian Foreign
Service officers appointed against them.
(3) An Officer of Indian Foreign Service (A) has been appointed againt the post of Director, Information Service of
India at Headquarters.
(4) An Officer of Indian Foreign Service (A) is working against
the post of a Public Relations Officer at Karachi.
(viii) Organisation and Staff.-The External Publicity Division
at Headquarters and in its Information Units abroad employs a total
staff of 526. It consists of nine Public Relations Officers, one Deputy
Director, Information Service of India, 38 Information Officers Press
<pg46>
Attaches, 26 Assistant Information Officers/Assistant Press Attaches/
Attaches, 5 Publicity Officers, 116 India-based Ministerial staff and
331 locally recruited personnel in various Missions abroad.

Four Publicity organisations were set up in Algeria, Port Louis,
Rabat and Trinidad during the year under report.
As a result of a re-examination of India's publicity needs, posts of
Press Attaches/Assistant Press Attaches at Washington, Phnom Penh
and Djakarta were transferred to Port Louis, Rabat and Port of Spain
respectively.
(ix) Budget and Expenditure.-The total budgetory provision for
the External Publicity Division, including Information Units abroad,
amounts to Rs. 1,10,55,200. Of this, Rs. 28,07,400 is for expenditure at
Headquarters.
With the existing budget, External Publicity Division runs 54
separate Information Units and provides Information Service to all
Indian Missions and Posts abroad.
J. MISCELLANEOUS
(i) Central Passport and Emigration Organisation: Policy.-It
was decided to replace the old passport booklets of all categories by a
new series of bilingual Hindi-English passports, the replacement of
the former series being effected gradually as and when the life of
each passport expires. The new series of Hindi-English passports was
introducd in April 1962, for use by the Passport Issuing Authorities.
Passports.-The number of passports issued in the Ministry of
External Affairs (P. V. Division) during the period January-December
1962 is as follows:1. Diplomatic passports
2. Official International passports
3. Official Indo-Pakistan passports
4. Emergency certificates

468
2978
141
11

2593 visas were granted to foreigners posted in their respective
Missions in India. The number of passports serviced during this
period is as below:1. Diplomatic passports
2. Official International passports
3. Official Indo-Pakistan passports
<pg47>

134
788
135

The following is the position of applications for passports in the
five Regional Passport Offices at Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi, Madras and,
Lucknow during 1962:------------------------------------------------------------------------------

No. of

No. of

No. of

applica-

pass-

pass-

Regional Passport Office

tions

ports

No. of
cases
port

closed

for
granted applicaIndiations
Internarejected
tional
passports
received
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------Bombay
Delhi

17448

16165

1602

1176

15483

13638

1320

1210

Madras

9189

8773

133

339

Calcutta

6571

5938

236

1133

Lucknow

3111

2803

107

205

---------------------------------------TOTAL

51802

47317

3398 4064**

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------The position regarding appeals received in the Ministry for the
year 1962 was as follows:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------No. of appeals received

No. of appeals disposed of under
appeals
under
consideration
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------2569
2434
135
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Emigration.-Emigration of unskilled labourers to Burma, Ceylon,
Malaya and Singapore continued to be banned but general exemptions were granted to wives and minor children of unskilled workers
settled in Ceylon, Malaya and Singapore.
There has been an appreciable improvement in the checking of
illicit emigration to Ceylon.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------(** The closed cases mostly related to those applicants who did not
reply to the quaries of or did not furnish required documents to the
Regional Passport Officers).
<pg48>
The number of deportees arriving at Dhanuskodi after being
deported by the Government of Ceylon as illicit emigrants for 1962
were:January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December

42
90
60
52
126
129
157
132
114
112
161
196

During the year under review a ban has been imposed on the
emigration of Indian women to Persian Gulf territories for domestic
service.
During the year the Indian High Commission in Kuala Lumpur
was informed that the Federal Government of Malaya had terminated
the services of 22 Indian teachers, in accordance with the terms of
their contract. It is reported that of these 22 teachers all but two
secured alternative employment in Malaya and have settled down in
that country. The remainder have gone to the United Kingdom,
seeking employment opportunities in that country.
The Government of Burma requested in 1961 for the services of
104 medical practitioners. The proposal was accepted by the Government of India in principle and the terms of employment were
approved by mutual consultation. The arrangement for recruitment
of the doctors has progressed well and a Burmese recruiting team
had also selected 38 candidates. However, early this year, the
arrangement was cancelled by the Government of Burma as a part
of a drive launched by the new regime in Burma for Burmanisation
of the public services there.

Administration.-The Senior and Junior Departmental Promotion
Committees met during the first half of the year and approved promotion of officers in Grades II to VII of the Central Passport and
Emigration Organisation. As a result, four of the I.F.S. (B) officers
on deputation to the Organisation are being withdrawn and reverted
to I.F.S. (B) and C.P.E.O. officers are being given promotion to fill
the posts.
During the year, the post of Regional Passport Officer, Calcutta,
has been upgraded from Grade II to Grade I and a Grade I Officer
of the I.F.S. (B) has been appointed to that post on deputation
<pg49>
Consequent on the heavy pressure of work in the Regional Passport and Emigration Office, Bombay, the Reorganisation Unit of the
Ministry was deputed to conduct an on-the-spot work-study of that
Office and submit their recommendations. On careful examination
of these recommendations, the Ministry decided to create the following additional post's on a temporary basis during this year:------------------------------------------------------------------Post
No. of
Posts
------------------------------------------------------------------Assistant Passport Officer
1
Assistants
2
Upper Division Clerks
3
Lower Division Clerks
5
------------------------------------------------------------------The total strength of the Central Passport and Emigration Organisation is:--Gazetted 33 and non-gazetted 231. The breakdown is. as
follows:------------------------------------------------------------------------Delhi
Madras
Calcutta
Bombay
Lucknow
-----------------------------------------------------------Per. Temp. Per Temp. Per. Temp. Per. Temp. Per. Temp.
------------------------------------------------------------------------Gazetted
5 1
8 2 3
2 7
1 1
3
Non-Gazetted 29 8 69 13 24
9 38 18 10 13
------------------------------------------------------------------------(ii) Haj.-As usual, the Government of India made necessary
arrangements to facilitate the Haj pilgrimage to Saudi Arabia by
Indian Muslims. The Indian contingent of 21,084 pilgrims was the
second largest. Besides other facilities, including medical aid, each
pilgrim was allowed to carry Indian currency to the extent of.
Rs. 1,200 for expenses in Saudi Arabia. A special medical mission
consisting of four doctors (including a lady doctor) and four compounders (including a lady compounder) was sent to Saudi Arabia to
attend to the Haj Pilgrims. This medical team was in addition to the
permanent Indian dispensary at Mecca and the dispensary set up at
Jeddah during the Haj season every year.

At the instance of the Ministry, the Port Haj Committee in Bombay
sent five volunteers to look after the welfare of Indian pilgrims in
Saudi Arabia.
The term of the Central Haj Committee, originally constituted in
1948 to advise the Central Government on matters relating to the Haj,
was extended for another year.
<pg50>
(iii) Legal and Treaties Division.-This Division is concerned
with international legal problems arising in this Ministry as well as
various other Ministries of the Government of India. Such work
relating to international legal affairs, so far dealt with by the Ministry of Law, has been transferred to this Division.
The editing of the volumes of treaties for 1957 and 1958 has been
completed. The editing of the other volumes of treaties since 1947
is now in hand.
(iv) Consular Division.-In pursuance of the decision to bring out
a, separate Consular Manual, relevant circulars and orders on the subject, issued from time to time, are being scrutinized in consultation
with the appropriate Ministries, where necessary. The work is likely
to be completed shortly.
Consequent on the re-designation of the posts of Registrars, etc., in
Missions abroad as Attaches and the grant of diplomatic status to the
incumbents of such posts, a general notification empowering the
redesignated Attaches to perform consular functions was issued.
66 documents consisting of letters of request, commissions, decrees,
maintenance orders, summonses and other processes received from the
courts in India either for execution or service abroad and vice versa
were forwarded to the authorities concerned after preliminary examination.
The cases pertaining to revision of the existing arrangements and
entering into fresh arrangements for service of summonses and other
processes under section 29(c) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
with Nepal, France, Spain, the Soviet Union, the UAR, Canada,
Argentina, Thailand and Hong Kong were pursued. However, final
replies in this regard were not received from the countries concerned.
The question of approaching the High Courts to amend the relevant
rules in the Code of Civil Procedure so as to provide for the summonses, etc., for service abroad being sent by Indian courts through
diplomatic channels is under consideration with a view to finalising
the arrangements with Belgium, Japan, West Germany and Switzerland.
Negotiations for reciprocal arrangements for execution of decrees

under section 44A of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, initiated in
earlier years with Japan, Trinidad and Tobago have not yet been
completed as the Governments concerned have not replied.
Negotiations for reciprocal arrangements for examination of witnesses in criminal cases were finalised with Mauritius during, the year
and a notification declaring Mauritius as a reciprocating territory
<pg51>
the purposes of section 504(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898,
was issued. Negotiations for making similar arrangements with
Nepal, West Germany, Ghana, Nigeria, Liberia, Czechoslovakia, Fiji,
the U.A.R., the Central African Federation, Gambia, Sierra Leone and
Swaziland are in hand.
182 documents, such as powers of attorney, affidavits and certificates, etc., for use in foreign countries were attested during the period
under review.
The cases regarding reciprocal arrangements under section 14 of
the Notaries Act, 1952, for recognition of notarial acts with some
countries which were not finalised last year were pursued further.
The proposal to enter into these arrangements with Ceylon, Switzerland, Laos, Madagascar, Saudi Arabia and France has been dropped
either because of absence of analogous laws in the countries concerned or for want of sufficient reciprocity. The remaining cases are
under correspondence.
69 cases of estates of deceased Indians abroad and those relating
to property of Indian nationals and their claims against foreign Governments were dealt with during the period under review.
The cases in regard to revision of the existing reciprocal arrangements with Thailand, Argentina, Iraq and Costa Rica under section 57
of the Administrator General's Act, 1913, for administration of properties of deceased Indian nationals, dying intestate, by the Indian
Diplomatic and Consular Officers in those countries are still under
correspondence. Netherlands which was hitherto being recognised as
a reciprocating country for the purpose of the above section has now
been omitted from the notification issued in this regard for want of
reciprocity.
Negotiations for reciprocal arrangements under the provisions of
enactments referred to in the foregoing paragraphs have been initiated with Denmark and Yugoslavia.
During the period under review, 41 persons were repatriated from
foreign countries by the various Indian Missions at a total cost of
Rs. 24,437.19 nP. The respective State Governments have been asked
to recover the repatriation charges from these individuals and
Rs. 4,753.19 nP. have been recovered from them. An amount of
Rs. 12,832.28nP. has been written off as irrecoverable on the recommendations of the State Governments concerned as the repatriates
were either untraceable or were not in a position to repay the

advances.
During the same period, Indian Missions rendered financial assistance amounting to Rs. 6,210.54nP. to 32 Indian nationals who were
<pg52>
stranded abroad due to unforeseen circumstances against bank drafts,
cheques or other negotiable instruments. Rs. 4,372.00 nP. have since
been recovered.
28 cases relating to extradition of offenders from or, to India, trial
of citizens of India for offences committed abroad and trial of foreigners in their country of nationality for offences committed in India,
were dealt with during the year. 23 cases of deportation of Indian
citizens from abroad were also handled.
Instructions relating to registration of minor children under section
5(1) (b) of the Citizenship Act, 1955, were also issued to Indian
Missions.
42 cases including legal enquiries on Indian laws relating to marriages, births, deaths and legitimacy were dealt with.
131 cases of deaths of foreigners in India were intimated to the
foreign Missions concerned. In 33 cases, death reports were sent to
the foreign Missions concerned by the State Governments direct.
27 cases relating to remittance facilities from or to India were also
dealt with. About 160 cases relating to the whereabouts of Indians
abroad, requests for birth, death, marriage and other certificates, complaints from Indian nationals and foreigners abroad against individuals, firms etc., in India, civil and criminal proceedings against
Indians abroad and other miscellaneous enquiries were also dealt
with.
55 cases relating to settlement of pay, pension, etc., and claims
of Indian nationals pending with other foreign Governments, particularly the Government of Burma, were taken up with the governments concerned through Indian Missions. In addition, a few cases
concerning Indian - seamen were also handled.
During the Second world war, evacuees from War Zones who
took refuge in India were given repayable advances by the Government of India. The Scheme of Financial Assistance to these evacuees commenced in 1942 and closed at the. end of February 1948,
and the work connected with the recoveries of advances started with
effect from March 1948. The present position regarding the amount
recovered, written off and balance outstanding is as follows: Of a total amount of Rs. 7.18 crores paid as advances, Rs. 33.67
lakhs have been recovered and Rs. 213.14 lakhs were written off,
leaving an amount of Rs. 471.21 lakhs still outstanding. Two officers
of the Central Government, representing the Ministry of Finance and

the Ministry of External Affairs, visited all the State capitals concerned to explore the possibilities of effecting recoveries expeditiously
<pg53>
from the evacuees. The recommendations of these officers to write
off or to effect recoveries wherever possible are being implemented.
It was decided, in consultation with the Ministry of Finance, not
to write off irrecoverable loans in bulk, but to consider individual
cases on merit. As a result of this decision, enhanced powers to
write off irrecoverable loans upto, Rs. 5,000 in each case, have been
delegated to the different State Governments in order to expedite
disposal of pending cases. Such delegation of power to the three
Indian Missions who are also dealing with recoveries in their respective jurisdictions is also under consideration of the Government of
India.
Regarding the claims against the Government of Burma, that
Government have been persuaded to accept the date 31 March 1961,
as the last date for raising debits against them in respect of the expenditure incurred by the Government of India on the evacuees for whom
that Government accepted responsibility. This will further cancel
Rs. 20 to 30 lakhs of outstanding debits pending with the AccountantsGeneral of different States.
The settlement of the orphan evacuees problem is almost
completed.
The Public Accounts Committee, in its last report, asked the Ministry to fix a target date for the completion of the work relating to
recoveries from evacuees, but it has not been possible to fix a date
as the scheme cannot be closed as long as advances continue to be
refunded. Expeditious action is, however, being taken to bring this
outstanding balance to a minimum. The Public Accounts Committee
is being apprised of this position.
The consular activities of Indian Missions abroad are covered by
work dealt with in the Consular section. However, *figures relating
to important consular items handled by the Missions are given
below:1. Number of cases relating to estates of deceased Indians abroad handled
3
2. Number of passports, visas and emergency certificates issued
(a) Passports
61
(b) Visas
6
(c) Emergency certificates

36,3
2,70,10
2,76

18

8
3. Total revenue from the consular services rendered
Rs. 13,96,388.88 n
P.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------*Figures for 1962 based on reports from 73 Missions only.
<pg54>
4. Total number of Indians repatriated and the amount spent
on them:
(a) No.
(b) Amount

73
Rs.52,912.77 nP.

5. Number of Indian citizens stranded abroad to whom financial
assistance was granted and the amount of such assistance:
(a) No.
(b) Amount

62
Rs. 11,108.68 nP.

6. Number of deportation cases handled

77

Generally the Missions assisted Indian nationals in respect of
several matters connected with their stay abroad. Besides, some of
the Missions rendered assistance to Indian ships and seamen engaged
on Indian Articles, visiting areas within their jurisdiction.
(v) Economic and Coordination Division.--The Economic and Coordination Division, set up in July 1961, coordinates and deals with
international economic questions from the political angle and thus
helps in the formulation of a closely integrated politico-economic
policy. During the year, the Division was also made responsible for
aid and trade relations with Nepal, previously dealt with by the
Eastern Division and certain aspects of the economic work relating
to Goa such as trade, import and export policy and industrial development. Co-ordinating functions in respect of defence procurement
have also, since the emergency, been assumed by the Economic and
Co-ordination Division.
Though in relation to such matters as trade agreements, credit
and payments agreements, foreign aid negotiations and other technical agreements including air and shipping agreements, the role of the
Division was primarily advisory both in relation to other Ministries
as well as in regard to Territorial Divisions within the, Ministry, the
Economic and Co-ordination Division assumed direct responsibility
for all proposals relating to technical assistance with the exception
of schemes and pro-grammes within the scope of the Colombo Plan,
which remained with the Ministry of Finance. In addition, the Division continued to deal with political and economic conferences other

than the regular conferences of the United Nations which are the
responsibility of the UN Division. The Division was closely associated
with the Indian delegation to the Cairo. Conference on the problems
of economic development and the Annual ECAFE sessions held in
Tokyo in March 1962.
(vi) Diplomatic Missions and Consular Posts in India.-At the
end of the period under review, there Were 50 Embassies, 10 High
Commissions and 3 Legations, including the Apostolic Internuncia<pg55>
ture. During the period under review, the High Commission for the
Federation Of Nigeria was established in New Delhi. A list of the
Diplomatic Missions in India and a list of the Sub-offices, of the High
Commissions of the Common wealth countries are given at Appendix
III.
The total number of foreign Consular posts at the end of December 1962 was 109. The status of the Consulate (Honorary) of Japan
in Madras was raised to that of a Consulate-General (Honorary).
The following new Consular offices were opened during the period
under review:(1) Consulate of Panama: at Calcutta.
(2) Consulate-General of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea at New Delhi.
(3) Consulate-General of the Republic of Korea at New Delhi.
(4) Consulate-General of the U.S.S.R. at Madras.
(5) Consulate-General (Honorary) of Ethiopia at Calcutta.
(6) Consulate-General of France at Pondichery.
(vii) Distinguished visitors from abroad.-The following is a list
of the distinguished visitors visiting India from April to December
1962:His Holiness the Supreme Patriarch of Thailand ( 7 to 27 April);
Their Majesties the King and Queen of Nepal accompanied by Princess
Sarda (18 to 23 April); H.E. Mr. Lee Kuan Yew, Prime Minister of
Singapore accompanied by Mrs. Lee (22 to 25 April); H. E. Prof.
Sudjono Pusponegoro, Minister of National Research of Indonesia
(28 April to 3 May); Mr. Jigmie P. Dorji, Prime Minister of Bhutan
accompanied by Mrs. Dorji (29 April to 5 May); Mr. E. G. Whitlam,
Deputy Leader of Opposition Party in Australian Senate accompanied by Mrs. Whitlam (5 to 7 June); Rt. Hon. Duncan Sandys, Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations, U.K. (15 to 19 June);
H.E. Alhaji Shehu Shagari, Minister of Establishments, Federal
Government of Nigeria (23 June to 7 July); Mr. Jeam Albert Zafimahova, Director of Mines and Power, Malagasy Government (1 to 4
July); Mr. A. I. Mikoyan, First Deputy Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of the USSR (24 to 25 July); H. E. Mr. Rishikesh Shah,
Foreign Minister of Nepal (5 to 14 September); Mr. A. R. Qureshi,
Surveyor-General of Pakistan (11 to 13 September); Mr. Lhendup
Dorji, Acting Prime Minister of Bhutan (11 to 14 September); H.E.

Mr. Lee Kuan Yew, Prime Minister of Singapore (22 to 24 September); Mr. Rene Maheu, Acting Director General of the UNESCO
(24 to 30 September); H.E. Mr. Nzo Ekhah Nghaky, Deputy Minis<pg56>
ter for Foreign Affairs, Federal Republic of Cameroon (30 September to 3 October) ; H.E. the President of Mexico (6 to 10 October).
H.E. the President of the People's Republic of Rumania (12 to 20 October); H.E. the Prime Minister of the Federation of Malaya (21 October
to 1 November); the Prime Minister of Bhutan (22 to 27 October);
H. E. Mr. Jacobo Schaulsohn, President of the Chamber of Deputies
in Chile (28 to 31 October); H.E. Archbishop Makarios, President
of Cyprus (31 October to 15 November); H.E. Mr. S. Rajaratnam,
Minister for Culture, Government of Singapore (15 to. 17 November); U.S. Delegation led by Governor Averell Harriman, Assistant
Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (22 to 30 November);
H.E. Mr. S. Boolell, Minister of Agriculture and Natural Resources
and H.E. Mr. Harold Edward Walter, Minister of Works and Internal Communication, Government of Mauritius (23 November to 5
December); H. E. Dr. Heinrich Luebke, President of the Federal
Republic of Germany accompanied by Mrs. Luebke (26 November
to 5 December); Goodwill Mission from the Republic of Niger led
by H.E. Mr. Yacouba Djibo, Minister of Rural Economy (29 November to 4 December); British Mission led by H.E. Mr. Duncan Sandys,
Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations accompanied by
Mrs. Sandys (22 to 27 November); British Mission led by General
Hull, Chief of Imperial General Staff (22 to 30 November); Sir
Garfield Barwick, Minister of External Affairs, Australia (1 to 5
December); H.E. Mr. G. S. Peiris, Ambassador of Ceylon to Burma
(16 to 18 December); and H.E. Mr. Edvard Kardelj, Vice-President
of the Federal Executive Council of the Federal People's Republic
of Yugoslavia accompanied by Mrs. Kardelj (18 to 27 December).
INDIA
BHUTAN SRI LANKA AUSTRALIA USA AFGHANISTAN BURMA LATVIA UNITED KINGDOM
CHINA NEPAL CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC PAKISTAN IRELAND BANGLADESH NEW
ZEALAND CAMBODIA LAOS SWITZERLAND VIETNAM CANADA INDONESIA ISRAEL REPUBLIC
OF SINGAPORE PHILIPPINES THAILAND PERU TOTO GHANA JAPAN RUSSIA KOREA
MONGOLIA IRAN CYPRUS IRAQ JORDAN LEBANON SYRIA SAUDI ARABIA EGYPT KUWAIT
TURKEY YEMEN ALGERIA MOROCCO TUNISIA CAMEROON CONGO ETHIOPIA KENYA LIBYA
MADAGASCAR NIGER NIGERIA SOUTH AFRICA SUDAN UGANDA FRANCE SENEGAL AUSTRIA
BELGIUM NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK SWEDEN GERMANY HUNGARY POLAND SPAIN
JAMAICA TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO YUGOSLAVIA BOLIVIA BRAZIL CUBA MEXICO PANAMA
PORTUGAL ARGENTINA MAURITIUS MALAYSIA HONG KONG FIJI LIBERIA SIERRA LEONE
SWAZILAND COSTA!!CHILE
Sep 11, 1962

United Nations
PART III
UNITED NATIONS
(i) The Seventeenth Session of the General Assembly was held
in New York from Sep 18, 1962 to 21 December 1962.
(ii) Admission of New Members.-The total membership of the
United Nations rose to 110 with the admission of Ruanda, Burundi,
Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago, Algeria and Uganda.
(iii) General Assembly.-Among the important matters on the
agenda of the current session of the Assembly were:
(a) Security Council election.-Brazil, Norway and Morocco,
were elected to the Security Council for two years replacing Chile,
Ireland and the United Arab Republic. Philippines was elected for
one year replacing Rumania under an agreement reached last yearbetween the two countries to divide the two-year terms between
themselves.
(b) Representation of China.-On the initiative of the Soviet,
Union the Assembly discussed this question but rejected the Soviet
proposal to replace the Kuomintang representatives by those of the
People's Republic of China. India voted for the proposal as she
supported the principle of universality in regard to the membership of the U.N. and believed that the only effective way to check
Chinese military adventurism was to make China accept the responsibilities of the Charter and thus be subjected to the views and
disciplines of the U.N.
(c) Non-Self-Governing Territories.-India continued to serve as-the Chairman of the Special Committee of Seventeen Members set
up by the Assembly at its last session to examine the application
of the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples. The Special Committee considered the cases of
12 territories and recommended to the Assembly to urge the,
Administering Authorities to take steps for the immediate independence of all the Non-Self-Governing Territories. The Assembly
endorsed the work of the Special Committee and expanded its
membership to 24.
(d) Trust Territories.-The Trust Territory of Ruanda Urundi
achieved independence on 1 July 1962.
<pg57>
<pg58>
(e) South-West Africa.-The United Nations Special Committee
for South-West Africa submitted its report to the Assembly. The

Committee maintained that unless an early satisfactory settlement
of this question was reached, the situation could result in a serious
political disaster with far-reaching consequences. The Committee
also urged that the United Nations take. firm and resolute action
on this question so that the South African Government willingly
allows the United Nations to perform its legitimate and supervisory
function over this mandated territory. The Assembly has asked the
Secretary-General to take all necessary steps to establish an effective
U.N. presence in South-West Africa. The Special Committee on
South-West Africa has been dissolved and its work has been entrusted to the Committee on Decolonization.
(f) Portuguese Colonies.-The Special Committee of Seven Members, set up by the Assembly at its last session to examine the conditions in the territories under the Portuguese Government, stated
that Portuguese military action and other repressive measures in
the territories under its administration had created a situation which
represented a serious threat to international peace and security.
The Committee also stated that Goa and dependencies: and Sao
Joao Batista d' Ajuda, having been nationally united with India and
Dahomey respectively, were no longer under Portuguese administration and did not come within its purview. The Assembly approved
the report of the Special Committee and invited the Portuguese
Government to implement its recommendations and requested the
Security Council to take appropriate measures if Portugal should
refuse to comply with this resolution. It further condemned the
attitude of Portugal and requested all States to refrain from offering
Portugal help which could be used for repression and to prevent
the sale and supply of military equipment to Portugal. The Committee on Portuguese Territories has been dissolved and the Committee on Decolonization has been asked to give high priority to a
study of the Portuguese territories.
(g) Angola.-The Sub-Committee set up by the Assembly at its
fifteenth session went to Africa in August 1962 and interviewed
Angolan groups and refugees in Leopoldville, Matadi and Thysville.
The Assembly expressed satisfaction at the work done by the
Sub-Committee and condemned the colonial war pursued by
Portugal against the Angolan people and requested the Security
Council to take appropriate measures, including sanctions, to secure
Portugal's compliance with the United Nations resolution.
(h) United Nations Year for International Co-operation.-The
(General Assembly considered an item, originally proposed by India
<pg59>
at the 16th Session and postponed to the 17th Session entitled
"United Nations Year for International Co-operation", and unanimously adopted a draft resolution, co-sponsored by India and 20
other member States, designating 1965 as the "Year of International Co-operation". A Preparatory Committee of twelve members has been asked to report on this matter to the next session of

the General Assembly.
(i) Other. Political Matters.-In the political field, the, General
Assembly decided to continue the work of the United Nations Corp mission for the Rehabilitation and Unification of Korea (UNCURK),
extended the mandate of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees (UNRWA), and re-appointed for the next two
years the 14 members (including India) of the Peace Observation
Commission.
(j) Financial Matters.-The General Assembly agreed to an additional $ 3,673,480 as supplementary to the budgetary estimates of
$ 82,144,740 for 1962; resolved to revise the estimates of income for
the financial year 1962 from $ 14,062,050 to $ 14,426,200; voted a total
of $ 93,911,050 in appropriations for the United Nations and the International Court of Justice for the financial year 1963; approved estimates of income, other than assessments on member States totalling
$ 15,247,500 for the financial year 1963 and raised the Working Capital
Fund ending 31 December 1963 from $ 25 million to $ 40 million.
India's scale of assessment for the apportionment of the expenses of
the United Nations for the year 1963 will continue to be 2.03 per cent.
The Assembly also voted to accept the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice to the effect that the expenditure incurred on the United Nations Operations in the Congo (ONUC) and
West Asia (UNEF) constituted expenses of the organisation within
the meaning of Article 17, paragraph 2 of the United Nations Charter.
It also decided to set up a working group of 21 Members (including
India) to study methods of financing peace-keeping operations of the
United Nations involving heavy expenditures including a possible
special scale of contributions.
(iv) Economic and Social Council.-India became a member of the
United Nations Economic and Social Council from 1 January 1962
after a lapse of seven years. The 33rd Session of the Economic and
Social Council was held in New York in April 1962 and India was
represented by its Permanent Representative to the United Nations.
The 34th Session of the Council was held in Geneva from 3 July
1962. The Indian delegation took a prominent part in the discussions and co-sponsored resolutions which were adopted, mostly with
unanimous support.
<pg60>
Shri E. S. Krishnamoorthy was re-elected as a member of the
Permanent,, Central Opium Board for a term of five Years beginning
from 3 March 1963.
(v) The Commission an Human Rights.-India participated in the
18th Session of the Commission on Human Rights which was held
in New York from 19 March to 14 April 1962.
(vi) All India U.N. Day Committee.-The All India U.N. Day Com-

mittee which was formed under a notification issued by the Ministry
of External Affairs, celebrated the United Nations Day on 24 October
1962. The Prime Minister was chief guest at the function.
Poster and essay competitions on an all-India basis were organised
by the Committee as part of the celebrations.
(vii) Asian African Legal Consultative Committee.-The Fifth Session of the Asian African Legal Consultative Committee, of which
India is a member was held in Rangoon from 17 to 30 January
1962.
(viii) Disarmament.-Significant discussions an disarmament at
the international level have taken place at the Conference of the
18-Nation Disarmament Committee in Geneva and at the 17th Session of the U.N. General Assembly in New York. The 18-Nation Disarmament Committee, of which India is, a member, has been holding negotiations in Geneva since 14 March 1962 with a view to reaching an agreement on a treaty on general and complete disarmament,
measures to reduce international tension and build up confidence
among nations, and discontinuance of all nuclear weapon tests.
The Disarmament Committee began its deliberations under conditions which were more favourable than ever in the past. The Committee had before them a joint statement by the U.S.A. and the
Soviet Union on agreed principles for a detailed programme on
complete and general disarmament and comprehensive draft treaties
presented by the U.S.A. and the Soviet Union. Another hopeful
feature was the fact that for the first time in negotiations on general
and complete disarmament, eight non-aligned nations were invited
to participate in addition to representatives of the two Power blocs.
Although differences still persist between the two Power blocs over
many crucial issues, some progress was achieved during the five
months of the Committee's deliberations. The draft preamble of a
proposed disarmament treaty has been drawn up and agreement has
been reached on its first four articles.
The Disarmament Committee has also considered collateral tension-reducing measures and discussions have been held on (i) the
cessation of war propaganda; (ii) the prevention of further spread
<pg61>
of nuclear weapons, and (iii) reduction of the risk of war by accident,
miscalculation or failure of communications.
Some progress was made at Geneva on a treaty on the discontinuance of nuclear weapon tests. There is agreement between the
`nuclear Powers' that cessation of tests in the, atmosphere, outer
space and under water does not require any control or inspection
arrangements for detection and verification. There is, however, a
difference of opinion with regard to detection and identification of
underground tests.

With a view to resolving the differences between the `nuclear
Powers', India and the seven other non-aligned members of the Disarmament Committee submitted a Joint Memorandum on 16 April
1962 expressing the belief that possibilities existed of establishing by
agreement, a system for continuous observation and effective control
on a purely scientific and non-political basis. Such a system might
be based and built upon already existing national networks of observation posts and institutions, or if more appropriate, on certain of the
existing posts designated by agreement for the purpose together, if
necessary, with new posts established by agreement. They further
suggested that the feasibility of constituting by agreement an international commission consisting of a limited number of highly qualified scientists, possibly from non-aligned countries, together with
appropriate staff, might be considered. Even though this Joint
Memorandum has been accepted by the `nuclear Powers' as a basis
for negotiations, no agreement has so far been reached due to
differences of interpretation of the 8-Power proposals.
The Disarmament Committee went into recess on 8 September
1962 in order to enable the 17th Session of the U.N. General Assembly
to consider their report. At the 17th Session of the General Assembly
an item on the suspension of nuclear and thermonuclear tests was
inscribed on the agenda at the request of the Government of India.
By general agreement this item was given highest priority and was
the first to be considered in the Political Committee.
India, along with 36 co-sponsors from Asia, Africa, Europe and
Latin America, tabled a resolution on the urgent need for suspension
of nuclear and thermonuclear tests for acceptance by the General
Assembly. The resolution, with some minor amendments, was adopted in the General Assembly by 75 votes in favour, none against and
21 abstentions. The General Assembly also adopted another resolution on the same item co-sponsored by the U.S.A. and the U.K. with
51 votes in favour, 10 against and 40 abstentions. India voted in
favour of this resolution.
<pg62>
The 18-Nation Disarmament Committee reconvened at Geneva on
26 November 1962, and adjourned on 21 December 1962. It will
reconvene on 12 February 1963.
No agreement on the cessation of tests has so far been reached
by the Disarmament Committee in Geneva and, in pursuance of the
resolution adopted by the General Assembly asking the Disarmament Committee to report to the General Assembly by 10 December 1962, the two Co-Chairmen of the Committee, the representatives
of the U.S.A. and the Soviet Union informed the President of the
General Assembly to this effect.
The General Assembly also considered the question of general and
complete disarmament and adopted a resolution which called uponthe Committee at Geneva to resume its negotiations expeditiously
and in a spirit of constructive compromise until an agreement is

reached. It also requested the Committee to report periodically to
the General Assembly on the progress of its work and in any case,
not later than the second week of April 1963.
(ix) Outer Space.-The 28-Nation U.N. Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space, of which India is a member, held its second
meeting at New York in March 1962. This Committee established,
a Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee and a Legal Sub-Committee,
which were requested to meet in Geneva in May 1962.
The Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee on which India was
represented met in Geneva on 28 May 1962 and concluded its deliberations on 13 June 1962. It made unanimous recommendations to
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space on exchange of
Information, encouragement of International Programmes and international Equatorial Sounding Rocket Launching Facilities.
The Legal Sub-Committee also met at Geneva on 28 May 1962
and concluded its work on 20 June 1962.
The reports of the two Sub-Committees were considered by the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space at its meetings held:
In New York from 10 to 14 September 1962. In pursuance of the recommendations made by the Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee,
the Permanent Representative of India, Shri B. N. Chakravarty,
expressed the interest of the Government of India in providing facilities for establishing an International Equatorial Sounding Rocket
Launching Facility in the terms proposed by the Sub-Committee and
on the understanding that the project would be a United Nations project in which the principal Powers concerned would co-operate.
An item on "International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space" was considered by the General Assembly and a resolu<pg63>
tion was adopted which, among other things, requested the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to continue its work on
the legal questions connected with the Peaceful Uses of Outer Spaceand endorsed the basic principles suggested by the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space for the operation of Sounding,
Rocket Launching Facilities under United Nations sponsorship.
India's Permanent Representative to the United Nations, reiterated
the interest of the Government of India in being a host State for the
establishment of such a facility on the terms proposed.
B. International Conferences
India participated in many conferences held abroad under the
aegis of the United Nations and its specialized agencies. Brief reports,
On Indian participation in the more important of these Conferences
will be found in the reports of the appropriate Ministries.
A list of International Organisations, of which India is a member,

is attached as Appendix VI.
USA
BURUNDI ALGERIA JAMAICA TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO UGANDA BRAZIL MOROCCO NORWAY
CHILE IRELAND PHILIPPINES CHINA INDIA SOUTH AFRICA PORTUGAL ANGOLA KOREA
CONGO SWITZERLAND UNITED KINGDOM
Sep 18, 1962

Appendix I Indian Missions abroad
Jan 01, 1962
APPENDIX I
Indian Missions abroad
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------Missions
Location
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------Embassies
1.
Afghanistan
Kabul
2.
Algeria
Algiers
3.
Argentina
Buenos Aires
Concurrently accredited to
Paragu
ay
and Uruguay as Minister
4.
Austria
Vienna
5.
Belgium
Brussels
Concurrently accredited to
Luxem
bourg as Ambassador
6.
Bolivia
Ambassador resident in
Rio-de-Jan
eiro (Brazil).
7.
Brazil
Rio-de-Janeiro
Concurrently accredited to
Venezu
ela
as Minister and Bolivia as
Ambass
ador
8.
Bulgaria
Ambassador resident in Belgrade
9.
Burma
10. Cambodia
11. Chile
Colomb
ia

Rangoon
Phnom Penh
Santiago

Concurrently accredited to
as Ambassador

12.
13.

China
Colombia

Peking

Ambassador resident in

14. Congo
15. Cuba
16. Czechoslovakia
Ruman
ia

Leopoldville
Havana
Prague

17.
18.
19.

Denmark
Ethiopia
Finland

Copenhagen
Addis Ababa
Helsinki

20.
21.
22.

France
Germany
Greece

Paris
Bonn

23. Hungary
24. Guinea
25. Indonesia
26. Iran
27. Iraq
28. Ireland
29. Italy
Albani
a

Santiago

(Chile).
Ambassador resident in Mexico
Concurrently accredited to
as Ambassador
Ambassador resident in Stockholm
(Sweden).
Ambassador resident in Belgrade

Budapest
Djakarta
Tehran
Baghdad
Dublin
Rome

Ambassador resident in Moscow
Ambassador resident in Accra

Ambassador resident in London
Concurrently accredited to

as Minister
30. Ivory Coast
Ambassador resident in Dakar
31. Japan
Tokyo
32. Jordan
Ambassador resident in Beirut.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg64>
<pg65>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------Missions
Location
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------33. Laos
34. Lebanon
Amb
assador
Commissi
oner

Vientiane
Beirut

Concurrently accredited as
to Jordan and as High

35.

Liberia

to Cyprus.
Ambassador resident in Accra.

36.

Libya

Ambassador resident in Cairo.

37.

Luxembourg

Ambassador resident in

Brussel
s.
38. Malagasy
39. Mali
40. Mexico
Amb
assador,

Tananarive
Mexico City

Concurrently accredited as
to Cuba.
Ambassador resident in

41. Mongolia
Moscow.
42. Morocco
Tun
isia

Rabat

43. Nepal
44. Netherlands
45. Norway
46. Philippines
47. Poland
48. Rumania
Prague.

Kathmandu
The Hague
Oslo
Manila
Warsaw
Bucharest

49. Saudi Arabia
50. Senegal
Amb
assador

Jeddah
Dakar

Volta
.
51. Somalia
Lo
uis.
52. Spain
53. Sudan
54. Sweden
Fin
land

Ambassador resident in Accra.

concurrently accredited to
as Ambassador.

Ambassador resident in

Concurrently accredited as
to Ivory Coast and Upper

Mogadiscio

Ambassador resident in Port

Madrid
Khartoum
Stockholm

Concurrently

55. Switzerland
Vatican

Berne

as Ambassador.
Concurrently accredited to the

56. Syrian Arab Republic
57. Thailand
58. Togo
Lagos.

Damascus
Bangkok
Lome

59.

Tunis

Ambassador resident in Rabat.

60. Turkey
61. United Arab Republic
Amb
assador

Ankara
Cairo

Concurrently accredited as

62.

Washington

Tunisia

United States of
America
Union of Soviet

63.
Hu
ngary

Moscow

accredited to

as Minister.
Ambassador

resident in

to Libya and Yemen.
Concurrently accredited

to

64.

Socialist Republics
Upper Volta

and Mongolia as Ambassador.
Ambassador resident in Dakar.

65.

Yemen

Ambassador resident in Cairo.

66. Yugoslavia
Gr
eece

Belgrade

Concurrently

accredited to

as Ambassador and to Bulgaria

as

Minister.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg66>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------Missions
Location
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------High Commissions
1. Australia
Ne
w

Canberra

2. Canada
3. Ceylon

Ottawa
(a) Colombo
(b) Kandy

4. Cyprus (Nicosia)
at
Beirut.
5. Ghana
G
uinea

Accra

Zealand.

High Commissioner resident
Concurrently accredited to
and Liberia as Ambassador

and
as
L
eone.
6. Malaya
S
ingapore

Concurrently accredited to

High Commissioner to Sierra
Kuala Lumpur

Concurrently accredited

to

as Commissioner and also to

t
he

British North Borneo,

territ
ories of
7. New Zealand
in
Can-

Wellington

Brunei and Sarawak.
High Commissioner resident

8.

Lagos

berra.
Concurrently accredited as

Nigeria

Am
bassador
9.

Pakistan

Commissioner.
10. Sierra Leone
in
Accra.
11. Tanganyika
12. Trinidad and Tobago
Consul-Genera
l to
13. Uganda
14. United Kingdom
Ir
eland

(a) Karachi
(b) Dacca (E.
Pakistan
(c) Rajshahi (do)

to the Republic of Togo.
Deputy High Commissioner.
Assistant

High

High Commissioner resident
Dar-es-Salaam
Trinidad

Kampala
London

Accredited

as

Surinam.
Concurrently accredited to
as Ambassador.

Legations
1.

Albania

Minister resident in Rome.

2. Paraguay
Aires.

Minister resident in Buenos

3. Uruguay
Aires.

Minister resident in Buenos

4.

Vatican

Minister resident in Berne.

5. Venezuela
Rio-deJaneiro.

Minister resident in

Special Missions
1. Bhutan
i
n Gangtok.

Political Officer resident

2. Sikkim

Gangtok

3. United Nations

New York

Commissions
1. Aden

Aden

2. Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland
Salisbury
Commissioner resident in
Nai
robi.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

-------------<pg67>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------Missions
Location
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------3. East Africa
Federation
(British)

Nairobi

Concurrently accredited to
of Rhodesia

and Nyasaland

Commissioner and to Rwanda

and

Burundi as Consul-General.

4. Fiji
5. Hong Kong
6. Mauritius
Ambassador

Suva
Hong Kong
Mauritius

7.

Singapore

Singapore

Concurrently accredited as
to Somalia

Trade Commissions
1. Australia

Sydney

2. British East Africa

Mombasa

3. Canada

Vancouver

Consulates-General
1. Burundi
in
Nairobi.
2. Denmark
3. Dutch Guiana
in
Trinidad.
4. Germany

5. Kuwait
6. Muscat
7. Rwanda
in
Nairobi.
8. Switzerland
9. United States
America
10.
11.

Consul-General resident
Copenhagen
Surinam

Hon. Consul-General.
Consul-General resident

(a) Berlin
(b) Frankfurt
(c) Hamburg
Kuwait
Muscat

of

Vietnam (North)
Vietnam (South)

Geneva
(a) New York
(b) San Francisco
Hanoi
Saigon

Consul-General resident

Consulates
1.
2.
3.
4.

Belgium
Canary Islands
French Somaliland
Germany

5.
6.
7.

Greece
Iran
Indonesia

8. Iraq
9. Japan
10. U.S.S.R.

Ghent
Las Palmas
Djibouti
(a) Munich
(b) Stuttgart
Athens
Khorramshahr
(a) Sourabaya
(b) Medan
Basra
Kobe
Odessa

Hon.
Hon.
Hon.
Hon.
Hon.
Hon.

Consul
Consul
Consul
Consul
Consul
Consul

Vice-Consulates
1. Afghanistan

(a) Jalalabad
(b) Kandahar
2. Burma
Mandalay
3. Iran
Zahidan
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------*The Honorary Consulate-General at Copenhagen will continue to function
e
ven
after the establishment of the Indian Embassy there.
INDIA
AFGHANISTAN ALGERIA ARGENTINA URUGUAY AUSTRIA USA BELGIUM BOLIVIA
BRAZIL BULGARIA YUGOSLAVIA BURMA CAMBODIA CHILE CHINA COLOMBIA CONGO
CUBA MEXICO CZECH REPUBLIC NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK ETHIOPIA FINLAND
SWEDEN FRANCE GERMANY GREECE RUSSIA HUNGARY GHANA GUINEA INDONESIA
IRAN IRAQ IRELAND UNITED KINGDOM ITALY SENEGAL JAPAN JORDAN LEBANON
LAOS CYPRUS LIBERIA EGYPT LIBYA MALI MONGOLIA MOROCCO NEPAL
PHILIPPINES POLAND ROMANIA SAUDI ARABIA SOMALIA SPAIN SUDAN SWITZERLAND
SYRIA THAILAND TOTO TUNISIA TURKEY YEMEN AUSTRALIA CANADA SRI LANKA
MALAYSIA BRUNEI NEW ZEALAND NIGER NIGERIA PAKISTAN BANGLADESH SIERRA
LEONE TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO UGANDA ALBANIA PARAGUAY VENEZUELA BHUTAN
KENYA RWANDA BURUNDI FIJI HONG KONG MAURITIUS REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE
KUWAIT OMAN VIETNAM DJIBOUTI
Jan 01, 1962

Appendix II Indian

Information Units abroad

Jan 01, 1962
APPENDIX II
Indian

Information Units abroad

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.

Accra
Addis Ababa
Buenos Aires
Bangkok
Belgrade
Brussels
Bonn
Berne
Baghdad
Colombo
Cairo
Dacca
Damascus
Dar-es-Salaam
Djakarta
Gangtok
The Hague
Hong Kong
Istanbul
Jeddah
Kalimpong
Kathmandu
Karachi
Kabul
Khartoum
Kuala Lumpur

27. Lagos
28. London
29. Manila
30. Moscow
31. New York
32. New York (Indiadel)
33. Nairobi
34. Ottawa
35. Peking
36. Phnom Penh
37. Prague
38. Paris
39. Port Louis
40. Rio de Janeiro
41. Rome
42. Rangoon
43. San Francisco
44. Sydney
45. Salisbury
46. Suva
47. Stockholm
48. Tokyo
49. Tehran
50. Trinidad
51. Washington
<pg68>

INDIA
GHANA UNITED KINGDOM ARGENTINA PHILIPPINES RUSSIA USA YUGOSLAVIA
BELGIUM GERMANY KENYA CANADA SWITZERLAND IRAQ CAMBODIA SRI LANKA CZECH
REPUBLIC EGYPT FRANCE MAURITIUS SYRIA INDONESIA ITALY AUSTRALIA HONG
KONG TURKEY FIJI SAUDI ARABIA SWEDEN JAPAN NEPAL IRAN PAKISTAN
AFGHANISTAN SUDAN MALAYSIA
Jan 01, 1962

Appendix III Foreign

Diplomatic Missions in India

Jan 01, 1962

APPENDIX III
Foreign

(i)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Embassies
Afghanistan
Argentina
Austria
Belgium
Brazil
Bulgaria

Diplomatic Missions in India
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.

Morocco
Nepal
Netherlands
Norway
Philippines
Poland
Rumania

7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

Burma
Cambodia
Chile
China
Colombia
Cuba
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Germany (Federal Republic of)
Greece
Hungary
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Italy
Japan
Jordan
Laos
Lebanon
Mexico
Mongolia

38. Saudi Arabia
39. Spain
40. Sudan
41. Sweden
42. Switzerland
43. Syria
44. Thailand
45. Turkey
46. U.A.R.
47. U.S.A.
48. U.S.S.R.
49. Venezuela
50. Yugoslavia
(ii) High Commissions
1. Australia
2. Canada
3. Ceylon
4. Ghana
5. Malaya
6. New Zealand
7. Nigeria
8. Pakistan
9. Tanganyika
10. U.K.

(iii). Legations
1. Albania (Stationed at Baghdad).
2. Apostolic Internunciature (Holy See).
3. Uruguay.
(iv) Sub-Offices of High Commissions
1. office of the Assistant High Commissioner for Ceylon at Madras.
2. Office of the Ceylon High Commissioner's isa Office at Tiruchirapalli.
3. Office of the Assistant High Commissioner's for Malaya at Madras.
4. Office of the Deputy High Commissioner for Pakistan at Calcutta.
5. Office of the Assistant High Commissioner for Pakistan at Shillong.
6. Office of the Deputy High Commissioner for U.K. at Bombay.
7. Office of the Deputy High Commissioner for U.K. at Calcutta.
8. Office, of the Deputy High Commissioner for U.K. at Madras.
9. Office o the High Commissioner for U.K. at Patna.
<pg69>
INDIA
MOROCCO AFGHANISTAN NEPAL ARGENTINA AUSTRIA NORWAY USA BELGIUM
PHILIPPINES BRAZIL POLAND BULGARIA BURMA SAUDI ARABIA CAMBODIA SPAIN
CHILE SUDAN CHINA SWEDEN COLOMBIA SWITZERLAND CUBA SYRIA SLOVAKIA
THAILAND DENMARK TURKEY ETHIOPIA FINLAND FRANCE GERMANY VENEZUELA
GREECE YUGOSLAVIA HUNGARY AUSTRALIA INDONESIA CANADA IRAN IRAQ GHANA
ITALY JAPAN JORDAN NEW ZEALAND LAOS NIGER NIGERIA LEBANON PAKISTAN
MEXICO MONGOLIA UNITED KINGDOM ALBANIA URUGUAY
Jan 01, 1962

Appendix IV Foreign Consular Offices in India
Jan 01, 1962
APPENDIX IV
Foreign Consular Offices in India
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------Sl.
Country
Location
Status
No.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.

Afghanistan
Austria
Austria
Austria
Belgium
Belgium
Belgium
Bolivia
Brazil
Brazil
Burma
Burma
Colombia
Costa Rica
Costa Rica
Cuba
Czechoslovakia
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Denmark
Denmark
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Dominican Republic
Equador
El Salvador
Ethiopia
Ethiopia
Finland
Finland
France
France
France
France
France
Germany
Germany
Germany

Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Madras
Calcutta
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Calcutta
Madras
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Calcutta
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Pondicherry
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
<pg70>
<pg71>

Consulate-General
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Consulate-General
Hon. Consulate
Consulate-General
Hon. Consulate-General
Consulate (Vacant)
Consulate
Consulate-General
Vice-Consulate
Hon. Consulate (Vacant)
Hon. Consulate-General
Hon. Consulate-General
Hon. Consular Agency
Consulate-General
Consulate-General
Hon. Consulate-General
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate-General
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate-General
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Consulate-General
Consulate-General
Hen. Consular Agency
Consulate
Consulate-General
Consulate-General
Consulate-General
Consulate

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------Sl.
Country
Location
Status
No.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.

Greece
Greece
Haiti
Haiti
Indonesia
Indonesia
Iran
Calcutta

Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Consulate-General

47. Iraq
48. Israel
49. Italy
50. Italy
51. Italy
(Temporaril
y

Bombay
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras

52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.

Japan
Japan
Japan
Jordan
Kuwait
Liberia
Luxembourg
Monaco.
Monaco
Nepal
Netherlands
Netherlands
Netherlands

Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
New Delhi
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin

65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.

Netherlands
Nicaragua
Nicaragua
Norway
Norway
Norway
Norway
Panama
Panama
Panama
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Poland
Saudi Arabia

Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Bombay
Madras
Calcutta
Calcutta
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
<pg72>

Hon. Consulate-General
Hon. Consulate-General
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate-General
(Temporarily
Closed)
Consulate-General
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Hon. Consular Agency
closed)
Consulate-General
Consulate-General
Hon. Consulate-General
Hon. Consulate (Vacant)
Consulate-General
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Vice-Consulate
Hon. Consulate-General
Hon. Consulate (Vacant)
Consulate-General
Consulate-General
Hon. Consulate-General
Hon. Consulate (Temporarily
closed).
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Consulate-General
Hon. Consulate-General
Hon. Vice-Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Consulate-General
Hon. Consulate(Vacant)
Consulate
Consulate-General
Hon. Consulate-General
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate-General (Temporarily
closed)

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Sl.
Country
Location
Status
No.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.
90.
91.
92.
93.
94.
95.
96.
97.
98.
99.
100.
101.
102.
103.
104.
105.
106.

Spain
Spain
Spain
Sudan
Sweden
Sweden
Sweden
Switzerland
Switzerland
Switzerland
Switzerland
Syria
Thailand
Turkey
Turkey
Turkey
U.A.R.
U.A.R.
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
U.S.S.R.
U.S.S.R
U.S.S.R.
Yugoslavia
Yugoslavia
Democratic People's
Republic of Korea
107. Republic of Korea
108. Democratic Republic
of Viet-Nam
109. Republic of VietNam

Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta

Consulate-General
Hon. Vice-Consulate
Hon. Vice-Consulate
Consulate-General
Hon. Consulate-General
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Consulate-General
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consular Agency
Hon. Consular Agency
Cosulate-General
Consulate-General
Hon. Consulate-General
Hon. Consulate-General
Hon. Consulate-General
Consulate-General
Consulate-General
Consulate-General
Consulate-General
Consulate-General
Consulate-General
Consulate-General
Consulate-General
Consulate-General
Consulate-General

New Delhi
New Delhi

Consulate-General
Consulate-General

New Delhi

Consulate-General

New Delhi

Consulate-General

INDIA
USA AFGHANISTAN AUSTRIA BELGIUM BOLIVIA BRAZIL BURMA COLOMBIA
COSTA!!CUBA NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK DOMINICA EL SALVADOR ETHIOPIA
FINLAND FRANCE GERMANY GREECE HAITI INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ ISRAEL ITALY
JAPAN JORDAN KUWAIT LIBERIA MONACO NEPAL CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
NICARAGUA PANAMA PERU PHILIPPINES POLAND SAUDI ARABIA SPAIN SUDAN
SWEDEN SWITZERLAND SYRIA THAILAND TURKEY YUGOSLAVIA KOREA
Jan 01, 1962

Appendix V Treaties, Conventions and Agreements
Jan 01, 1962
APPENDIX V
Treaties, Conventions and Agreements concluded or renewed by India with
ot
hercountries during April-December 1962
1.
2.
3.
4.
Kabul.

Trade
Trade
Trade
Trade

Agreement
Agreement
Agreement
Agreement

with
with
with
with

Jordan signed on 11 May 1962 at New Delhi.
Morocco signed on 3 August 1962 at Tangiers.
Iran signed on 16 August 1962 at Tehran.
Afghanistan signed on 12 September 1962 at

5. Trade Agreement with Yugoslavia signed on 13 October 1962 at
Belgrade.
6.
7.

Trade Agreement with Mexico signed on 1 November 1962 at New Delhi.
Trade Agreement with Rumania signed on 30 November 1962 at Bucharest.

8. Trade Agreement with Iraq signed on 13 December 1962 at New Delhi.
9. Trade Agreement with Burma signed on 24 December 1962 at Rangoon.
10. Letters exchanged on 7 June 1962 in Paris renewing the Trade
Agreemen
t with
France.
11. Letters exchanged on 3 July 1962 in New Delhi renewing the Trade
Agre
ement
with Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
12. Letters exchanged on 3 September 1962 in Hanoi renewing the Trade
Agre
ement
with Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam.
13. Letters exchanged on 16 October 1962 in New Delhi renewing the Trade
A
greement with Italy.
14. Letters exchanged on 21 October 1962 in Berlin renewing the Trade
Agre
ement
with Democratic Republic of Germany.
15. Letters exchanged on 20 November 1962 in Warsaw renewing the Trade
Agr
eement with Poland.
16. Letters exchanged on 24 November 1962 in Sofia renewing the Trade
Agre
ement
with Bulgaria.
17. Letters exchanged on 3 December 1962 in Cairo renewing the Trade
Agre
ement
with the United Arab Republic.
<pg73>

INDIA
JORDAN MOROCCO USA IRAN AFGHANISTAN YUGOSLAVIA MEXICO ROMANIA IRAQ
BURMA FRANCE KOREA VIETNAM ITALY GERMANY POLAND BULGARIA EGYPT
Jan 01, 1962

Appendix VI International Organisations of which India is a member
Jan 01, 1962

APPENDIX VI

International Organisations of which India is a member
UNITED NATIONS

1.

General Assembly

2.

Committees and Commissions of the General Assembly:

(a)
(b)
to re(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)

Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.
Committee to consider the question of convening a general conference
view the U.N. Charter.
17-Member Special Committee on Colonialism.
Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation.
Peace Observation Commission
Disarmament Commission.
International Law Commission.
Committee on Contributions.
Administrative Tribunal.
18-Nation Disarmament Committee.
Investment Committee.

3.

Economic and Social Council

4.

Functional Commissions of the Economic and Social Council:
(i) Human Rights Commission.
(ii) Narcotic Drugs Commission.
(iii) Statistical Commission.
(iv) Population Commission.

5. Regional Commission of the Economic and Social Council:
Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE).
6. Other Subsidiary Bodies of the Economic and Social Council:
(i) United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF).
(ii) Committee for Industrial Development.
(iii) Permanent Central Opium Board.
(iv) Technical Assistance Committee and Technical Assistance Board.
(v) Special Fund.
7. Trusteeship Council (upto 31-12-1962)

8. International Court of Justice
9. Specialized Agencies :
(a) Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO).
(b) General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
(c) International Bank of Reconstruction and Development (IBRD).
(d) International Monetary Fund (IMF).
<pg74>
<pg75>
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)

International Finance Corporation (IFC).
International Development Association (IDA).
International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO).
international Tele-communication Union (ITU).
World Meteorological Organisation (WMO).
Universal Postal Union (UPU).
International Labour Organisation (ILO)
United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO).

(m) World Health Organisation (WHO).
(n) International Maritime Consultative Organisation (IMCO).
10.

International Atomic Energy Agency.

Other International Organisations :

Zur
ich.

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

Asian African Legal Consultative Committee, New Delhi
Asian Broadcasting Conference.
Asian Productivity Organisation, Tokyo.
Asian Statisticians Conference.
American Society of Travel Agents, New York.
Commonwealth Air Transport Council.
Commonwealth Advisory Aeronautical Research Committee.
Commonwealth Agriculture Bureau, U.K.
Commonwealth Broadcasting Conference.
Commonwealth Statisticians Conference.
Committee on Space Research, The Hague.
Federation Internationale des Agences de Voyage, Paris.
International Association for Bridges and Structural Engineering,

14. International
15. International
16. International
17. International
18. International
19. International
20. International
Documentation,
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.

Paris.
International
International
International
International
International
International

Commission on Irrigation and Drainage, New Delhi.
Commission on Large Dams, Paris.
Committee of the Red Cross, Geneva.
Conference of Social Works, Paris.
Cotton Advisory Committee, Washington.
Council of Archives, Paris.
Council of Building Research Studies and

Criminal Police Commission, Paris,
Customs Tariff Bureau, Brussels.
Electro-Technical Commission, Geneva.
Federation for Documentation, The Hague.
Federation for Housing and Town Planning, The Hague,
Federation for University Women, London.

27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.

International
International
International
International
International
International
International
International
International
International
International

Hydrographic Bureau, Monte Carlo.
Institute for Administrative Sciences, Brussels.
Mathematical Union, Zurich.
Organisation of Legal Metrology, Paris.
Organisation for Standardisation, Geneva.
Railway Congress Association, Brussels.
Scientific Radio Union, Brussels.
Tea Committee, London.
Union of Biological Sciences, Paris.
Union of Crystallography, Cambridge.
Union of Geodesy and Geophysics, Paris.
<pg76>

38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
allied

International
International
International
International
International

53.
54.
55.
56.

International
International
International
International

Union
Union
Union
Union
Union

of
of
of
of
of

Geography, New York.
Pure and Applied Chemistry, Paris.
Pure and Applied Physics, Paris.
Theoretical and Applied Mechanics, Delft.
Official Travel Organisation, Geneva, and its

Commission, viz. the South Asia Travel Commission.
43. International Hide and Allied Trade Improvement Society, U.K.
44. International Union for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works
and Universal Copy Right Convention, Geneva.
45. International Association of Hydraulic Research, Delft.
46. International Bureau of Weights and Measures, Sevres (France).
47. International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, London.
48. International Commission of Table of Constants.
49. International Dairy Federation (I.D.F.), Brussels.
50. International Society of Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering,
L
ondon
51. International Union of Astronomy, Greenwich, (U.K.).
52. International Union of the History and Philosophy of Sciences,
Paris.

a
nd

Statistical Institute Conference, The Hague.
Wheat Council, London.
Council for Museums, Paris.
Committee on Monuments, Artistic and Historical Sites

Archaeological Excavations.
57. International Lead and Zinc Group, New York.
58. International Seed Testing Association, Washington.
59. International Society for Photogrammetry, London.
60. International Union Against the Venereal Diseases and the
Treponemato
se
Paris.
61. International Folk Music Council, London.
62. International Council for Bird Preservation, British Museum
(Natural
63.
64.
65.

History), London.
International Council of Scientific Unions, London.
International Union of Anthropological Sciences, Mexico.
League of Red Cross Societies, Geneva.

66. Pacific Area Travel Association, San Francisco.
67. Permanent Court of Arbitration, The Hague.
68. Permanent International Association of Navigation Congress,
Brussels.
69.
70.
71.
72.

Permanent International Association of Road Congress, Brussels.
Union Internationale Contre le Cancer, Paris.
World Power Conference, Paris.
World Poultry Science Association.

GMGIPND-M-156 M. of EA-12-3-63-1450

INDIA
USA JAPAN UNITED KINGDOM FRANCE LATVIA SWITZERLAND BELGIUM CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC MEXICO
Jan 01, 1962


