1961-62

Contents
Jan 01, 1961
REPORT
1961-62
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
Table of Contents
PartAdministration
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)
(x)

PAGE

Headquarters
Rationalization of the methods of work and connected matters
Indian Foreign Service
Missions Abroad
Inspectorate
Expenditure
Indian Frontier Administrative Service
Assam Rifles
North East Frontier Agency
Nagaland

1
2
5
6
7
8
11
12
12
14

Part-II
A-States in Special Treaty Relations with India:(i) Bhutan
(ii) Sikkim

16
16

B.-Former Foreign Enclaves in India:(i) Goa, Daman and Diu
(ii) Pondicherry, Karaikal, Yanam and Mahe

17
17

C.-India's neighbours:(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)

Afghanistan
Burma
Ceylon
China (see under East Asia)
Nepal
Pakistan

19
20
20
21
21
23

D.-South East Asia, Australia and New Zealand

31

E.-East Asia

32

F.-West Asia

39

G.-Africa

40

H.-Europe

49

I.-The Americas:(i) North America
(ii) Central and South America

59
63

J.-External Publicity

64

115E.A.-1
K.-Miscellaneous:(i)
Central Passport and Emigration Organisation
(ii)
Haj
(iii)
Legal and Treaties Division
(iv)
Consular Division
(iv)
Economic and Co-ordination Division
(vi)
Diplomatic Missions and Consular Posts in India
(vii)
Distinguished visitors from Abroad

PAGE
69
71
72
72
76
77

Part-III
A.-United Nations

80

B.-International Conferences

86
APPENDICES

(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
INDIA
BHUTAN
USA

Indian Missions abroad
Indian Information Units abroad
Foreign Diplomatic Missions in India
Foreign Consular Offices in India
Treaties, Conventions and Agreements concluded or renewed by
India with other countries during 1961-62
International Organisations of which India is a member.

AFGHANISTAN

Jan 01, 1961

Administration

BURMA

CHINA

NEPAL

PAKISTAN

AUSTRALIA

87
92
94
97
100
101

NEW ZEALAND

PART I
Administration
Organisation of the Ministry
(i) Headquarters.-The Ministry of External Affairs is responsible for the conduct of India's relations with foreign countries.
The Ministry is also responsible for the country's representation in
the United Nations and advises other Ministries and State Governments when the latter have dealings with foreign Governments
and institutions. In the domestic sphere, it is responsible for the
administration of the North East Frontier Agency and Nagaland,
and for matters of policy relating to the former French and Portuguese possessions in India. The administration of the Indian Emigration Act of 1923, the Reciprocity Act of 1943, the Port Haj Committee Act of 1932, the Indian Merchant Shipping Act in so far as it
relates to pilgrim ships, the Indian Pilgrim Shipping Rules of 1933,
the Protection of Pilgrims Act of 1887 (Bombay) and the Protection
of the Mohammedan Pilgrims Act of 1896 (Bombay) are also the
special responsibility of the Ministry of External Affairs.
The Ministry is under the charge of a Minister of Cabinet rank.
at present the Prime Minister is also the Minister of External
Affairs. A Deputy Minister and two Parliamentary Secretaries
assist the Minister in his work.
The Secretary-General is the principal official adviser to the
Minister on matters relating to foreign policy and is responsible for
--e supervision and coordination of the Ministry as a whole. The
--ign Secretary is in charge of the Eastern Division, the Western
--on, and the United Nations and Conference Division.
The Commonwealth Secretary looks after the work of the South
East Asia Division, and the Pakistan Division.
The Special Secretary, in addition to being in general charge of
the administration of the Ministry and Indian Missions abroad, looks
--fter the work of the Africa and West Asia Division. In important
--atters of policy relating to administration, the Special Secretary
works in close collaboration with the Foreign Secretary and the
Commonwealth Secretary.
The three Secretaries and the Secretary, Ministry of Commerce
and Industry, with Foreign Secretary as Chairman, constitute the
Foreign Service Board which is responsible for all diplomatic, commercial and consular postings and transfers, promotions, and con<pg1>
<pg2>
firmation of Foreign Service officers of Branch A of the Indian

Foreign Service and Grade I of the Indian Foreign Service (B).
The Ministry is divided into 13 main Divisions. Five of these
are Territorial Divisions which deal exclusively with India's relations
with foreign countries, each Division dealing with a number of
countries grouped on a geographical or `territorial' basis. There are
five `specialist' Divisions, which deal respectively with Protocol and
Consular matters, Passports and Emigration, External Publicity,
Research and Legal problems and Treaties. These Divisions serve
the Ministry as a whole. There is also a separate United Nations
and Conference Division which deals with all matters concerning
the United Nations. The Administration Division deals with all
matters pertaining to administration, personnel and `supplies and
services'.
An Economic and Coordination Division was created in this
Ministry in July 1961. This Division is mainly responsible for
the coordination of political and economic policies affecting India's
relations with the outside world.
(ii) Rationalisation of the methods of work and connected
matters.-Efforts to improve administrative efficiency in the
Ministry and particularly in its executive agencies which come into
direct contact with the public (viz., the Regional Passport Offices)
were continued during the year.
In pursuance of the recommendations of the Estimates Committee
of Parliament, a Reorganisation Committee under the Chairmanship
of Joint Secretary (Administration) was set up to examine the organisation of the Ministry and reallocation of work among the
different Divisions and to make recommendations to ensure that
the work was evenly distributed and effectively handled.
On the basis of the recommendations of the Reorganisation Committee, the Territorial Divisions have been reorganised and re-grouped, and the work also re-distributed between the Secretaries to ensure a more rational and equitable workload and responsibilities.
Four Territorial Divisions in the Ministry were re-organised or
the new pattern with effect from Mar 01, 1962. As a result, the
following posts were created/abolished:Posts, created

Posts abolished

Under Secretary
1
Section Officer
1
Stenographers
6
Steno-typists
2
Peon
1

Assistants
U.D.Cs.
L.D.Cs.

18
4
11

<pg3>
In the re-organised Divisions nine posts of Section Officers were
converted into those of Attaches, with a special pay of Rs. 75/- p.m.,

with duties almost similar to those of Under Secretaries. The net
financial effect of this re-organisation will be a saving of the order
of Rs. 51,000 per annum.
The Reorganisation Committee also made certain recommendations in regard to the Administration, Historical, Legal and Treaties
and Protocol Divisions. In the light of these recommendations, the
work in the Administration Division has been redistributed. Action
to implement the Committee's recommendations in respect of the
other Divisions was also initiated.
A new filing system in respect of the Territorial Divisions has
been introduced with effect from 1 January 1962.
Another Special Committee, under the Chairmanship of Joint
Secretary (Administration), has been set up to study the structure
of the existing Missions and Posts and to lay down, after due examination, a standard pattern for the normal staffing of each category
of Missions/Posts. The Committee is expected to complete its work
by June 1962.
The working of the Regional Passport Offices at Bombay and
Madras has been examined with a view to simplifying methods of
work, minimising procedural difficulties and improving the
machinery from the point of view of service to the public. A,
survey of all the Regional Passport Offices was also taken in hand
in order to analyse the types of complaints received in those Offices
and to evolve ways and means of providing better service.
During the year, the problem of speeding up the rate of disposal of receipts/cases and consideration of various other problems,
relating to Organisation and Methods was kept constantly under
review. As in the past, specific instances of long delays in the
disposal of primary receipts/cases were also brought to the notice
of the officers concerned.
To achieve economy, a scrutiny of all en clair foreign telegrams, despatched and received was taken in hand and cases where
the use of the telegraph appeared to be of doubtful value, were investigated. A review of the expenditure incurred on trunk calls
and telegrams by Indian Missions abroad was also undertaken.
A scheme of incentive awards to non-gazetted members of staff
in the Ministry for exceptional performances, which had been
introduced in the Ministry in 1959, has been continued on an
experimental basis.
<pg4>
The estimates of the Ministry were examined by the Estimates
Committee of the Lok Sabha for the first time in 1961. In its
Report to the Lok Sabha the Committee stated that "the policy
pursued by India in the conduct of external affairs has led to the
establishment of relations with many countries in the world which

are not only `correct' but also `friendly'. Its policy is in consonance
as much with the genius, of India's culture and tradition as with the
requirements of statecraft. That India, though not a military
power of any magnitude, has been able to find a respectable place
in the comity of nations, many of them with different ideologies,
during these years could only be ascribed, to the righteousness of
its stand and its keeping clear of alignments".
In all, 55 quarterly and annual inspections of the Sections were
carried out during the year and the defects noticed brought to the
notice of officers concerned for rectification.
The sanctioned strength of ex-cadre posts at the Headquarters
of the Ministry is given below:1. Library Assistants-5.
2. Wireless Operator-1.
3. Research Assistant-1.
4. Hindi Translator-1.
5. Interpreters-9.
During the year, the Ministry of Home Affairs started a scheme
for training Assistants and clerks in Cash and Accounts matters in
the Secretariat Training School. The scheme was at first restricted to Assistants/Clerks of the Central Secretariat Service/Central
Secretariat Clerical Service. But on a request from this Ministry,
the Ministry of Home Affairs agreed to admit some IFS (B)
Assistants also. One Assistant has completed the training and
another is undergoing it. It is hoped to secure at least two places
four this Ministry in each course. With the centralisation of the
accounts of the Missions at the Headquarters of this Ministry, the
need for Assistants knowing accounts was acutely felt and this
training will help in meeting this lacuna.
There was no change in the size and functions of the Vigilance
Unit. During the period under review, the Unit dealt with 63 complaints, 37 disciplinary cases and 4 appeals and disposed of 46
complaints, 16 disciplinary cases and 2 appeals.
The Economy Board, first constituted in April 1958 under the
Chairmanship of the Special Secretary continued to deal with
such matters as the scrutiny of all. proposals regarding the
<pg5>
creation and continuance of posts and the fixation of ceiling
rentals of residences of officials in the Missions abroad. Besides
the Chairman, now the Joint Secretary (Administration), the Board
consists of two other Joint Secretaries and the Deputy Financial
Adviser as Members, and a Deputy Secretary in the Administration
Division as Member-Secretary. The Board held 38 meetings and
considered 227 proposals.
(iii) Indian Foreign Service.-On the basis of a review

undertaken early in 1961, the permanent strength of the Indian
Foreign Service is at present 233. In addition, there are 10 supernumerary posts and 93 temporary posts in the various grades. Excluding the 25 posts of Heads of Missions and Posts abroad which
are filled by non-officials, the net permanent strength of the Indian
Foreign Service for purposes of recruitment is 208 plus 10 supernumerary posts. Apart from a 10% quota, reserved for being filled
by promotion of officers of Grade I of the Indian Foreign Service
Branch (B) and the Information Services, recruitment to the Indian
Foreign Service is made only in the Junior scale of the Service
through an annual competitive examination conducted by the Union
Public Service Commission. In 1961, ten candidates were recruited on the basis of the results of the examination held in 1960.
Eight officers were promoted in 1961 to the Indian Foreign Service
(A) from Grade I of the Indian Foreign Service (B) and the Information Services.
Indian Foreign Service (B).The present permanent strength of the Indian Foreign Service
(B) is 1774. In addition, there are 509 temporary posts in the
various sub-cadres.
Six Stenographers have joined this Ministry during 1961-62, on
the basis of the Union Public Service Commission examinations.
No Assistant was recruited through the Union Public Service
Commission during the year 1961-62, as no examination was held
during 1960 and 1961. During the year under review, the work relating to fixation of the pay of Assistants, in pursuance of the Pay
Commission's recommendations, was taken in hand. This work has
almost been completed. A few cases are being processed.
74 Lower Division Clerks and one Steno-typist were recruited
on a purely temporary basis from the Employment Exchange
against Grade VI posts of the Indian Foreign Service (B). These
will be replaced by persons who qualify in the Clerks Grade
Examination held by the Union Public Service Commission in
<pg6>
December 1961 and are likely to be available by the end of 1962.
The temporary recruitment from the Employment Exchange was
done with the concurrence of the Union Public Service Commission.
40 persons of Grade V of the initial constitution of the Indian
Foreign Service (B) have been confirmed in that grade with effect
from 1 August 1956. 68 persons of Grade VI of the initial constitution of the Indian Foreign Service (B), who were hitherto
temporary ranking from 303 onwards in the initial constitution
list, were approved for confirmation in that grade. Formal confirmation orders are being issued.

The present permanent strength of the Indian Foreign Service
(B) in Grades V and VI are 44 and 479 respectively.
(iv) Missions abroad.-At the beginning of the year 1961, there
were 116 Indian Missions and Posts abroad:
Embassies

High Commissions
Legations

Commissions
Trade Commissions
Consulates-General

Consulates
Vice-Consulates
Special Missions
Agencies

54 (Nine concurrently accredited
without separate
establishments.)
11
6 (Five concurrently
accredited
without separate
establishments.
9
3
15 (Two concurrently
accredited
without separate
establishments.)
7
5
3
3

In 1961, new Embassies were opened in Somalia and Senegal.
A new High Commission has been set up in Tanganyika. A Trade
Commission has been established in Kuwait. The Legations in
Bulgaria and Luxembourg have been raised to the level of Embassies, with the Indian Ambassadors at Belgrade and Brussels
respectively, continuing to be concurrently accredited to them.
The Legation at Beirut and the Consulate-General at Damascus
have been raised to Embassies. It has been decided to establish
diplomatic relations with Paraguay, Uruguay and the Ivory Coast.
The Ambassador in Argentina is concurrently accredited to the two
Latin American countries, while our Ambassador in Senegal has
been concurrently accredited to the Ivory Coast. It has also been
decided to establish diplomatic relations with the Governments of
Cyprus, Upper Volta and the Yemen. The Ambassadors at Beirut,
<pg7>
Dakar and Jeddah respectively have been concurrently accredited
to these countries.
An Honorary Consulate is being set up at Las Palmas, Canary
Islands. A list giving the details of the Indian Missions and Posts
abroad is at appendix 1.
During the year, there has been little progress in the various
construction programmes in Indian Missions abroad. Only in
Japan, was the construction of the Chancery building in Tokyo,
begun in May 1961, completed in January 1962. It is also proposed
to construct 10 flats for members of the staff. The preliminaries

are being completed.
The original plot given by the Ghana Government in Accra was
subsequently withdrawn by them and an alternative plot offered.
This has been accepted by the Government of India. The preliminaries connected with the construction of the Chancery building
have been completed; and a proposal regarding the High Commissioner's residence is being examined.
Arrangements for the construction of the Ambassador's residence
in Ankara had been almost completed when the Turkish Government gave notices to stop construction on the ground that the site
fell within their security zone. Efforts are being made to secure
an alternative plot of land from the Turkish Government.
The construction of the Agency building at Gyantse in Tibet
could not be taken in hand due to a delay in settling the terms of
the lease. A revised lease deed has now been signed; and work is
in progress.
The construction of the Agency building at Gartok in Tibet
could not be started for lack of building facilities.
Plans for the construction of a hospital with ten beds at Kathmandu have been completed. The construction will be taken up
shortly. The construction of staff quarters is also likely to be
begun soon.
Preliminaries for the construction of the High Commissioner's
residence at Lagos in Nigeria are being completed.
A residence of the Ambassador has been purchased for Rs. 95,000
at Rabat in Morocco.
(v) Inspectorate.-The system of periodical inspection of
Missions abroad has been revived. But instead of effecting this
through a team of Foreign Service Inspectors, it is proposed that
115 E-2
<pg8>
the three Secretaries of the Ministry should tour the areas within,
their jurisdiction. The Secretaries will not confine themselves to
inspection of the administrative functions of the Indian Missions,
but make an on-the-spot assessment of the effectiveness of each
Mission, and develop personal contacts with the leaders and officials.
of the countries concerned. The first tour was undertaken by the
Special Secretary, Shri Badr-ud-Din Tyabji to Aden, the Aden
Protectorate, the Yemen, the United Arab Republic and Saudi
Arabia from 3 to 22 January 1962.
(vi) Expenditure.-The revenue expenditure of this Ministry

falls under six Demand Heads, viz.:
(1) Tribal Areas (North East Frontier Agency),
(2) Naga Hills-Tuensang Area,
(3) External Affairs,
(4) Pondicherry,
(5) Dadra and Nagar Haveli Areas, and
(6) Miscellaneous.
The expenditure relating to Goa, Diu and Daman from the date,
of their incorporation, is also borne by this Ministry. Details are
being collected for obtaining a Supplementary Grant for meeting
it.
According to the Revised Estimates, the expenditure in 1961-62
on the six Demand Heads mentioned above is expected to be
Rs. 35.49 crores.
Some of the items included therein do not relate to External
Relations proper. These are:(In crores of rupees)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------1960
-61
1961-62
---------------------(i) The Tribal Areas including the Assam Rifles and provision for
development (Rs. 1.29 crores) and Community Development Projects (Rs. 12.72 lakhs)
10.11
10.53
(ii) The Naga Hills-Tuensang Area including provision for
development (Rs. 97.10 lakhs) and Community Development Projects (Rs. 14.79 lakhs)
3.26
3.61
(ii) Expenditure on the Dadra and Nagar Haveli Areas
0.21
(iv) Expenditure on Pondicherry and payments to neighbouring
Countries
5.15
7.34
(v) Expenditure on the demarcation of boundaries between India
and Pakistan

0.14

0.12

(vi) The Central Passport and Emigration Organisation
26
0.27
(vii) Miscellaneous expenditure e.g. on Pilgrimages, Refugees
including Tibetan Refugees (Rs. 62.15 lakhs) and evacuees,
the Repatriation of Indians, Loss by Exchange etc.
0.63
0.69
<pg9>
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------(viii) Economic Aid under the Colombo Plan to Nopal
3.25
(provided
in Budget
of Ministry of
Finance)
---------------------TOTAL
19.55
26.02
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------In addition, due to India's commitments abroad, the following
items are met from the Ministry's budget:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------1960-61
1961-62
(i) Reimbursement of the expenditure on the Indian
contingents in Gaza (United Nations Emergency
Forces) and in the Congo to the Ministry of Defence
1.38 (Ministry of D
efence
are themselves
bearing this expe
nditure from 1961
-62)
(ii) Expenditure on the Delegation to the United
Nations Organisation and the Delegation to the
International Commission for Supervision and
Control in Indo-China
0.24
0.21
-----------------------TOTAL
1.62
0.21
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

0.

The actual expenditure on the Ministry of External Affairs and
its Missions abroad amounts to Rs. 9.26 crores.
This includes:(i) Rs. 2.69 crores on "Charges in England"; Rs. 0.70 crores
being expenditure on the High Commission in London
and Rs. 1.99 crores as India's normal contribution to
the United Nations Organisation and for the United
Nations Emergency Forces at Gaza and in the Congo,
(ii) Rs. 1.35 crores on Pay and Allowances of Officers and
Staff and other expenses at Headquarters,
(iii) Rs. 0.18 crores for the Hospitality Grant of the Government of India, and
(iv) Rs. 0.11 crores on Donations and Relief Measures in
foreign countries.
The expenditure on our Missions and Posts abroad amounts to
Rs. 4.95 crores, spread over 89 Missions. This works out to an
average of Rs. 5.56 lakhs a Mission. Of this an average of Rs. 1.66
lakhs per Mission is spent on the pay and allowances of officers and
Rs. 1.69 lakhs on the pay and allowances of its staff, Rs. 1.00 lakh
for office and residential accommodation, and the balance on contingent and other expenditure.
<pg10>
In addition, there is also a capital expenditure head comprising the
capital outlay of the Ministry for the procurement of food-stuffs
and other essential commodities for the North East Frontier
Agency and the Naga Hills-Tuensang Area. This expenditure
during the current year is expected to be Rs. 88.32 lakhs. The
anticipated recovery adjusted in the accounts as reduction of expenditure is expected to be Rs. 103.00 lakhs. This also includes
recoveries for previous years.
The sanctioned grant under "Standing Charges" and the anticipated requirements for 1961-62 are indicated below, along with the
corresponding figures of the Revised Estimates for 1960-61:(Figures in Lakhs)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------Revised
Original
Revi
sed
Estimates
Grant
Requ
irefor
for
ment

s for
1960-61

1961-62

1961

-62
------------------------------------1

2

3
------------------------------------Tribal Area
149.21
153.22
140.
63
External Affairs
377.76
370.33
392.
08
Miscellaneous expenditure under the Ministry of
External Affairs
2.91
2.92
2.8
8
-----------------------------------TOTAL
529.88
526.47
535.
59
-----------------------------------The broad distribution of the figures is as follows: (i) Assam Rifles
110.85
110.
89 99.76
(ii) Political and Administrative Charges in Tribal
Areas
17.19
17.
90 17.25
(iii) Social and Developmental Services on Tribal
Areas and Miscellaneous Expenditure .
21.17
24.
43 23.62
(iv) Ministry of External Affairs (Headquarters)
97.15
93.
93 105.77
(v) Missions and Posts abroad
260.73
256.
34 265.76
(vi) Emigration and Passport Establishment
8.14
8.
30 8.86
(vii) Special Diplomatic Expenditure
10.00
10.
00 10.00
(viii) Other Miscellaneous Expenditure
1.74
1.
76 1.69
(ix) Miscellaneous Loss by Exchange and Expenditure on Pilgrimage beyond India
2.91
2.
92 2.88
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------The anticipated excess of Rs. 9.12 lakhs in the Revised Estimates
for 1961-62 (as compared to the sanctioned Grants) is largely the
result of the classification of Delhi as an `A' Class city; greater
expenditure on external publicity, additional expenditure on the

air freight of diplomatic bags and the conversion of temporary
posts into permanent ones during 1961-62. On the other hand,
there has been a decrease in the expenditure on the Assam Rifles,
and on the administration of the North East Frontier Agency.
<pg11>
The comparative figures of the Revised Estimates for 1960-61
and 1961-62 show that in the current year there will be an increase
in expenditure of Rs. 5.71 lakhs. This is mainly due to: (i) Extra expenditure caused by upgrading Delhi as an `A'
Class City.
(ii) The conversion of a large number of temporary posts
into permanent ones and re-consequent transfer of
expenditure thereon from Part II to Part I of the
Budget Estimates.
(iii) Increase in foreign allowances due to a revision of rates.
(iv) A greater increase in the expenditure of the External
Publicity Division than there have been savings under
Assam Rifles.
The present permanent strength of officers and establishment is
as follows:-----------------------------------------------------------------------Officers
Establishment
1960-61
1961-62 1960-61 1961-62
Headquarters
194
194
1080
1089
Missions
252
256
449
453
Assam Rifles
(5 battalions)
North East Frontier Agency
Administrative Wing.
33
37
444
708
Development Wing .
11
36
793
870
--------------------------------------------------------------------------In addition, the
following temporary posts have been converted
into permanent ones during the current year. The effect of this
will be reflected in future standing charges.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------Officers

Establishment

Headquarters
116
Missions
22
92
North East Frontier Agency
Administrative Wing.
206
Development Wing
4
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

(vii) Indian Frontier Administrative Service.-To meet the
additional requirements of the administration of Border areas, the
strength of the Indian, Frontier Administrative Service was increased from 69 to 73 by the creation of four temporary posts.
One officer was deputed for studies to the National Defence College,
<pg12>
and six others received training in the National Academy of
Administration at Mussoorie. The number of posts held by officers
of the Indian Frontier Administrative Service was 35 in the North
East Frontier Agency, 18 in Nagaland, 6 in Manipur, 5 in Jammu
and Kashmir, 2 in Tripura, 1 each in Himachal Pradesh, Uttar
Pradesh, Laccadives and the Ministry of Defence and 3 in the
Ministry of External Affairs.
(viii) Assam Rifles.-The Assam Rifles is being strengthened by
the raising of two more battalions. The Peace Establishment and
Peace Equipment tables for the Assam Rifles battalions have been
standardised.
Hill and winter allowance and enhanced rates of compensatory
allowance to civilian employees of Assam Rifles posted in certain
localities have been sanctioned.
(ix) North East Frontier Agency.-For closer administration of
the Dibang Valley of the Lohit Frontier Division, the Sub-Divisional Headquarters, under the charge of an Additional Political Officer, was shifted from Roing to Anini. A new administrative centre
was opened in the Noa Dihing Valley of the Tirap Frontier Division.
The Third Five Year Plan for the North East Frontier Agency
was finalised. The plan provides for an expenditure of Rs. 709
lakhs, the percentage of outlay being, Engineering 37.38, Agriculture 8.95, Forests 6.04, Community Development/National Extension
Service 13:13, Medical 18.76, Education 11.62, Industries 1.50, Publicity 0.52, Co-operation 1.69 and Statistics 0.41.
In the field of agricultural development, 158 acres of land were
reclaimed for permanent cultivation, and 27 minor Irrigation
channels were constructed to irrigate 135 acres of land. An Agricultural Farm was established, bringing the total to nine. 2600
maunds of seeds and 30,641 fruit seedlings were distributed at subsidised rates. 23 farmers were taken round Development Centres.
2,060,bottles of orange squash were prepared by the Gram Sevaks
Training Centre at Pasighat. 87 persons including candidates from
Nagaland and Manipur, underwent the Village-Level-Workers
training course in the Gram Sevaks Training Centre Pasighat, and
74 were successful in the final examination. 6 Cattle Farms and 6
Cattle Improvement Centres were opened.
Community Development and National Extension Service
covered an area of 14,500 square miles with a population of 1.94

lakhs.
41 miles of new roads were constructed while 26 miles of roads
were improved. 71 miles of new Porter tracks were constructed
<pg13>
and 42 miles of porter tracks were improved. An airstrip was
built and generating sets with a total capacity of 275 KW were
installed.
Five new Health Units were opened, raising the total number
to 87. The number of patients treated during the year was 2,57,918.
18,929 persons were inoculated and 24,469 were vaccinated. A
special survey undertaken resulted in the discovery of, 1,662 cases
of goitre, 121 of tuberculosis and 7 of leprosy. Eleven more antimalarial teams were raised bringing the total in the Agency to 55.
A Tuberculosis hospital of 50 beds for the North East Frontier
Agency was established at Margherita in Assam.
Seventeen new schools were opened, increasing the total
number of schools in the Agency to 161. These were staffed by 440
teachers including 119 from the North East Frontier Agency itself.
The number of students on the rolls was 7,153. Eleven Lower
Primary Schools were converted to the Basic Pattern. Thirty-two
scholarships were granted to deserving pupils. Forty-three teachers
were under training in the Buniadi Shiksha Bhavan.
248 boys and 16 girls completed their training in 10 Cottage
Industries Training Centres of the North East Frontier Agency.
The area of forest plantations was extended by 255 acres and
preliminary work on another 420 acres was in progress. 345 acres
of Aided Natural Regeneration of Hollock/Hollong were tended.
89,114 pieces of sleepers were supplied to Railways besides other
sawn timber in the form of boards for Railway wagons. An amount
of Rs. 22,15,556/- was realised as revenue against an expenditure
of Rs. 17,39,867/-.
A monograph on the Shardukpen tribe and a revised edition of
the Statistical Outline of the North East Frontier Agency were
published.
Eleven new co-operative societies were established raising the
number of societies in the Agency to 36. Of them, 29 are consumers'
co-operatives, 1 an industrial co-operative, 1 a dairy farm co-operative, 3 are multipurpose co-operatives, 1 a transport co-operative and
1 a central store. The total membership is 4,412 and working
capital is Rupees 8 lakhs.
Two new post offices were established, raising the total number
to 23.

Preliminary compilation of the Primary Census Abstract figures
for the North East Frontier Agency showed that the Agency had a
<pg14>
density of 10.65 per square mile. The total population of 2,383
villages in the area was 3,34,828 of whom 1,76,787 were men and
1,58,041 women. There were 24,224 literates of whom 21,843 were
men and 2,381 women.
(x) Nagaland.-In pursuance of the understanding reached
with the Naga leaders in July 1960, the Nagaland (Transitional Provisions) Regulation of 1961 was promulgated on 8 February 1961.
The Regulation redesignated the Naga Hills-Tuensang Area as
Nagaland and provided for the establishment of an Interim Body of
45 members and an Executive Council of not more than 5 members
of the Interim Body. The function of the Interim Body is to discuss
and make recommendations to the Executive Council on matters of
administration involving general policy, development schemes and
other matters referred to it by the Executive Council. The Executive Council assists and advises the Governor in all matters, though
finance and the maintenance of public order remain the special responsibility of the Governor.
The Interim Body was inaugurated on 18 February 1961 and
held two sessions during that year. It held its third session at
Mokokchung from 17 to 30 January 1962. The Executive Council
was sworn in on 16 March 1961.
Shri Shilu Ao, Chief Executive Councillor, Shri T. N.
Angami, Chairman of the Interim Body, and Executive Councillors
met the Prime Minister and senior officers of the Ministry on 29
October 1961 and subsequent days and discussed certain procedural
difficulties in the actual working of the transitional arrangements.
Mutually acceptable solutions to these difficulties were easily found
and are being implemented. The Chief Executive Councillor,
Nagaland, accompanied by his colleagues and senior officials, paid
a brief visit to Delhi in January 1962 for consultations with the
Ministry.
The Commissioner's Office was re-organised during the year under three Secretaries for Finance, Development and General Administration. In addition, three Directorates have been created for
Agriculture, Education and Health.
Dr. Imkongliba Ao, the first Chairman of the Interim Body was
shot by a hostile Naga in Mokokchung on 22 August 1961, and died
two days later. The assassination of this popular leader aroused
wide-spread indignation in Nagaland and the rest of India. The
vacancy caused by the death of Dr. Ao was filled by the election of
Shri T. N. Angami as Chairman of the Interim Body.
Shri Chubatoshi Jamir has been nominated as a Member of the

Lok Sabha for Nagaland.
<pg15>
By a Regulation issued on 16 February 1961 the Extradition Act
of 1903 was extended to the Tuensang district of Nagaland.
The pace of development work in the area was maintained during the current year. The total budget provision for 1961-62 for
community development in Nagaland was 17 lakhs. Of the seven
existing development blocks in Nagaland, one was converted into
a special Tribal Block.
11 E.A.-3.
INDIA
INDONESIA PAKISTAN USA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC MALI SENEGAL SOMALIA KUWAIT
BULGARIA BELGIUM YUGOSLAVIA LEBANON SYRIA PARAGUAY URUGUAY ARGENTINA
CYPRUS YEMEN SAUDI ARABIA JAPAN GHANA TURKEY NIGER NIGERIA MOROCCO SRI
LANKA CONGO CHINA UNITED KINGDOM LATVIA
Mar 01, 1962

States in Special Treaty Relations with India
PART II
A. STATES IN SPECIAL TREATY RELATIONS WITH INDIA
(i) Bhutan.-The implementation of the First Five Year Plan for
the economic and social development of Bhutan was begun during
the year. Its total outlay will be Rs. 17.22 crores; and will be provided by India as an outright grant.
The Plan was drawn up after a technical team from the Planning Commission had visited Bhutan in June 1961. It comprises
road projects and general development measures. The PhuntsolingParo Road has already been completed. Survey work and initial
operations have started for construction of several other roads.
Development measures include schemes for education, health and
mining. The administrative machinery for the Bhutan development
wing has already been set up. The Government of India have deputed an officer to act as its Secretary.
An agreement between the Governments of India and Bhutan
for the utilisation of the waters of the Jaldhaka River has been,

signed. The estimated cost of the project is Rs. 4.5 crores. When
completed, it will supply electricity to the areas adjoining the border
between Bhutan and West Bengal.
At the invitation of the Government of India, a delegation of 48
Members of the Bhutan National Assembly visited many places in,
India in March 1961.
(ii) Sikkim.-The Seven-Year Development Plan of Sikkim
which began in 1954, came to an end on Mar 31, 1961. Notable
progress was achieved under that Plan in the fields of education,
health, roads, transport and electricity. The Government of Sikkim
have formulated, with the help of the Planning Commission, a further
Five-Year Plan, which will coincide with the period of the Third
Five-Year Plan of India. The total financial outlay for Sikkim's
Second Plan has been estimated at Rs. 8.13 crores, a substantial
increase over the expenditure on the First Plan of Rs. 3.24 crores.
Road construction projects have been implemented under the
general supervision and control of the Central Public Works Department and the Border Road Development Board as a part of India's
general aid programme for the development of Sikkim.
<pg16>
<pg17>
Shri I. J. Bahadur Singh took charge as Political Officer in Sikkim
on 23 October 1961.
The UNICEF milk distribution scheme, which has been in operation for some time in Sikkim, continued during the year.
B. FORMER FOREIGN ENCLAVES IN INDIA
(i) Goa, Daman and Diu.-These remnants of Portuguese Colonial rule in India were re-united with India on 20 December, 1961.
The roads and bridges which were destroyed and blown up by
the Portuguese are being restored. The posts and telegraphs system,
banks and harbours are again all functioning normally under the
Military Governor of Goa, Daman and Diu. This territory is now
centrally administered.
Certain legislative measures have been taken for the administration of these Union Territories. The President promulgated the
Goa, Daman and Diu (Administration) Ordinance (2 of 1962). This
Ordinance kept the existing Portuguese laws in force and retained
the services of the former Government employees. This was done
in order not to effect a sudden change in the administrative pattern
of the areas. The Ordinance also took powers to extend Indian Acts
to the Union Territory. The Indian Citizenship Act was extended
to Goa, Daman and Diu. All citizens of this Territory became

Indian citizens, unless they chose to register themselves as foreign
nationals.
During the last session of the Lok Sabha the Ordinance was
replaced by an Act. An Act was also passed amending the Constitution so as to provide for (a) the specific inclusion of Goa, Daman
and Diu in the list of Union Territories, and (b) the inclusion of
Goa, Daman and Diu in Article 240 of the Constitution, enabling the
President to make regulations for the peace, progress and good
government of the Union Territory.
Those Portuguese detenus who wish to leave Goa for Portugal
on their own, are permitted to do so. At the time of the liberation
of Goa, Daman and Diu, the Portuguese authorities interned a large
number of Indian nationals in their colonies. Some passengers in
transit through Lisbon were also interned. The transit passengers
have now been released, but Indian nationals in Portuguese territories continue to be kept in detention camps. The Government of
India have taken up the question of their release with the Government of Portugal.
(ii) Pondicherry, Karaikal, Yanam, and Mahe.-The Government
of France have not yet ratified the Treaty of Cession of the French
<pg18>
Establishments of Pondicherry, Karaikal, Yanam and Mahe, though
they have introduced a Bill for the purpose in the National Assembly. It is expected to be discussed at the session of the National
Assembly in April 1962.
A French Parliamentary delegation consisting of three Deputies
arrived in New Delhi on 22 November 1961 on a goodwill mission.
They visited Pondicherry, Karaikal, Madras and Calcutta.
Shri S. K. Datta assumed charge as Chief Commissioner, Pondicherry on 2 May 1961.
According to the Revised Estimates for 1961-62 the revenues of
these territories are estimated at Rs. 220 lakhs, and the expenditure
Rs. 394 lakhs. Under the head "Revenues", the estimated amount
for the year 1962-63 is Rs. 231 lakhs, an increase of Rs. 11 lakhs
over the current year's Revised Estimates. The estimated expenditure on the Plan schemes for the year 1962-63 is Rs. 176 lakhs as
against Rs. 148 lakhs in the Revised Estimates for 1961-62.
The electricity rates in Pondicherry have been reduced in order
to bring them into line with those prevailing in the neighbouring
state of Madras.
Arrangements for the substitution of the Appellate Courts in
Paris by corresponding Indian bodies are being completed.
The dispute between the workers and the management over the

implementation of the recommendations of the Textile Wage Board
has been amicably settled under the aegis of an ad hoc Tribunal.
The Government of India have sanctioned ad hoc compensatory
allowances to permanent employees governed by the pre-merger
rules, at rates varying from Rs. 15 to Rs. 35 per month, with effect
from 1 June 1960. This concession has been extended to the
permanent ex-French daily-rate and the temporary ex-French
employees provided the persons in the latter category were continuously in service prior to 1 November 1954.
Over 800 temporary posts have been made permanent.
Following the de facto transfer of these territories on 1 November 1954, municipal elections were held in 1955. Municipal elections were held again in October 1961. Their results were:Congress
People's Front
Praja Socialists
Independents
TOTAL

129
31
2
38
200
<pg19>
C. INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS

(i) Afghanistan.-During the period, close and friendly relations
between India and Afghanistan continued to develop undisturbed.
Two Afghan trade delegations visited India to consider and renew
the Trade Agreement between the two Governments. The first
delegation, headed by Mr. M. R. Younossi, President of Trade,
Ministry of Commerce, Royal Afghan Government, visited India in
January-February 1961, to conduct the trade negotiations and to
seek certain revisions of the Indo-Afghan Trade Agreement concluded last year. The negotiations concluded satisfactorily and it
was decided to have further negotiations after six months. Accordingly, the second Afghan trade delegation headed by Mr. Abdul
Ghafoor Seraj, former Afghan Commercial Attache at Karachi,
visited India on 30 September 1961. The negotiations were satisfactory and further measures of mutual advantage regarding IndoAfghan trade were agreed to for a year from 1 October 1961.
As in the past, India participated in the Afghan Jeshan (Independence) celebrations held at Kabul in August 1961. The Indian
contingent, headed by Shri Amar Nath Vidyalankar, Education
Minister of the Punjab, as the representative of the Government of
India, included a Services hockey team, musicians and artists.
India also participated in the International Trade Exhibition held
at Kabul from 22 to 30 August 1961 during the Jeshan celebrations.
Dr. Abdul Ghaffar Khan Kakkar, Head of the Faculty of Science,

Kabul University, visited India on invitation during JanuaryFebruary 1961 to see the atomic reactor at Bombay and to discuss
technical matters with Indian scientists. Dr. Kakkar also represented his Government on the occasion of the formal inauguration
by the Prime Minister on 16 January 1961, of a number of new
facilities at Trombay, including in particular the 40 KW CanadaIndia reactor, a Uranium Metal Plant, a Fuel Fabrication Facility
and "ZERALINA", a zero energy reactor for lattice investigation.
On an invitation from the All India Lawn Tennis Association, an
Afghan tennis team consisting of four players visited India in AprilMay 1961, and played friendly matches in Delhi, Calcutta, Madras
and Bombay.
Eleven Indian teachers are serving in Afghanistan for teaching
English in various schools. In addition, five teachers have recently
been selected for Afghanistan and arrangements to send them are
in progress.
<pg20>
Shri Bakar Ali Mirza, M.P., served the Royal Afghan Government for some time as Literary Adviser. The services of two linooperators and one stenographer have also been loaned to the Afghan
Government Press Department to help bring out a four-page
English newspaper, the first of its kind in Afghanistan.
The Government of India made a gift of two lakhs C.O. of anticholera vaccine.
An agreement for establishing a direct radio telephone service
between New Delhi and Kabul was signed on 23 March 1961, at
Kabul, and formally inaugurated on 9 May 1961,
(ii) Burma.-Relations with Burma continued to be close and
cordial.
The then Prime Minister of Burma, U Nu, accompanied by
Madam Nu, their daughter and a party of officials, visited India
from 11 to 17 January 1962.
An Armed Forces Goodwill Mission comprising 17 members of
the Burmese Army, Navy and Air Force arrived on 23 January 1962
on a visit of twelve days to India at the invitation of the Government of India.
A delegation of four members of the Election Commission of
Burma, arrived at New Delhi on 15 February 1962 to observe the
conduct of the general election in India. They were later joined,
on 17 February 1962, by 3 Burmese politicians viz. Thakin Pan
Myaing (Union Party), U Khin Maung Lat (AFPFL) and U. T. P.
Wan (NUF).

On 2 March 1962, a new Government was installed in Burma.
The Government of India directed their Ambassador to inform the
Burmese Foreign Officer, that they welcomed the new regime's policy
of neutrality and its desire to maintain and strengthen friendly
relations with all countries.
Clothing and other articles worth Rupees one lakh were presented to the Government of Burma for relief to flood victims in that
country.
(iii) Ceylon.-Relations with Ceylon continued to be friendly
and cordial.
The Government of Ceylon sent a gift of 1,000 lbs. of tea for
flood relief in India. Cloth and other articles worth about
Rs. 13,000-were also received by the Indian Red Cross Society from
the Ceylon Red Cross for similar distribution.
<pg21>
The Hon'ble Mr. P. B. G. Kalugalla, Minister for Transport and
Works, Government of Ceylon, accompanied by Mr. W. A. E. Molamure, General Manager, Air, Ceylon, visited India in September
1961.
The Hon'ble Mr. T. B. Ilangaratna, Minister for Commerce,
Trade, Food and Shipping, accompanied by Mrs. Ilangaratna and
four officials, visited India in October 1961.
The Hon'ble Mr. A. P. Jayasuriya, Minister of Health, Government of Ceylon, accompanied by his daughter, visited India in
January 1962.
(iv) China.-(See under East Asia).
(v) Nepal.-On 15 December 1960, the King of Nepal dismissed the Ministry under Mr. B. P. Koirala, dissolved the Parliament,
banned all political organisations and activities, suspended by
Proclamation certain provisions in the Constitution including those
relating to fundamental rights, and assumed full powers. Mr.
Koirala and several other political personalities including Opposition leaders were arrested. Many of them were subsequently released;
but Mr. Koirala still remains in custody. A number of Nepali political leaders and workers left for India. The reasons given by the
King for his action were the inefficiency and corruption of the
Koirala Government, their failure to discharge their responsibilities
properly and their misuse of power for personal and party ends.
The King's Proclamation affirmed that Nepal would remain
neutral in the field of foreign affairs and would pursue a policy of
good-will and friendship with all friendly nations. By another

Proclamation on 26 December 1960, the King appointed a new
Council of Ministers consisting of 5 Ministers and 4 Assistant Ministers. Early in January 1961, a further Proclamation announced a
plan for setting up Panchayats and fostering through them the
growth of democracy.
Relations between India and Nepal have, however, continued to
be close and friendly. The Foreign Minister of Nepal paid a brief
visit to Delhi and stressed the desire of the Government of Nepal
to maintain and develop their ties with India. The King of Nepal
visited Delhi towards the end of August 1961 on his way to attend
the Conference of Non-aligned Countries in Belgrade.
During the year eminent Indian musicians and poets visited
Kathmandu on the occasions of Republic Day, Independence Day
and Gandhi Jayanti. A Ramlila troupe performed in Kathmandu
<pg22>
during Diwali and was much appreciated. A student/teacher delegation from Nepal visited India and participated in the InterUniversity Youth Festival. Of the 360 scholarships offered during.
the year for training Nepalese abroad, 330 were granted by India.
A Nepalese delegation, drawn from members of the Scheduled
Castes, paid a good-will visit to India for three weeks.
The work relating to India's Aid Programme in Nepal was transferred from the Ministry of Finance to the Ministry of External
Affairs from 1 January 1961. The main fields in which Indian aid
was utilised during the year were: irrigation schemes, village and
local development works, maternity and child welfare, road construction, the establishment of a national archives, an industrial
estate and an engineering school and the Trisuli hydroelectric
project.
(i) The following Aid Agreements were signed with Nepal
during the year:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Name of the Scheme
Amount
Date of
provided
A
greement
(in Lakhs of
Rupees)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------1. Minor Irrigation etc.
25-4-1961
2. Village Development
25-4-1961
3. Local Development

50
70
10

25-4-1961
4. Maternity Home
25-4-1961
5. Forestry
17-11-1961
6. Geological Survey
17-11-1961
7. Tripartite Roads
1-12-1961

1.5
32
40
12.4

2.59
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------The following visits of Nepalese

officials were sponsored:-

(i) Four Nepalese officials attended the Annual Conference
of Development Commissioners held in Hyderabad in,
July 1961.
(ii) The Vice-Chancellor of the Tribhuvan University visited several Indian Universities during September/
October 1961. He also attended the meetings of the,
Inter-University Board held at Madras and Tirupati
from 12 to 17 February 1962.
(iii) Two Nepalese officials attended the Tenth Silvicultural
Conference held at Dehra Dun in November 1961.
(iv) A batch of Nepalese students from the EngineeringSchool, Kathmandu, went on a study tour of India
during December 1961.
<pg23>
(v) Three Nepalese officials visited New Delhi in December
1961 to see, among other places, the Okhla Industrial
Estate and the Indian Industrial Fair.
(vi) Shri Keshvadeo Bhattarai, lecturer in mathematics,
Tribhuvan University, attended the All-India Mathematical Conference at Ahmedabad in January 1952.
Shri P. N. Kirpal, Secretary, Ministry of Education, visited Nepal
on 19 November 1961, on an invitation from the Government of
Nepal to witness the laying of the foundation of the National
Archives building in Kathmandu.
Rupees one lakh were sanctioned on 23 January 1962 and placed at the disposal of the Director General of Archaeology, India,
for carrying out excavations in the Lumbini-Kapilvastu area in
Nepal. An archaeological team left for the site on 12 February
1962 and are carrying out excavation operations there.
A micro-filming unit of the National Archives of India is at pre-

sent in Kathmandu and is engaged in filming the old and rare
manuscripts.
16 Indian advisers and 182 technical personnel were provided
to Nepal. 23 Professors and Lecturers were provided to the Tribhuvan University under the Colombo Plan. 213 Nepali candidates
were admitted to Indian Institutions this year under the Technical
co-operation scheme of the Colombo Plan, bringing the cumulative
total to 1,465.
An additional two lakhs of rupees was sanctioned on 19
February 1962 for payment to the Tri-Chandra College Vikas Samiti,
Kathmandu, for effecting improvements in the various departments
of the College.
At the invitation of the Commander-in-Chief, Indian Army,
General Nir Shumsher, Commander-in-Chief of the Nepalese army,
accompanied by Rani Nir Shumsher and six officers visited India
from 30 November to 16 December 1961.
As a measure of relief to the victims of a fire at Biratnagar
in Eastern Nepal Terai on 19 March 1962, the Government of India
gave a present of goods worth Rupees two lakhs. The victims were
reported to have suffered a loss of approximately a crore and 50
lakhs of rupees.
(vi) Pakistan.-(a) Indus Waters Treaty.-The formal exchange
of the Instruments of Ratification of the Indus Waters Treaty 1960
took place in New Delhi on 12 January 1961. With this exchange,
115 E.A.-4
<pg24>
the Treaty came into force and took effect retrospectively from
1 April 1960.
In accordance with the-provisions of Article 8(1) of the Treaty,
the Governments of India and Pakistan each created a permanent
post of Commissioner for Indus Waters, and appointed Shri H. C.
Kalra and Mr. M. A. Hamid respectively to these posts. With the
appointment of the two Commissioners, the Permanent Indus Commission, as provided for in the Treaty, came into being.
Since the ratification of the Treaty. the Permanent Indus Commission has submitted to the Governments of India and Pakistan
its first Annual Report for the year ending 31 March 1961. The
Commission has also held six meetings and conducted ten inspection tours of works and sites in the Indus basin in India and
Pakistan.
(b) India-Pakistan Border Conference.-Consequent upon the

exchange, in January 1961, of areas in adverse possession of either
India or Pakistan on the Punjab (India)-West Pakistan border,
and in pursuance of the decisions taken at the India-Pakistan Conference on India-West Pakistan border problems, held in January
1960, it was considered necessary to review the existing Ground
Rules on the Punjab (India)-West Pakistan border. Accordingly,
an India-Pakistan Conference, in which delegations led by Secretaries participated, was held in New Delhi from 22 to 26 August 1961.
The discussions were friendly and cordial. Complete agreement
was reached on the modifications in the Ground Rules, and the new
Ground Rules became operative on the Punjab (India)-West
Pakistan border immediately after the Conference.
(c) Border incidents.-The settlement of the border disputes on
the India-East Pakistan border and on the Punjab (India)-West
Pakistan border, reached at the two Conferences of October 1959
and January 1960, continued to have a salutary effect on the border
situation. Such incidents as occurred were mostly of the nature
of dacoities or cattle-lifting. There was, however, one serious
violation of India's territorial sovereignty when some Pakistanis,
after resort to firing, kidnapped Lt. Col. Bhattacharya in April 1961,
from Indian soil. There were also some arrests and harassment of
Indian officials engaged on joint demarcation of the India-East
Pakistan border.
(d) Implementation of India-Pakistan Border Agreements of September 1958, October 1959, and January 1960.-(i) September 1958
and October 1959 Agreements.-The settlement on the Berubari
<pg25>
Union No. 12 and the Cooch Behar Enclaves, envisaged in the IndiaPakistan Agreement of September 1958, is being implemented.
The exchange of territories, including the areas in adverse possession of the two countries, will take place on the completion of
demarcation of the various sectors, of the India-East Pakistan
border.
(ii) January 1960 Agreement.-On the completion of ground
demarcation of the Punjab (India)-West Pakistan border, boundary
maps were signed by the Plenipotentiaries. of India and Pakistan
in New Delhi in January 1961. Subsequently, all the areas in
adverse possession on this sector were exchanged between India
and Pakistan in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution
(Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960 and the Acquired Territories
(Merger) Act, 1960.
(e) Demarcation of Boundaries. -(i) Ground demarcation of
645 miles of the Rajasthan-West Pakistan border has been complet-

ed. Only four minor sectors totalling about five miles remain.
Ancillary work leading to the preparation of final maps of this
border is in full swing.
(ii) Ground demarcation of 1,655 miles of the India-East
Pakistan border (2,520 miles) was completed on 28 February 1962.
The remaining work is in progress.
(f) Kashmir.-The Pakistan press and radio, both controlled by
the Martial Law Administration, as well as the so-called `Azad
Kashmir' government, launched their periodic hate campaign against
India. This hatred was also reflected in the public statements of
Ministers and even in those of President Ayub during his tours of
West Asia, South-East Asia, East Asia,
Western Europe and the
United States of America. In a public
statement at Srinagar on
19 July 1961, the Prime Minister of India referred to this unhealthy
development in Pakistan. He said that
the problem of Kashmir
was that of aggression by Pakistan which she tried to cover up by
inciting hatred against India on the basis of the completely discredited two-nation theory. For 14 years Pakistan had refused to
implement the obligation to terminate her unlawful occupation of
a part of Jammu and Kashmir, which was a constituent State of
the Indian Union. She had thus nullified the principles of a plebiscite tentatively suggested in the U.N. Commission resolution of 5
January 1949. Nevertheless, Pakistan continues to harp on plebiscite, even though successive Pakistan Governments had denied free
general elections to their own people, as well as to those of Pakistanoccupied Kashmir. In spite of Pakistan's determined opposition to
<pg26>
the people of Jammu and Kashmir-indeed to her own peopleexercising the right of self-determination, a Constituent Assembly
with elected representatives had met in Kashmir and drawn up a
democratic Constitution; and this had been followed by another
general election, not to mention two Five-Year Development Plans,
the execution of which has helped considerably in raising the
standard of living in this part of India. Referring to officially
inspired threats in Pakistan to commit breaches of the cease-fire
line, the Prime Minister warned Pakistan that no aggression on
Kashmir in any garb or on any pretext would be tolerated.
The Permanent Representative of Pakistan at the United Nations
wrote to the President of the Security Council on 11 January
1962, requesting for a meeting of the Security Council to consider
the Graham Report now four years old. The Government of India,
in their reply asked the Council to refuse to entertain the Pakistani
Permanent Representative's request for a meeting on the ground
that the Pakistan approach was purely opportunist, agitational and
propagandist. The eve of the general elections in India was hardly the
proper time either for direct negotiations between the two Governments or for discussion of the situation in the Security Council.

On a further request of the Pakistani Permanent Representative,
to the President of the Security Council in a letter dated 29
January 1962 the Council held a brief meeting on 1 February 1962,
and postponed the substantive discussion to a date in March, after
the Indian elections were over.
In March the Pakistani Permanent Representative in the United
Nations again approached the President of the Security Council for
a meeting of the Council to resume the Kashmir debate. The
Security Council is expected to meet to discuss Kashmir or 27
April 1962.
Till the end of November 1961, Pakistan armed forces or their
agents were responsible for 405 incidents involving firing along or
across the cease-fire line and the Jammu-Sialkot border. This is
more than five times as many incidents, as those reported in the corresponding period of 1960. Their striking feature was the continued participation in them by Pakistan troops or police and armed
civilian gangs in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir, trained, equipped and
protected by Pakistani armed forces. Subversion and sabotage
activities from Pakistan were frustrated and 157 infiltrators intercepted.
(g) Trade.-The trade between India and Pakistan is governed
by the India-Pakistan Trade Agreement (1960-61) and the two
<pg27>
attached Protocols. A conference of the delegates of the two countries was held in New Delhi from 22 to 28 March 1961 to review
the working of the Trade Agreement. It was agreed at this meeting that steps should be taken to facilitate further trade. The ceilings fixed for the first year were repeated for the second year in
addition to the carry over of the balances of the first year. Under
Protocol One of the Agreement, India exported to Pakistan goods
valued at Rs. 345.90 lakhs, till 12 July 1961. The main items of
export were bidi leaves, cement, stone boulders, steel, iron and coal.
The value of goods imported from Pakistan was Rs. 227.21 lakhs.
The main items of import from Pakistan were raw cotton and jute
cuttings.
(h) Evacuee Property-Movable.-The deadlock of previous
years in the implementation of measures already agreed to by India
and Pakistan for settling the various items under the Movable Property Agreement of June 1950 was substantially resolved during
the current year. Important items which had remained unresolved
during the last ten years related to the transfer of lockers and safe
deposits of evacuees from banks in Pakistan, the assets of joint
stock companies and the status of displaced Indian banks.
As a result of the meeting held between the Ministers of Rehabilitation of India and Pakistan in Calcutta on 5 July 1961, it was
decided to declare displaced Indian banks as non-evacuee concerns.
The Pakistan Government would issue a notification to exempt all

displaced Indian banks from the operation of the Evacuee Property
Laws and to declare them as non-evacuee concerns. As for the
mode of repatriation of surplus assets of the Indian banks, which
either do not wish to function in Pakistan or am not permitted by
the Pakistan Government to operate in that country, it was agreed
that this matter should be left over for decision by the Finance
Ministers of the two countries. It was also agreed that, after the
Indian banks had been declared, non-evacuee concerns, the transfer
of bank accounts and funds from the en bloc areas would take place
along with the funds as decided under the Banking Agreement. The
Pakistan Government issued a notification in September 1961,
exempting 61 Indian banks from the provisions of the Pakistan
Administration of Evacuee Property Act of 1957.
As regards the transfer of lockers and safe deposits, it was agreed
that this would take place simultaneously with the transfer of bank
accounts and funds from the en bloc areas. The exchange of
lockers and safe deposits and bank accounts and funds took place
on 30 November 1961. During the exchange, India handed over
bank drafts for Rs. 8.71 lakhs to the representative of the Pakistan
<pg28>
Government at Delhi; and Pakistan gave bank drafts for Rs. 2.25
lakhs to the Indian representative at Lahore. India also handed
over the contents of 135 lockers and safe deposits of Pakistani
nationals. The contents of 750 lockers of Indian nationals were
handed over by Pakistan.
No agreement was reached regarding the restoration of properties of joint stock companies or payment of compensation therefor
where properties have been acquired and allotted. The Pakistan
delegation did not agree to the suggestion of the Indian delegation
that the restoration of the immovable property of companies
which could produce evidence of having moved their headquarters
outside Pakistan before 15 August 1947, should also be considered
by the Government of Pakistan. The leader of the Pakistan delegation was of the opinion that the status of joint stock companies
had already been incorporated in the Evacuee Property Law of his
country and the companies concerned should, if they so desired,
approach the Custodian to get their status determined in accordance
with the law.
Immovable.-There was no progress during the year and the
deadlock in respect of payment of compensation for requisitioned
premises and remittances of rents still continues.
The Government of East Pakistan have not yet paid compensation or arrears of rent to Indian owners whose immovable properties were acquired or requisitioned by them. The Pakistan Government also do not permit remittances of rents etc. to non-resident
Indian owners of property under their foreign exchange regulations. This issue has been taken up with the Government of Pakis-

tan by the Indian High Commissioner in Karachi and the Pakistan
Government have promised to consider it. Their reactions are
awaited.
(i) Stoning of Indian Chancery, Karachi.-A demonstration took
place outside the Indian High Commission in Karachi on 25 February 1961 in which some 600 persons took part. They shouted
abusive slogans against India and the Prime Minister and threw
stones at the Chancery building for about half an hour, causing
extensive damage to the glass frontage and to some cars.
The Acting High Commissioner of India protested to the Government of Pakistan, and claimed appropriate restitution and adequate
compensation. But no payment has so far been received from the
Government of Pakistan in compensation for the damage.
(j) Co-operation on rivers in the Eastern Zone of India and
Pakistan.-In pursuance of the principle of co-operative approach on
a reciprocal basis for the development of the water resources of the
<pg29>
Ganga and the Teesta, the Governments of India and Pakistan
agreed to there being meetings between their respective experts on
procedural matters and to arrange for the exchange of technical
data on projects of mutual interest.
During the year 1960, two meetings of experts were held in New
Delhi and Dacca in June-July and October respectively.
During the year under review, a third meeting of experts was held
at Calcutta in April. This was preceded by a trip along the river
Hooghly from Calcutta to Saugor. During this trip, the navigational difficulties experienced in the approaches to the port of
Calcutta were explained to the Pakistan team. The two delegations
exchanged, at the meeting, further technical data on the Farakka
barrage, the Ganges-Kobadak project and the Teesta project in India
and Pakistan.
In June 1961, the Indian experts visited the sites of works on the
Ganges-Kobadak project in East Pakistan.
The fourth meeting of the experts was held at Dacca from 27
December 1961 to 8 January 1962. The Pakistan experts are soon
likely to visit the sites of the works on the Farakka barrage, the
Jangipur barrage and Teesta Canal in West Bengal.
(k) Karnafuli Dam Project in East Pakistan.-The Karnafuli
dam project in East Pakistan is likely to submerge certain contiguous
areas in the Mizo District of Assam. A settlement of the compensation to be paid by Pakistan and the power supply that would be made
available to India is dependent on the completion of surveys which
are now being carried out by joint teams from India and Pakistan.

(1) Shrines, Holy Places and Pilgrimages.-During the first ten
months of 1961, seven officially sponsored pilgrim parties comprising
705 Muslim pilgrims from West Pakistan visited shrines in India.
During the same period eleven officially sponsored pilgrim parties
from India, comprising 2,890 pilgrims, visited shrines in West
Pakistan.
(m) Minorities in Pakistan.-The Prime Ministers' Agreement of
1950 guaranteed certain basic rights to the minority community in
Pakistan. The condition of the minority community in Pakistan
however continues, as in the last year, to be unsatisfactory. There
were serious communal riots in Khulna, Jessore and Gopalganj,
where the minority community suffered losses in both life and
property. Besides these serious communal riots, reports of offences
against the person and property of members of the minority community continued to be received throughout the year.
<pg30>
As the Pakistan Government unilaterally closed their Minority
Affairs Section in Dacca, the Government of India closed the Minority
Affairs Section of the Ministry of Rehabilitation at Calcutta and
abolished the portfolio of the Minister for Minority Affairs at the
Centre.
Migration of Hindus from Pakistan continued on the same scale as
last year.
(n) The Indo-Pakistan Passport and Visa Rules.-The Government of Pakistan have unilaterally imposed restrictions in the grant
of various categories of visas, and in the movement of visa holders
from Pakistan into India. The Indian High Commission in Karachi
has brought to the notice of the Pakistan Government the unilateral
nature of these restrictions and have repeatedly requested them to
discuss the question of liberalising the Passport and Visa Rules
between the two countries. The Government of Pakistan's reply is
equivocal. Instead of agreeing
to remove
the restrictions
unilaterally imposed by them and to hold talks for revising the
Rules, they have levelled untenable charges against India for
following a restrictive policy. Their reply is being examined in.
detail.
(o) Payment of Pensions, Provident Funds and Gratuities.-In
accordance with the provisions of an agreement reached in 1959, the
Indian High Commission and Deputy High Commission in
Pakistan, on a basis of reciprocity, issued a Press Note inviting applications for the payment of provident fund, pension and gratuity from
persons who migrated from India to Pakistan during the period I
July 1955 to 31 December 1960. This arrangement applied to servants of the Central and Provincial Governments, and to the
employees of the former Princely States and of the Local Funds and
Semi-Government Institutions. The High Commission of India in

Karachi has commenced making these payments.
(p) Supply of anti-snake bite serum to Pakistan.-On an urgent
request from the Government of Pakistan, the Government of India
supplied 7,000 ampoules of anti-snake bite serum (Polyvalent Antivenum Serum) from the Central Research Institute, Kasauli and the
Haffkine Institute, Bombay
(q) Permission to run special trains carrying rock salt from. West
Pakistan to East Pakistan.-Due to an acute shortage of salt in East
Pakistan, the Government of India agreed to the request of the
Government of Pakistan to transport rock salt from West to East
Pakistan in four or five trains across Indian territory.
(r) Relief Assistance to victims of cyclone in East Pakistan.-Aid
in the form of ready made clothing and medicines valued at Rs. 25,000
<pg31>
was given to the East Pakistan authorities for relief of the victims
of the cyclone in East Pakistan in May 1961.
The Indian High Commission in Karachi also arranged a concert
of dance and music at the Rivoli Theatre in Karachi in aid of these
victims. The proceeds, amounting to Rs. 8,220, were presented to
the President of Pakistan.
D. SOUTH EAST ASIA, AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND
Relations between India and the countries in South East Asia,
Australia and New Zealand continued to be cordial and friendly.
(i) International Commissions for Supervision and ControlCommissions in Vietnam and Cambodia.-The International Commissions for Supervision and Control in Vietnam and Cambodia continued to exercise their responsibilities to maintain peace in the area
during the period under review. Shri G. Parthasarathi took over as
Chairman of the International Commission in Vietnam on 1 December
1961.
Commission in Laos.-In Laos, following the out-break of hostilities and the joint message of 24 April 1961 from the Co-Chairmen
of the 1954 Geneva Conference on Indo-China, the International Commission for Supervision and Control was reconvened in Delhi on
28 April 1961, under the Chairmanship of the Indian delegate, Shri S.
Sen. The Prime Minister addressed the inaugural meeting of the
Commission. After reporting to the Co-Chairmen and obtaining
their instructions, the Commission left New Delhi for Laos.
Soon after the arrival of the International Commission in the
country, the open fighting between the various factions stopped.
A conference of fourteen Nations on Laos, in which India is participating is in session in Geneva, to find out a peaceful settlement of

the problem.
(ii) Indonesia.-General A. H. Nasution, Minister for National
Security and Chief of the Army Staff, Indonesia, and his party consisting of 10 members, visited India in January 1961.
Air Chief Marshal Suryadarma and Madame Suryadarma of
Indonesia, with a team of four senior officers, came to India in
February 1961 on a State visit.
Shri Apa B. Pant presented his credentials as Ambassador of
India to Mr. Leimena, Acting President of Indonesia, on I November
1961 at Djakarta.
Dr. Mohammad Hatta, former Vice-President of Indonesia and
H. E. Air-Vice-Marshal Iskandar, Minister for Air Communication of
Indonesia, visited India in March 1962.
115 E.A.-5
<pg32>
(iii) Malaya.-Dato Ong Yoke Lin, Minister of Health and Social
Welfare, Federation of Malaya, visited India in February 1961 to
attend the World Health Assembly held in India.
Inche Sardon Bin Haji Jubir, Minister for Transport of the
Federation, accompanied by his wife, visited India in May 1961 for a
fortnight at the invitation of the Railway Board.
The Malayan Minister of Agriculture and Co-operatives visited
India for securing technical assistance in establishing a fertilizer
factory in Malaya.
A Railway Commission, consisting of three members, was sent to
Malaya under the Colombo Plan during the year to enquire into the
working of the Malayan railways.
As in previous years, a number of Malayan personnel were trained
in India and several Malayan students were admitted to medical and
ther colleges in India.
(iv) Fiji.-A cultural delegation, consisting of four members
under the leadership of Mr. K. K. T. Ratu Mara, Chief Member of
the Fiji Legislative and Executive Council visited India in February
1961.
(v) Philippines.-Shri Buddhadeva, Bose, a well known writer in
Bengali and English, represented India at the Rizal Centenary celebrations in Manila.
Shri Amitabha Chowdhury, Assistant Editor of "Jugantar" of

Calcutta, was given the 1961 Ramon Magsaysay award for journalism
and literature.
Ten thousand vials of anti-cholera vaccine were given as a gift to
the Government of the Philippines during the year.
(vi) New Zealand.-H.E. Mr. J. R. Marshall, Deputy Prime
Minister of New Zealand, visited India in March 1962. A baby elephant was presented to the Auckland Zoo.
(vii) Australia.-Shri M. V. Krishnappa, the then Deputy Minister of Food and Agriculture, visited Australia in May 1961, at the
invitation of the International Education League.
E. EAST ASIA
(i) China.-During the year, relations with China, strained since
1959, tended to worsen. While Chinese propaganda still sought to
convey the impression that the border problem with India was a
<pg33>
`family affair' to be settled by negotiations, China's military activity
along the border was increased in disregard of solemn Chinese
assurances.
In February 1961, the Report of the officials of the Government's
of India and the People's Republic of China on the boundary question
was placed before Parliament. The Report proved that the Indian
alignment was well-supported by internationally accepted principles
on the formation of traditional boundaries, as well as by unbroken
historical evidence and administrative record. The Chinese line by
contrast was found to be inconsistent in logic, poor in documentary
evidence and lacking in content. There was a sharp contrast between
the wealth of consistent and conclusive data produced by India and
the sketchy and contradictory material brought forward by China..
In the light of such incontrovertible evidence, the only course left
for the Chinese was either to withdraw from the Indian territory
under their unlawful occupation and make amends for their past
actions or to try to ignore it completely. They did the latter. The
Report was not published in China in 1961; nor did the Chinese
leaders give it any serious consideration.
In July 1961, Shri R. K. Nehru, Secretary-General of the Ministry
of External Affairs, visited China on his way back from Mongolia.
It was an informal visit, which he utilised to meet the Chinese leaders
and seek their reactions to the facts established by the Report of the
officials. At his meetings with the Chinese leaders, he emphasised
the fact that the occupation of Indian territory by China had come
in the way of friendly relations between the two countries. When,
on his return to India, he repeated this in a brief statement to the
press, the Chinese Government charged him with prevarication and
abuse of Chinese hospitality. It was pointed out to the Chinese

Government that such accusations and offensive remarks were not
conducive to contacts at high level between the two Governments.
While no move came from the Chinese Government for further
consideration of the boundary question in the light of the Report,
they sent a number of notes to the Government of India, alleging that
Indian troops, personnel and aircraft had repeatedly encroached on
Chinese territory and air space causing tension in the border areas,
that they themselves had desired to maintain the status quo and
tranquillity of the border by ordering their troops not to send patrols
within 20 kilometres, of the alignment claimed by them. Reports
received by the Government of India established the hollowness of
these Chinese protestations; for the Chinese had in fact intensified
patrolling on the border, intruded on a number of occasions into
Indian territory, constructed new military roads close to the border
<pg34>
in the Middle and Eastern sectors and well within the Indian territory under their unlawful occupation on the Western sector, and set
up new army posts much deeper in Indian territory than those of
1959-60. Instances of Chinese violation of Indian territory and Indian
air space have been cited in recent notes sent by the Government of
India to the Government of China and published in White Paper No..
V, presented to Parliament in November 1961.
During the first three months of 1962, there was a further
exchange of correspondence with the Government of China about
the Sino-Indian border. The Government of China continued to
make baseless charges of Indian intrusions into Chinese territory and
air space. These charges have been refuted in detail.
At the same time, the attention of the Government of China has
been drawn to the fact that, contrary to their contention, it is they
who have intruded into and occupied large tracts of Indian territory.
While declaring their willingness to consider certain minor mutual
adjustments of the border in the interests of friendship between the
peoples of India and China, the Government of India have firmly
rejected the untenable Chinese claim that the entire boundary
between India and China has not been delimited and should be the
subject of negotiations.
The Government of India have pointed out the absurdity of
Chinese allegations that certain areas in the Middle and Eastern
sections of the boundary, which are traditionally and legally a part
of India, have been "occupied" in recent years by Indian authorities.
They have also repudiated the Chinese attempt to justify their
illegal occupation of areas in the Western sector of the border by
threatening to occupy Indian territory in the Eastern sector. The
Government of India have reiterated their desire for peace and
friendship with China; but pointed out that this could only be
ensured by the withdrawal of Chinese forces from all areas which
have traditionally been a part of India.

Indian Missions in China continue to suffer from various
restrictions. Even for the celebration of the Indian Republic Day
on 26 January 1962, the Chinese authorities delayed providing hotel
accommodation until it was too late, and the facilities could not
be utilised.
In August-September 1961, the Government of India received
confirmatory reports that Chinese force had established three new
army posts in Ladakh at point 780 12' E and 35deg 19' N at NYAGZU
and near DAMBUGURU-and had constructed roads to link these
posts with their bases in the rear. The note of the Government of
China of 30 November 1961 admitted the existence of their army
<pg35>
posts at point 780 12' E and 350 19' N and at NYAGZU but denied
that there was any post near DAMBUGURU. It has been checked
and confirmed that a Chinese army post exists about 11/2 miles southwest of DAMBUGURU.
During the year, there was a further curtailment of the economic
and cultural facilities provided to Indian traders and pilgrims in
Tibet under the 1954 Agreement. Indian traders had to contend
with restrictions on their movements, a termination
of the
traditional pattern of barter trade, ban on the export of conventional
merchandise to India, and the denial of facilities for the repatriation
of their assets and profits to India. At the same time the Chinese
persisted in their policy of discouraging the payment of debts by
Tibetans to Indian traders. These restrictive trade and fiscal
policies, together with the acts of discrimination against Indian
traders, led to a serious fall in Indo-Tibetan trade, and caused a sharp
decline in the customary number of Indian trading establishments
in Yatung.
Indian Missions in Tibet, which had been guaranteed certain
rights and immunities under the 1954 Agreement, fared no better.
The numerous restrictions placed on them greatly reduced their
sphere of activity. The Indian Trade Agencies at Gyantse and
Gartok were unable to start building of the Agency
accommodation
(mere mud-huts in Gartok) because of the dilatory
and obstructive
tactics of the Chinese authorities.
The Sino-Indian Agreement of 1954 expires on 2 June 1962.
Under Article VI of the Agreement a request had
to be made by
either party by 1 December 1961, for its renewal. Neither party
made any such move by the due date; but on 3 December 1961 the
Government of China offered to negotiate a new agreement. They
sought in particular to separate the Sino-Indian border problem and
the question of trade relations between India and Tibet. This was
not acceptable to the Government of India. Replying to the Chinese
offer, the Government of India asked for a reversal of the aggressive
policies pursued by the Government of China during the last few

years and the restoration of a climate of peace which would assure
the strict observance of the Five Principles both in letter and spirit
as essential pre-requisites to negotiations for a new agreement.
During the year, it was found that Chinese nationals resident in
India served with notices to quit India for engaging in subversive
activities, against the State, were either defying these orders or
seeking to defeat them. The Government of India had, therefore, to
deport some of them. 12 have been deported out of a total Chinese
population of over 12,000 in India.
<pg36>
During the year, the programme for the exchange of scholars
between the two countries was discontinued at the instance of the
Government of China.
Shri G. Parthasarathi relinquished charge as Indian Ambassador
to China on 19 July 1961. The Embassy has since remained under
a Charge d' Affaires.
Tibetan refugees continued to arrive during the year, and the
total number rose to 33,000. The number of new arrivals till
October 1961 was 4,091. 5,000 refugees are still in various transit
camps awaiting dispersal.
The responsibility for providing educational facilities to the
Tibetan refugees was transferred to the Ministry of Education, and
a Central Committee was set up for coordinating such educational
activities. A Tibetan Schools Society, with the representatives of
the Government of India and the Dalai Lama as members, has been
formed. It has been entrusted with the management of the
Mussoorie School. The new schools, at Simla and Darjeeling, wereopened during the year.
The Government took over the Tibetan Refugees Handicraft
Training Centre at Dalhousie. The Centre is now being managed by
the Indian Co-operative Union on behalf of the Government.
Schemes for the re-settlement on land at Periyapattana of 3,000
refugees, and of about 900 more in Ladakh were sanctioned and are
being implemented. Offers from the Governments of Madhya
Pradesh and Orissa to provide land for the re-settlement of Tibetan
refugees in agricultural colonies are being considered.
(ii) Japan.-The close and friendly relations between India and
Japan were further strengthened by the visit of the Prime Minister
of Japan, Mr. Hayato Ikeda, to India in November 1961. The Prime
Ministers of India and Japan had friendly discussions on problems of
mutual interest, specially in regard to the current international
situation. They also considered the economic and cultural relations
between the two countries and expressed the hope that these would
be further strengthened. The Prime Minister of Japan also held
discussions with other Ministers of the Government of India.

Several commercial and industrial delegations from Japan visited
India.
Mr. Y. Tsutsumi, a Member of the Japanese Parliament and exChairman of the House of Representatives, came to India in February
1961 on a goodwill mission as a Special Envoy of the Prime Minister,
Mr. Ikeda. He met the President and the Prime Minister of India.
<pg37>
The Japanese Vice-Minister of Justice, Mr. Yoshitsuju Baba,
visited India in June 1961, to study the reforms being carried out in
Lucknow jail.
A delegation of five Japanese Members of Parliament came to
India in August 1961, to study political and economic conditions.
The delegation called on the Vice-President and the Prime Minister.
The new Japanese Ambassador, Dr. Koto Matsudaira, presented
his credentials on 22 August 1961 to the Vice-President.
Shri Swaran Singh, then Minister for Steel, Mines and Fuel,
Government of India, accompanied by five officials, visited Japan in
May 1961 to see steel plants and engineering industries.
Dr. K. L. Rao, then Member of the Central Water and Power
Commission, accompanied by Shri S. P. Choudhry, Chief Engineer,
Assam State Electricity Board, visited Japan in May 1961 to study
the, effect of earthquakes on dams. The study was undertaken in
connection with the construction of the concrete dam of Umian
Hydro-Electric Project in Assam.
Shri C. Subramanian, then Minister for Finance, Government of
Madras, visited Japan in July 1961 to study industrial developments,
particularly the development of small-scale industries as ancillaries
to heavy industries.
Shri Maheswar Dayal, Member (Posts) of the Posts and Telegraphs Board, went to Japan in September 1961 to attend the
meetings of the Consultative Committee for postal studies of the
Universal Postal Union.
Shri B. S. Nag, Adviser (Irrigation and Power), Planning Commission, visited Japan to attend the Regional Symposium on Dams
and Reservoirs held in Tokyo in September 1961
During the year, India also participated in the Conference of
Asian countries on electronics held in Tokyo in October 1961 and in
the 20th Plenary meeting of the International Cotton Advisory Committee held from 15 to 23 May 1961.
The Government of India presented a rhinoceros to the Tokyo
Metropolitan Zoo as a gesture of goodwill and friendship towards

Japan.
A "Central and Southern India Expedition Team", consisting of 8
Japanese specialists, visited India in January-March 1962 to study
certain medical problems and to acquaint themselves with the
cultural aspects of life in India. They called on the Prime Minister
before their return to Japan.
<pg38>
A team of six Japanese students from Asia University, Tokyo,
visited India to study the economic situation and to examine the
progress of development plans in India.
(iii) Korea-The Democratic People's Republic of Korea.-A
trade delegation of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea led
by Mr. Li Ju Yun, Vice-Premier and Minister of Trade, visited India
in May 1961 with a view to exchange ideas on trade between the
two countries and to explore ways and means to diversify and
increase the volume of trade on a mutually advantageous and
balanced basis. The delegation held discussions with the Government of India. On the conclusion of these discussions, the representatives of the two Governments exchanged letters setting out
arrangements for the development of trade between the two
countries.
An agreement was also reached on the exchange of Trade
Representatives between the two countries. In accordance with this
agreement the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea have set up a Trade Representation in New Delhi. The
Government of India and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
have also agreed to establish consular relations at the level of ConsulGeneral.
Republic of Korea-The Government of the Republic of Korea
sent a goodwill mission in July/August 1961, consisting of four members and led by Mr. Choi Duk Shin, the then Ambassador of his
country in Saigon and now the Foreign Minister of the Republic of
Korea. The members of the Mission called on the Prime Minister
and the Ministers of Defence, Finance, and Commerce and Industry.
The Government of India have reached an agreement with the
Republic of Korea to establish Consular relations at the level of
Consul-General.
(iv) Mongolia.-At the invitation of the Government of the
People's Republic of Mongolia, an Indian delegation led by Shri R. K.
Nehru, Secretary-General of the Ministry of External Affairs, went
to Ulan Bator to participate in the 40th Anniversary celebrations of
the founding of the Republic. The opportunity was taken to
exchange instruments of ratification of the cultural agreement
between India and the People's Republic of Mongolia, which had
been signed in New Delhi earlier in the year.

A Mongolian journalist visited India in January 1962 under the
terms of the Cultural Agreement.
<pg39>
F. WEST ASIA
Relations with West Asian countries continued to be cordial and
co-operation in political, economic and cultural matters was further strengthened.
(i) Iran.-An Indian trade delegation headed by Shri K. R. F.
Khilnani, then Joint Secretary, Ministry of Commerce and Industry,
Visited Iran in April 1961 to negotiate a trade agreement. The
trade agreement was signed in Tehran on 2 May 1961. Under this
agreement, Iran will import six thousand tons of tea and fifty
thousand tons of sugar and India will import dry fruit to the value
of Rs. 15 million, and gums, dates etc., to the value of Rs. 2.5 million
from Iran.
Dr. P. S. Deshmukh, then Union Minister of Agriculture, visited
Tehran to preside over the Executive Committee on Rural Reconstruction of the Afro-Asian Conference which had met there on
8 and 9 May 1961.
Shri M. R. A. Baig was appointed Ambassador of India in Iran
with effect from 6 May 1961.
India continued to look after Iranian interests in the People's
Republic of China.
Mr. Jalali Naini, the well known Iranian scholar, was invited
to India in March 1962 to present a Persian translation of the Upanishads to the President. He met the Vice-President, the Prime
Minister and the Minister of Scientific Research and Cultural
Affairs.
Mr. Majid Mowaqqar, an Iranian philanthropist and FounderPresident of the Meher Foundation, Tehran, visited India on invitation in March 1962.
(ii) Iraq.-The Government of India continued to extend technical aid to Iraq in the shape of the services of technical experts. As
in the previous year, on the invitation of the Government of Iraq,
Shri Shah Nawaz Khan, Deputy Minister of Railways, was deputed
to Baghdad to attend the celebrations connected with the third
anniversary of 14 July Revolution.
(iii) Jordan.-Mr. Ihsan Hashim, Ambassador for Jordan in
India, presented his letters of credence on 10 October 1961.
(iv) Kuwait.-During the year, an Indian Trade Commission was
opened at Kuwait. Shri N. K. Nigam has been appointed as India's

first Trade Commissioner.
115 E.A.-6
<pg40>
(v) Lebanon.-The Government of India decided to raise their
diplomatic representation into an Embassy. Shri I. S. Chopra
assumed charge as India's Ambassador to Lebanon.
(vi) Muscat.-Shri W. E. Eling assumed charge as Consul-General
of India at Muscat.
(vii) Palestine Refugees.-The Government of India have again
decided to contribute for the relief of the Palestine refugees.
(viii) Turkey.-An Indian delegation of two members participated
in the "First Near East and South Asia Seminar on Soil Conservation
(Land Improvement) covering Dry Farm Lands, Grazing Lands and
Semi-Arid Forest Lands" held in Ankara from 23 April to 7 May
1961.
The Government of India agreed, at the request of the Government of Turkey, to divert 90,000 tons of wheat sent to India by the
United States, to help to overcome the grave shortage of wheat caused
by natural calamities in Turkey.
Some birds and animals of Indian origin were presented to the
Turkish Ambassador in New Delhi for the Izmir zoo.
(ix) Saudi Arabia.-For the first time, a student from Saudi Arabia
joined the pre-medical course in Delhi College. He had been selected under the General Scholarship Scheme of the Government of
India.
An Indian anti-locust team visited Saudi Arabia, as usual, early
this year and carried out anti-locust operations in the Arabian
Peninsula.
Shri M. N. Masud, formerly India's Consul-General in Muscat,
assumed charge as Ambassador of India in Saudi Arabia on
25 February 1961.
(x) Syria.-The Government of India gave, on 5 November 1961,
their formal recognition to the new Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic.
G. AFRICA
(i) Algeria.-During the year, the Provisional Government of
Algeria was granted de facto recognition by India.
Relief supplies worth about Rs. 30,000/- in the form of sugar and

children's clothing were despatched by India to the Algerian refugees
in Morocco and Tunisia. These relief supplies were sent in response
to an appeal from the U. N. High Commissioner for Refugees, as it
<pg41>
was beyond the capacity of the Governments of Morocco and Tunisia, without substantial foreign aid, to afford the minimum material
relief to the more than two million Algerian refugees now in these
countries.
(ii) Libya.-The Libyan request for technical personnel was
favourably considered. Dr. J. Sahu left in November 1961 for Tripoli
to join the University there as Professor of Chemistry.
(iii) Morocco.-A Moroccan delegation visited India to complete
the commercial and payment agreements; and a protocol to the
Trade Agreement negotiated in 1960 was signed.
Mr. Abdal Karim el Khatib, Minister for African Affairs in
Morocco, visited India in October 1961 to attend the seminar on
Portuguese colonies held in New Delhi.
(iv) Sudan.-India continued to provide the services of technical
personnel to the Sudan. Indian technical personnel already in the
Sudan include irrigation, electrical and railway engineers. The
Government of India agreed to the extension of the deputation of
12 engineers from India.
(v) Tunisia.-Tunisia's demand for the French withdrawal from
the Bizerta base received India's full support, when the issue came
up before the United Nations. As an expression of India's sympathy
for the victims of French action in Bizerta, the Government of
India sent by air medical equipment worth Rs. 10,000/-.
Mr. Habib Chatty, Special Envoy of President Bourguiba, visited
India from 7 to 10 August 1961 to apprise the Government of India of
the stand taken by Tunisia on her demand for the French withdrawal
from Bizerta and to enlist India's support.
During May, a delegation from Tunisia visited India. They discussed mainly the banking procedures connected with the contract
between the State Trading Corporation and its counterpart in Tunisia,
so that the goods mentioned in the annexures to the Agreement concluded last year at Tunis, could move smoothly. No change in the
text of the Agreement was considered to be necessary.
(vi) United Arab Republic.-The Government of India continued
to look after the interests of the United Arab Republic in France
and her territories.
India continued to maintain her contingent with the United Nations
Expeditionary Force in the Gaza area.

(vii) Sierra Leone.-Sierra Leone a British Colony, became independent on 27 April 1961. Shri Khub Chand, High Commissioner
<pg42>
of India in Ghana, represented the Government of India at the
Independence celebrations and was concurrently accredited there
with effect from 5 May 1961.
(viii) Gabon.-Gabon, a former French possession in West Africa,
which became independent in August 1960, celebrated the anniversary of her independence on 17 August 1961. Shri P. N. Haksar,
High Commissioner of India in Nigeria, attended these celebrations at Libreville on behalf of the Government of India.
(ix) Senegal and Mali.-Senegal and the Sudan (Fr.) dissolved the
Mali Federation and proclaimed themselves as the Republic of Senegal and the Republic of Mali, on 20 August 1960 and 22 September
1960 respectively. Both were recognised by the Government of
India in October 1960.
An Embassy was opened in Senegal in July 1961 with Dr. N. V
Rajkumar as Ambassador. The High Commissioner for India in
Ghana, Shri Khub Chand was concurrently accredited as Ambassador
to Mali with effect from 6 March 1962.
(x) Ivory Coast.-The Ivory Coast, a former French possession in
West Africa, which become independent in August 1960, celebrated
the anniversary of her independence, at Abidjan, on 6 and 7 August
1961. A delegation, consisting of Shri Khub Chand, High Commissioner of India in Ghana, and Dr. N. V. Rajkumar, Ambassador of
India in Senegal, represented the Government of India at these
celebrations.
It has been decided to accredit Dr. N. V. Rajkumar concurrently
as Ambassador to the Ivory Coast,
(xi) Guinea.-The Indian High Commissioner to Ghana was
concurrently accredited as Ambassador to Guinea with effect from
21 February 1961.
(xii) Nigeria.-The friendship existing between India and Nigeria
was further strengthened by visits to India of a Nigerian Economic
Mission and of the Premier of Eastern Nigeria in July 1961 and of
the Nigerian Defence Minister and party in August 1961.
The Chairman of the Eastern Nigerian Public Service Commission
toured India in October 1961, for recruiting technical experts.
(xiii) Ghana.-Shri Morarji Desai, the Union Finance Minister,
led the Indian delegation to the Commonwealth Finance Ministers'
Conference held in Accra in September 1961.
(xiv) The Congo.-The United Nations Conciliation Commission,

sent by the General Assembly to the Congo in January 1961, to assist
the Congolese in reconciling their internal differences, did not
<pg43>
succeed in its task as it was not allowed to see the former Prime
Minister, Mr. Lumumba, in prison. The Chairman and members of
the Commission had serious differences among themselves. Moreover,
the rapid developments in the Congo made its recommendations
obsolete. Mr. Lumumba and his companions were killed in a
Katanga jail when the Commission was still in the Congo.
Mr. Lumumba's death shocked the world and on 21 February
1961, the Security Council passed a resolution sponsored by the
United Arab Republic, Ceylon and Liberia, authorising the United
Nations to take all appropriate measures to prevent a civil war, including in the last resort the use of force, if necessary, and called
for an immediate withdrawal of all Belgian and other foreign military and paramilitary personnel, political advisers and mercenaries.
The Resolution also urged the convening of the Congolese Parliament.
In view of the deteriorating situation in the Congo, the United
Nations Secretary-General appealed to the Prime Minister, In
January 1961, for a brigade of Indian troops for service in the Congo.
In order to support the United Nations, the Government of India
sent in April-May 1961, a brigade of three battalions, under
Brigadier K. A. S. Raja to serve in the Congo under the UNOC. Its
immediate result was to strengthen the United Nations and to
stabilize the situation in the Congo. The strength of Indian troops
in the Congo is just below 6,000. In September 1961, at the request
of the United Nations Secretariat, six Canberra aircraft were also
sent by India to the Congo.
A meeting of the Congolese Parliament, which had been consistently urged by India, took place in July 1961, and a new Government
was formed on 2 August 1961, with Mr. Adoula as Premier.
The most important problem before the new Central Government
of the Congo was the question of reunification of the country. At the
request of the Central Government and in implementation of Security Council's resolution of 21 February 1961, the UNOC on 28
August 1961, took action to apprehend foreign military and paramilitary officers and mercenaries in Katanga. About 260 out of an
estimated total of 460 were apprehended. These operations were not
continued as the Consular Corps in Elizabethville, headed by the
Belgian Consul, undertook. with the support of Mr. Tshombe, responsibility for ensuring the surrender and repatriation of all personnel
who had to be withdrawn. When these repatriation arrangements
were not scrupulously carried out by the Consular Corps on 13
September 1961, the United Nations forces in Katanga, under
Brigadier Raja, were ordered to resume the operations which had
been suspended on 28 August 1961. The Indian troops, under the
UN Command, secured important communication centres in Eliza-

<pg44>
bethville such as Radio Stations and Post Offices. The counterattacks led by foreign mercenaries, said to be mostly Belgians,
Rhodesians, South Africans and French Algerians, were repulsed
and the United Nations troops held their position both in Elizabethville and throughout Katanga except in Jadotville. The
fighting continued until 20 September 1961, when a Cease-fire
Agreement was arrived at between the United Nations Representative and Mr. Tshombe. On 13 October 1961, a Protocol to the Ceasefire Agreement was also negotiated by the UN Representative and
Mr. Tshombe.
The Katangese forces did not adhere to the Cease-fire Agreement signed with the UNOC on 20 September 1961. Violations of
the Cease-fire Agreement increased steadily during November 1961,
and the Katangese soldiers and para-commanders laid road blocks in
the city of Elizabethville to hinder the movement of the UNOC.
They also took steps to provoke the UNOC into fighting. After the
Security Council's Resolution of 24 November, under the directions
of the Acting Secretary-General, the UNOC in Katanga, under
Brigadier Raja, started action early in December to clear the roadblocks and to defend the positions of the UNOC. The purpose of
these military operations was to assure the United Nations freedom
of movement to restore law and order and to ensure that for the
future the United Nations forces and officials in Katanga were not
subjected to such attacks. The United Nations planes bombed the
Katanga aeroplanes on the ground and put some out of action. By
18 December, the UNOC were firmly holding the important points in
the city of Elizabethville.
In December 1961, Mr. Tshombe sent a message to the President
of the United States expressing his desire to negotiate with Mr.
Adoula. In consultation with Mr. Adoula and the Acting SecretaryGeneral, the United States arranged for talks between Mr. Adoula
and Mr. Tshombe at Kitona in the Congo on 20 December. Because
of these talks, the UNOC in Katanga were asked to "hold fire".
During the talks Mr. Tshombe is reported to have agreed to end
Katangese secession and to have signed an agreement accepting the
Congolese Loi Fundamentale. Mr. Tshombe also undertook to send
deputies to the National Parliament of the Congo. But on his return
from Kitona to Elizabethville, Mr. Tshombe is reported to have said
that the agreement signed by him at Kitona was subject to the
approval by his cabinet and the Katangese Parliament. The United
Nations spokesman in the Congo, however, stated, that in so far as
the United Nations was concerned, the agreement had been "signed,
sealed and delivered".
The Kitona Agreement was accepted on principle by the Katanga
Provincial Assembly "as a potential basis of discussion with a view
<pg45>

to the settlement of the Congolese conflict". Accordingly, Mr.
Tshombe, under guarantees given by the UNOC for his personal
safety, has had a few meetings in Leopoldville with Mr. Adoula,
Katangese deputies have also gone to Leopoldville to attend the
meeting of the Congolese Parliament.
To stop the illegal flow of arms and equipment into Katanga
from outside, the Acting Secretary-General of the United Nations
proposed to Britain and Portugal that they allow the stationing of
United Nations observers in key-points in Northern Rhodesia and
Angola. This request was rejected by Portugal and Sir Roy Welensky, the Prime Minister of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland, although Britain is responsible for the foreign affairs of the
Federation.
(xv) Niger and Upper Volta.-Niger and Upper Volta, which had
become independent in 1960, celebrated the anniversaries of their
independence in December 1961. Shri P. N. Haksar, Indian High
Commissioner to Nigeria, attended the Niger celebrations and Shri
Khub Chand , Indian High Commissioner to Ghana, attended the
Upper Volta celebrations on behalf of the Government of India. It
has been decided to concurrently accredit Dr. N. V. Rajkumar,
Indian Ambassador to Senegal, as Ambassador to Upper Volta.
(xvi) Angola.-Since March 1961 an armed conflict has been in
progress in Angola between the Angolan nationalists and Portuguese
military forces. The Government of India gave 500 woollen
blankets, 1700 yards of cloth and one lakh of multivitamin tablets
for the use of the Angolan refugees in the Congo through the Indian
Red Cross Society.
(xvii) British East Africa.-Shrimati Indira Gandhi and Shri
Dinesh Singh, M.P. paid a goodwill visit to Kenya, Tanganyika,
Uganda and Zanzibar from 22 August to 4 September 1961, under
the auspices of the Indian Council for Africa.
Shri K. R. F. Khilnani was appointed as Commissioner for India
in British East and Central Africa, Nairobi, with effect from 14
October 1961.
(xviii) Kenya.-In May 1961, the Government of India donated
a sum of Rs. 666.66 to the Famine Relief Fund set up by the President, Kenya African National Union, for rendering assistance in the
famine-stricken area of Kenya.
The then Deputy Minister of External Affairs, Shrimati Lakshmi
N. Menon visited Zanzibar, Mombasa and Nairobi.
<pg46>
(xix) Tanganyika.-The Government of India established a

Commission of India at Dar-es-Salaam. Shri M. A. Vellodi was
appointed as India's first Commissioner.
Tanganyika became independent on 9 December 1961. In
response to an invitation from the Government of Tanganyika,
Shrimati Lakshmi N. Menon, the then Deputy Minister of
External Affairs, Shri Apa B. Pant, Indian Ambassador to Indonesia
and Shri M. A. Vellodi, Indian Commissioner, Dar-es-Salaam,
represented the Government of India at the celebrations at Dar-esSalaam.
(xx) Ethiopia.-The Government of India continued to extend
training facilities to defence personnel from Ethiopia in defence
establishments in India.
In January 1961, the Government of Ethiopia made a request to
the Government of India who were already rendering assistance in
the management of the Harar Military Academy for the loan of the
services of a team of Indian Army officers for a period of two to
three years to advise the Government of Ethiopia on the reorganisation of the Imperial Bodyguard. Four officers were sent to Ethiopia
in September 1961.
For several years, the Government of Ethiopia have been
recruiting teachers from India for service in Ethiopian schools. This
year also the Director of the Commercial School in Addis Ababa was
deputed by the Government of Ethiopia to visit India, interview
suitable candidates and select them for appointment as teachers. In
all, 69 Indian teachers were recruited this year. In response to a
request received from the Ethiopian Government passport facilities
were granted by the Government of India to the selected teachers.
In January 1961, the Government of Ethiopia approached the
Government of India for assistance in providing facilities to Ethiopian
officials to study and observe the methods and programmes in India
in the matter of Community Development. These were provided
to the Assistant Minister of Community Development, Government
of Ethiopia and three Ethiopian officials.
(xxi) Somali Republic.-It was decided to concurrently accredit
the Commissioner of India in Mauritius as Indian Ambassador to the
Somali Republic. Shri M. K. Kidwai, the Indian Commissioner in
Mauritius, presented his credentials to the President of the Somali
Republic on 30 July 1961 as India's first Ambassador to that country.
The Government of India have decided to despatch supplies of medicines, clothing, blankets and tea worth Rs. 15,000 for the relief of
flood victims in Somali Republic.
(xxii) South Africa.-In March 1961, the Commonwealth Prime
Ministers' Conference was held mainly to consider South Africa's
application for continued membership of the Commonwealth as a
Republic. The Prime Minister, Dr. Verwoerd, went to London with
the avowed intention of ensuring that South Africa should remain

within the Commonwealth, and to promote her chances of remaining in the Commonwealth he even agreed to a discussion of South
Africa's domestic affairs. But when he found that a majority of the
Commonwealth members, including India, were opposed to South
Africa's racial policies he decided to withdraw the application for
continued membership.
The Republic of South Africa was formally inaugurated on 31
May 1961. It simultaneously withdrew from the Commonwealth.
The Nationalist Government received a fresh mandate from the
"6 white" electorate to pursue its apartheid programme, with even
greater determination and vigour.
The Republic of South Africa Constitution Act (No. 32 of 1961)
was enacted on 25 April 1961. Like the Act of Union of 1909, the
Constitution Act offers no effective guarantee for any section of the
population. The new Act is a loose framework within which the
Nationalist Party Government will be able to exercise limitless legislative and executive powers.
The general elections in South Africa were held on 18 October
1961. The Nationalist Party was returned again to power with an
increased majority and three extra seats.
The South African Nationalist Government, for the first time,
acknowledged the right of South Africans of Indian origin to be
considered as an established part of the South African population,
abandoning their earlier policy of repatriation on which they had
hitherto depended for a solution of the Indian "problem". The
Government now plan to treat Indians on a similar basis as the
`Coloured' people; and a Ministry of Indian Affairs has been created.
All matters pertaining to Indians will now be dealt with by that
Ministry. The Minister of Indian Affairs, Mr. W. A. Maree, also
announced that the Republican Government intended to establish
a National Council for Indian Affairs.
Three "Tribal" University Colleges for Africans (Fort Hare,
Turfloop and Ngoya), one for the Coloureds (Western Cape) and one
for the Indians (Salisbury Island, Durban) were established. In
January 1961, a conference of 50 leading Indian organisations, held
in Durban, recommended to the Indian community not to co-operate
with the Indian College.
115 E.A.-7.
<pg48>
The Defence Act (No. 12 of 1961) was amended by the South
African Parliament with a view to ensuring the safety of the `white'
minority in South Africa.
The Defence Amendment Act will enable the Government to act
without necessarily declaring a statutory state of emergency, with

disastrous effects on the foreign capital position. In 1960, more than
pound 100 million had been withdrawn by foreign investors from South
Africa causing the foreign reserves to fall below the pound 90-million
mark.
The South African Government also passed the General Law
Amendment Act 1961, to enable it to deal with possible civil disturbances at the time of the inauguration of the South African
Republic. The Act (No. 39 of 1961) applies the savage penalties
prescribed in the original Act of 1953 to those who incite others to
commit crimes as a protest against the `white' man's laws and to
all forms of intimidation.
In 1959, the South African Parliament enacted the Promotion of
Bantu Self-Government Act. After two years the Government were
still making fitful attempts to create national homes for the various
tribal groups.
There was much opposition to the creation of a "Bantustan" in
the Transkei. The Pondos, who inhabit the Eastern half of the
Native Reserve in the Transkei-the hill country between Natal and
Cape Province of about 100,000 square miles-revolted against the
`Bantustan' programme, but were ruthlessly crushed.
The South African Government stand almost alone in the world.
Their tenuous links with certain Commonwealth countries and even
in world organisations are being strained to the utmost. Early in
1961, South Africa was rebuffed at the International Labour
Organisation. All the 100 nations represented at that body made it
clear that they detested South Africa's racial policies and many of
them called upon South Africa to resign from the Organisation.
South Africa's policies came under the sharpest attack in April 1961,
when the Special Political Committee voted almost unanimously to
recommend collective international action against South Africa.
Only Portugal-herself under heavy fire for repression of Africansvoted against the resolution, and there were no abstentions. The
resolution finally adopted by the General Assembly on 13 April 1961
called upon the "Government of South Africa to bring its policies and
conduct into conformity with the obligations under the Charter". A
similar resolution was adopted at the 16th session of the General
Assembly on 28 November 1961.
<pg49>
At the fifteenth session, the U.N. General Assembly had again
renewed its appeal to the Union of South Africa to enter into
negotiations with the Governments of India and Pakistan with regard
to treatment of people of Indian origin in South Africa. In
accordance with this resolution the Government of India asked the
Government of South Africa, through their Ambassador in London
and their Permanent Representative in the United Nations, to enter
into negotiations. The South African Government did not comply
with the request. The Government of India, therefore, again raised
this issue of the treatment of people of Indian origin at the 16th

session of the General Assembly. The Resolution adopted at this
session, on 28 November 1961, called upon "the Government of the
Republic of South Africa to enter into negotiations with the Governments of India and Pakistan, in conformity with the repeated resolutions of the General Assembly."
With South Africa becoming a foreign country with effect from
31 May 1961, the Government of India introduced a visa system
for regulating the entry of South African nationals into India. The
visa system will apply only to South African nationals of European
extraction and of indigenous-African, `Cape Coloureds', Cape
Malaya-origin. Persons of Indian origin have been exempted from
the requirement of a visa.
(xxiii) South West Africa.-The South African Government
generally remained on the defensive on the question of South West
Africa. When questioned at the United Nations, they took shelter
behind the plea that the matter was subjudice, as Liberia and
Ethiopia had filed a "contentious action" against South Africa in the
International Court at The Hague.
The South African Government refused permission to the Committee on South West Africa, appointed by the General Assembly,
to enter the mandated territory of South West Africa. The Chairman of the Committee, reporting to the Secretary-General, stated
that the information gathered by the Committee from political refugees from South West Africa and other sources showed "gravely
explosive reactions from all African peoples, which, unless alleviated by timely action, are bound soon to reach the breaking point
endangering peace and security in this region of the world."
H.EUROPE.
Relations with countries in Europe continued to be cordial and
friendly and were further strengthened by various cultural, trade
and economic exchanges.
(i) Austria.-An agreement was signed with the Government.
of Austria for the avoidance of double taxation..
<pg50>
(ii) Belgium.-The 50th Inter-Parliamentary Union Conference
held in Brussels in September 1961, was attended by a delegation
from the Indian Parliament headed by Shri H. N. Kunzru, M.P.
The Government of Belgium offered three scholarships to Indian
nationals for the academic year 1962-63. In addition, five fellowships for training in Belgian industry have also been offered by the
Belgian Foreign Trade Office.
(iii) Bulgaria.-Professor Humayun Kabir, M.P., Minister for
Scientific Research and Cultural Affairs, paid an official visit to Bul-

garia.
Cultural contacts between India
and Bulgaria were initiated.
An Indian artist visited Bulgaria in June 1961, and a Bulgarian
artist visited India in October 1961.
(iv) Cyprus.-Diplomatic relations between India and Cyprus
were established. Shri I. S. Chopra was appointed as High Commissioner to Cyprus and presented his letter of Commission to the
President of Cyprus on 29 January 1962.
Books on economic, political, constitutional and cultural affairs
were presented to the Library of the Cyprus Parliament.
(v) Czechoslovakia.-In February 1961, the Czechoslovak Minister for Health, Dr. Plojhar, led a delegation to the World Health
Organisation Conference held in India.
Shri S. K. Patil, M.P., Union Minister for Food and Agriculture,
paid a visit to Czechoslovakia.
Dr. B. C. Roy, Chief Minister of West Bengal. visited Czechoslovakia in July 1961.
In March 1961, a delegation of the Czechoslovak Committee of
the Defenders of Peace, headed by the Deputy Minister of Health,
attended the session of the World Peace Council in New Delhi.
The agreement relating to Air Services, which was signed by
India and Czechoslovakia, on 19 September 1960, came into force
on 7 June 1961, following the exchange of Instruments of Ratification/Note of Approval in New Delhi on that date.
An agreement was signed in New Delhi in June 1961, between
the Heavy Electricals (India) Ltd., and M/s. Technoexport of
Czechoslovakia for the preparation of detailed project reports for a
Heavy Power Equipment and a High Pressure Boiler Plant to be
set up in India.
<pg51>
(vi) Denmark.-An agreement for the Registration of Trade
Marks was signed between India and Denmark at Copenhagen on
19 June 1961.
The Danish Government's offer of scholarships in higher education and training in the co-operative movement and agriculture was
accepted by the Government of India. Denmark accepted the offer
made by India of two scholarships to Danish students under the reciprocal scholarship scheme.
At the invitation of the Prime Minister of India, His Excellency

Mr. Viggo Kampmann, the Prime Minister of Denmark accompanied by Mrs. Kampmann paid a 12-day visit to India from 18 to
29 January 1962. During this stay, they visited various places in
the country.
(vii) Finland.-The start of an exchange programme of scholars
between India and Finland, with two scholars on either side, was
approved. The number of scholarships was subsequently increased
to three.
The Indian Parliament agreed to exchange printed reports of
debates with the Finnish Parliament.
An agreement for the avoidance of double taxation was signed
between India and Finland.
Specimen notes and coins of all denominations in circulation at
present in India, to the value of Rs. 16,118/93 nP, were supplied to
the National Museum of Finland.
(viii) France.-To promote and further strengthen the IndoFrench technical co-operation programme, the Governments of
India and France exchanged letters, on 30 January 1961, laying
down the terms and conditions for experts and fellowships/
scholarships.
Under the Indo-French technical co-operation programme the
following scholarships offered by the French Government were
accepted for 1961-62:(i) 4 scholarships for specialised training in education,
archives and social welfare.
(ii) 2 scholarships for specialised training in dramaturgy and
music.
(iii) 14 scholarships for post-graduate studies in science and
technology.
(iv) 26 scholarships for specialised training in archaeology,
museology, architecture and town-planning.
115 E.A-8.
<pg52>
(v) 9 scholarships for higher studies in the humanities.
(vi) 2 scholarships to Indian Catholic priests.
The offer of the Government of France to train 30 officers during
1961-62, in "Production Management" was also accepted.
During the first three months of 1962, the following scholarships

have been offered by the Government of France to be utilised by
the Government of India during 1962-63:(i) 10 scholarships for specialised training in humanities.
(ii) 35 scholarships for specialised training in technical subjects.
(iii) 2 scholarships for training Indian priests.
It was decided to construct an "India House" at the Cite Universitaire, Paris, at an estimated cost of Rs. 34,37,500. The foundation
stone was laid by Shri Humayun Kabir, M.P., Minister for Scientific
Research and Cultural Affairs, on 17 June, 1960. A provision of
Rs. 10,00,000, has been made in the budget for this purpose.
The French Foreign Minister, M. Couve de Murville, visited
India in April 1961.
Dr. H.N. Kunzru attended the meeting of the Executive Committee of the Inter-Parliamentary Union held in Paris in October
1961.
Aircraft Carrier I.N.S. "VIKRANT", on her maiden voyage
from the United Kingdom, visited Toulon (France) in October
1961.
The Indian Ambassador to France, Nawab Ali Yavar Jung, inaugurated the Library of the Franco-Indian Cultural Centre in
Paris. This library was set up two years ago for the promotion of
better knowledge of India in France and of cultural exchanges between the two countries.
(ix) Germany.-Federal Republic of Germany.-An agreement
between the Government of India and the Government of Federal
Republic of Germany relating to, Air Services was initialled in
October 1961. The agreement will come into effect when it has
been ratified by the two Governments.
Dr. S. Radhakrishnan, Vice-President of India, paid a visit to
the Federal Republic of Germany in October 1961.
The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany donated a
sum of Rs. 59,000 (equivalent of DM. 50,000) for flood relief in
Bihar.
<pg53>
Unprecedented devastation was caused by hurricanes and floods
in the North Sea Coast areas of Germany. As a token of their
sympathy and concern for the victims, the Government of India
presented 3,000 lbs of tea, 5,000 bed sheets and 5,000 towels.
German Democratic Republic.-India accepted the offer of the

German Democratic Republic of 3 scholarships for post-graduate
studies in Agriculture.
(x) Greece.-A cultural agreement between India and Greece
was signed at Athens on 22 June 1961. Shri Humayun Kabir,
Minister of Scientific Research and Cultural Affairs, who was on a
State visit to Greece, signed the agreement.
Dr. J. N. Khosla was appointed as Ambassador of India to Greece
with effect from 17 January 1962.
(xi) Hungary.-On the invitation of the Government of India, the
Prime Minister of the Hungarian People's Republic, Dr. Ferenc
Munnich, accompanied by senior officials of the Hungarian Government, paid a visit to India from 24 to 27 August 1961.
Shri Morarji Desai, the Union Finance Minister, visited Hungary
for 3 days in September 1961, as the guest of the Hungarian Government.
Shri S. K. Patil, the Union Minister for Food and Agriculture,
paid a visit to Hungary.
The Vice-President, Dr. S. Radhakrishnan, went to Hungary on
a State visit in October 1961. An honorary doctorate was conferred
on him by the University of Budapest.
An agreement between India and Hungary for the development
of atomic energy for peaceful purposes was concluded by an exchange of letters between the Chairman of the Indian Atomic
Energy Commission and the Chairman of the Hungarian National
Atomic Energy Commission.
A cultural agreement between India and Hungary was signed
in New Delhi on 30 March 1962.
(xii) Italy.-To promote cordial relations between India and
Italy, the Government of Italy offered thirty scholarships for postgraduate and specialised studies in Italy.
(xiii) Luxembourg.-The Legation of India in Luxembourg was
raised to the level of an Embassy and the Ambassador of India in
Belgium was concurrently appointed as Ambassador of India to
Luxembourg with effect from 19 May 1961.
<pg54>
(xiv) Netherlands.-Dr. S. Radhakrishnan, Vice-President of
India, paid a State visit to the Netherlands from 17 to 20 October
1961. He presented books to the Department of Indian Arts and
Archaeology of the University of Amsterdam.
The University of Amsterdam instituted in 1960, a Chair Extraordinary for "Modern Indian Languages". Literature on Tamil was

supplied to the University. Exhibits were also sent for the Indian
section of the Museum of the Royal Tropical Institute, Amsterdam.
The following scholarships offered by the Netherlands Government
during 1961-62, were accepted by the Government of India:(i) 5 scholarships for post-graduate studies in technology.
(ii) 1 fellowship for research work on Indo-Dutch economic,
relations at the National Archives at The Hague.
(iii) 1 scholarship in the field of conservation of paintings and,
art.
The Hague Academy of International Law also offered two scholarships to Indian nationals.
The Netherlands Red Cross donated 255 blankets and 240 sheets
to the Indian Red Cross Society. They also donated 1,080 sets of
dried blood plasma to the Society.
The University of Utrecht in the Netherlands conferred an Honorary Doctorate on Dr. S. Radhakrishnan, Vice-President of India.
This Doctorate was received by the Indian Ambassador to the
Netherlands, Shri R. K. Tandon on behalf of the Vice-President on
3 April 1962.
(xv) Norway.-A. cultural agreement between the two countries
was signed in Oslo on 19 April 1961. The Norwegian Association of the Children's International Summer Villages, Oslo, organised an International Summer Camp at Gjvik (Norway) in July 1961.
The Indian Council for Child Welfare sent three children aged
eleven to represent India at the Camp.
Dr. Jivraj Mehta, Chief Minister of Gujerat, attended a meeting
of the Executive Committee of the International Conference of
Social Work at Oslo in August 1961.
Mr. Raeder, Secretary-General of the Norwegian Ministry of
Foreign Affairs accompanied by his wife, visited India in October
1961, on his way back from Bangkok.
Under the scheme of reciprocal scholarships, the Government of
India have offered one scholarship to Norway for studies in India
during 1961-62.
<pg55>
The Norwegian Co-operative Women's Guild have donated a
mobile gynaecological unit to the Government of India.
(xvi) Poland.-On the invitation of the Government of India,
the President of the Council of State of the Polish People's Republic,
Mr. Aleksander Zawadzki, accompanied by the Deputy Prime
Minister and senior officials of the Polish Government visited India

from 11 to 14 October 1961. A joint communique was issued on
the conclusion of his visit.
Shri S. K. Patil, M.P., Union Minister for Food and Agriculture,
paid a visit to Poland.
Dr. B.C. Roy, Chief Minister of West Bengal, visited Poland in
July 1961.
India participated in the International Book Fair held in Warsaw
in May 1961 and the International Poznan Fair held in Poznan
from 11 to 26 June 1961.
An agreement between the National Coal Development Corporation and the Polish organisation-CEKOP-for the development of
a deep-shaft mine project at Sudamiah in Jharia (Bihar) was signed
in Ranchi on 17 June 1961.
An agreement was signed in New Delhi on 21 July 1961, between
the Government of India and CEKOP for preparing a project
report for the construction of a port silo of 50,000 tons either in
Bombay or in Madras.
(xvii) Rumania.-In July 1961, Rumania observed the centenary
of Rabindranath Tagore by holding meetings in various important cities in the country. Photographs and old issues of magazines
and newspapers of 1926, when Rabindranath Tagore visited Rumania, were exhibited. To mark the occasion, the translations of some
of Tagore's works in Rumanian were also published.
The Oil and Natural Gas Commission purchased two oil drilling
rigs from Rumania for about a crore of rupees. Some Rumanian
experts are also assisting the Oil and Natural Gas Commission in
prospecting of oil.
An Oil Productivity Team from India visited Rumania for a
fortnight to study the methods used by the institutions and plants
in Bucharest.
At the invitation of the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha and the
Speaker of the Lok Sabha, a Parliamentary delegation led by Mr.
Stefan Incolau, Vice-President of the Grand National Assembly of
<pg56>
the Rumanian People's Republic visited India from 26 March to
3 April 1962.
(xviii) San Marino.-The Government of India have decided to
establish relations with the Republic of San Marino through the
appointment of Consul General. This was announced on 5 June
1961.

(xix) The Soviet Union.-The Prime Minister of India, after
attending the Conference of Non-aligned Countries held at Belgrade,
visited the Soviet Union from 6 to 12 September 1961. The Prime
Minister was accompanied by Shri R. K. Nehru, Secretary-General,
Ministry of External Affairs and Shri V. H. Coelho, Joint Secretary,
Ministry of External Affairs.
At the invitation of the President of India, Mr. L. L Brezhnev,
the President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet
Union and his wife, accompanied by an official party of eight persons, visited India from 15 December to 29 December 1961 as State
guests. The official Soviet party included Mr. Kolatov, Chairman of
the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union, Mr. Y. A.
Malik, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union and
other senior officials.
The first Soviet Cosmonaut, Major Yuri Gagarin, accompanied by
his wife, journalists and Soviet officials visited India in November
1961.
Shri S. K. Patil, M.P., the Union Minister for Food and Agriculture, paid a visit to the Soviet Union.
The Speaker of the Lok Sabha. Shri M. Aananthasayanam
Ayyangar, M.P., accompanied by Shri M. N. Kaul. Joint Secretary
and Shri S. L. Shakdher, Joint Secretary of the Lok Sabha Secretariat, visited the Soviet Union for 15 days from 1 June 1961.
At the invitation of the Soviet Union, several delegations of
artists, educationists, journalists, trade unionists, students and school
children visited the Soviet Union during the year.
A credit agreement for 112.5 million roubles in 1961 covering
an oil refinery in Gujerat, a washery for coking coal at Kathara
and the exploration, development and production of oil and gas by
the Oil and Natural Gas Commission in Cambay, Ankleshwar and
other areas, was signed with the Soviet Union in February 1961.
The Indo-Soviet Joint Committee, set up for implementing the
agreement signed in February 1960 between India and the Soviet
Union on cultural, scientific and technological co-operation met at
Moscow in August 1960 and completed the programme for 1961-62.
The Joint Committee met again at New Delhi in January 1962 for
<pg57>
drawing up the cultural programme for 1962-63. The Soviet delegation was led by Mr. G. A. Zhukov, Chairman of the State Committee
of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union for Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries.
An agreement on co-operation between the Soviet Union and
India for the development of atomic energy for peaceful purposes
was signed at Vienna on 16 October 1961.

(xx) Spain.-To promote cultural relations between the two
countries, the Institute Hispano Arabey Orientale was established
in New Delhi. The services of the Director of the Centre, Mr. Xavier
Mencos, have also been made available to the Delhi University for
teaching Spanish.
The Government of India have accepted two scholarships on a
reciprocal basis from the Spanish Government for 1961-62.
(xxi) Sweden.-Mr. O. Walter Aman, Governor of Orbero Province (Sweden), Chairman of the National Institute to Study the
Problems of Consumers and Chairman of the Swedish Oriental Committee for Technical Assistance, visited India in May 1961.
It was decided on 17 August 1961 to sign an agreement between
Sweden and India for co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic
energy.
The Elin Wagner Foundation of Stockholm, awarded Postgraduate research fellowships, one each for the years 1961 and 1962.
Swedish school children collected a sum of Rs. 5,000 and donated
it to the School Board of Palitana (Gujerat State) for the construction of a school building in the village of Piperdi.
The Swedish Red Cross offered; a donation of 300,000 Swedish
crowns to the Christian Medical College, Vellore, for the expansion
of the Training Centre for Reconstructive Surgery in Leprosy.
The Swedish Institute for Cultural Relations offered a scholarship in engineering and technology. The Government of India, under
the reciprocal scholarships scheme, offered a scholarship to Sweden
for studies in India during 1961-62.
The Indian Ambassador to Sweden, Shri Kewal Singh, presented
on behalf of the Government of India a set of 70 books on India to
the Uppsala University, the oldest and the largest University in
Sweden.
The President of the National Union of the Swedish Democratic
Women presented an ambulance-cum-mobile clinic to the Government of India for use as a first aid and a family planning centre.
<pg58>
The clinic centre was received by the Indian Ambassador to Sweden
at a special ceremony at Stockholm on 6 March 1962.
The Government of Sweden have awarded a scholarship to an
Indian student for 1962-63.
(xxii) United Kingdom.-In March 1961 the Prime Minister

attended the 11th Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference held
at London. The Prime Ministers devoted their attention to a limited
number of specific problems of common concern: disarmament, the
structure of the United Nations and certain constitutional problems
affecting the Commonwealth itself. The also undertook a general
review of world problems.
The Prime Ministers reaffirmed the support of their Governments
for the efforts of the United Nations to restore order in the Congo
and to secure the independence and integrity of the Republic. They
deplored outside intervention in the Congo and recognised that many
of the problems which had arisen were due to such intervention.
They considered that the United Nations forces in the Congo should
be strengthened and that the Security Council resolution of 21
February should be fully implemented.
The Prime Ministers noted with concern the situation which had
developed in Laos. They expressed the hope that the parties would
be able to reconcile their differences, that intervention from the outside world cease, and that Laos would be enabled to enjoy an independent, neutral and peaceful existence.
The Commonwealth Prime Ministers accepted a request from the
Republic of Cyprus for admission to the Commonwealth. The Prime
Minister of South Africa informed the other Prime Ministers that,
in the light of the views expressed on behalf of other member Governments and indications of their future intentions regarding the
racial policy of the Union Government, he had decided to withdraw
his application for South Africa's continuing membership of the
Commonwealth. The Prime Ministers noted that Sierra Leone
would attain independence on 27 April 1961, and looked forward to
welcoming her as a member of the Commonwealth on the completion of the necessary constitutional processes.
The Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference was held in
London from 25 to 30 September 1961. The Indian delegation to
that Conference was led by Shri M. Ananthasayanam Ayyangar,
M.P., Speaker, Lok Sabha and President, Indian Branch of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association.
The Second Commonwealth Education Conference, which was
attended by representatives of all Commonwealth countries including
<pg59>
non-self-governing countries, such as the British West Indies,
Mauritius and others, was held in New Delhi from. 11 to 25 January
1962. Tours in various parts of India were organised for the participating delegations to give them an opportunity of seeing places of
educational, historical and cultural interest as well as developments
in the industrial sphere.
(xxiii) The Vatican.-The Indian Minister to the Vatican,

Shri M. K. Vellodi, represented India at the 80th Birth anniversary
of the Pope in Rome on 4 November 1961. The President of India
sent a message of greetings to the Pope.
(xxiv) Yugoslavia.-The Prime Minister of India led the Indian
delegation to the Conference of Heads of State/Government of
Non-aligned countries, which was held in Belgrade from 1 to 6
September 1961.
In May 1961, a contract was concluded for the export from India
of 20,000 tons of pig-iron to Yugoslavia.
At the invitation of the Federal Planning Bureau of Yugoslavia,
Professor P. C. Mahalanobis, Director of the Indian Statistical Institute and Member, Planning Commission, visited Yugoslavia in June
1961.
1. THE AMERICAS
NORTH AMERICA
(i) The United States of America.-India's political relations
with the United States of America continued to be very friendly
and cordial. These friendly ties were further strengthened by the:,
visit of the Indian Prime Minister to the United States from 6 to
13 November 1961.
Shri M. C. Chagla relinquished charge as Indian Ambassador to
the United States on 9 June 1961. Shri B. K. Nehru assumed
charge as Ambassador of India to the United States of America on
21 September 1961.
33 students of the Industrial College of the Armed Forces of the
United States paid a brief visit to India from 20 to 24 April 1961.
During their stay, meetings with senior officers of the Ministries of
Finance, Commerce and Industry, and Defence and of the Planning
Commission were arranged to enable the visiting party to understand the progress made by India in various fields.
India continued to receive aid from the United States of America.
This aid has been in several forms, such as economic and technical
assistance, supply of agricultural commodities and local currency
assistance out of the sale proceeds of imported commodities. It has
benefited important sectors of development such as agriculture,
<pg60>
industry, power and transport as well as educational, health and
other social welfare activities.
On 3 January 1961, an agreement was signed with the United
States Export-Import Bank for the grant of a further credit of 50
million dollars (Rs. 23.81 crores) for the purchase of capital goods,

initial spares and related services from the United States. The
entire credit has been allocated for Government projects and aid
programmes.
To assist in the purchase of a Boeing 707 aircraft and related
spare parts by Air India International, a sum of $ 4.1 million has
been made available jointly by the Export-Import Bank and the
Boeing Airplane Company. The agreement was signed on 4 March
1961.
A major type of aid to India during the Second Five Year Plan
was the supply of surplus agricultural commodities. For the Third
Plan also, the benefit of such aid will be available to the extent of
$1,300 million. Under the agreements already concluded, 150 lakh
tons of wheat, 9 lakh tons of rice, 3.25 lakh bales of cotton will be
available. A long-term agreement for the import of foodgrains was
concluded with the purpose of assuring steady supplies in the country and for building up buffer stocks.
Out of the United States Government holdings of local currency
from the United States aid under P.L. 480, the United States Government have made available to India, third country currencies valued
at $6,039,305 for the purchase of fertilisers and tube-well equipment.
An Indo-U.S. agreement for a loan of Rs. 256.8 crores to India
from the sale proceeds of agricultural commodities supplied to India
under the Fifth U.S. Public Law Agreement was signed on 26
March 1962 at New Delhi. Loans by the Export-Import Bank,
Washington PL-480 (Rupee Fund) for the following firms have been
approved:
(a) Rs. 1,19,05,000 to M/s Limac Ltd., Madras.
(b) Rs. 9,50,000 to M/s Babrid India Private Ltd.
(c) Rs 75,00,000 to M/s Carrier Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Private Ltd.,
(d) Rs. 51,35,000 to M/s Wyeth Laboratories (P) Ltd.
The Ministry of Education, in consultation with the Ministries of
Scientific Research and Cultural Affairs, Commerce and Industry,
Finance, External Affairs and the University Grants Commission,
have set up a joint Indo-American Board for the cheap publication
in India of standard American books for use by Indian University
<pg61>
students. Rupee funds available under PL-480 are proposed to be,
utilised for this purpose.
The International Development Fund extended an interest-free
credit, equivalent to 6 million dollars to India for an irrigation pro-

ject in Uttar Pradesh. The project provides for drilling and equipping 800 tube-wells during the first three years of the Third FiveYear Plan.
Agreements for United States loans, totalling over a billion dollars, have been signed. In addition, grants amounting to $278 million and surplus agricultural commodities of the value of $2337 million have been allocated to India.
Private philanthropic foundations in the United States also
assisted development activities in India. Madras and Kerala received from CARE (Co-operative for American Relief Everywhere)
assistance for a mid-day meal programme for primary schools.
For
the school feeding programme in Madras CARE will import:
(a) Rice
(b) Milk Powder
(c) Enriched corn meal
(d) Vegetable oil

18,750,000 lbs.
6,250,000 lbs.
3,000,000 lbs.
3,000,00 lbs.
-----------------------31,000,000 lbs.
------------------------

In Kerala, milk, wheat flour, corn meal and vegetable oil will be
supplied. The estimated cost of these items
is approximately
Rs. 8 crores.
CARE also proposes to assist other State Governments in their
mid-day meal programme.
It was decided to participate in the Seattle Fair in the United
States of America, and in joint Indo-American Research in the
Indian Ocean and in "energy spectrum" of cosmic rays at different
latitudes.
Visits by Indian Dignitaries.
(i) The Prime Minister accompanied by Shrimati Indira Gandhi and the Foreign Secretary visited the United States
and Mexico in November 1961.
(ii) Shri Morarji Desai, M.P., the Finance Minister, paid a
brief visit to the United States from 25 September to 9
October 1961 at the invitation of the American Secretary of State for the Treasury. Financial problems of
mutual interest were discussed.
<pg62>
(iii) Shrimati Lakshmi N. Menon, M.P., Deputy Minister of
External Affairs, visited the United States in response
to an invitation by the Vassar College, New York to
participate in an International Conference as one of

the principal speakers in connection with their centenary celebrations during March 1961.
(iv) Shri L. N. Mishra, M.P., then Deputy Minister for Labour,
Employment and Planning, visited the United States for
a month in July 1961 at the invitation of the United
States Government to meet officials of the United States
Department of Labour and to exchange views on matters
of mutual concern, especially labour management relations in the Indian steel industry.
(v) Shri G. L. Mehta, Chairman of the Industrial Credit and
Investment Corporation of India, Ltd., Bombay visited
San Francisco to participate in the International Industrial Conference held in September 1961.
The United States ship "VALCOUR" made an informal visit to
Bombay from 24 to 29 April 1961.
Mr. Robert Sargent Shriver, Director of the United States Peace
Corps of Volunteers arrived in New Delhi on 30 April 1961. During
his short stay he had talks with the Prime Minister and with other
Government officials on the broad outline of Peace Corps work in
India. The Government of India have decided to utilise the prosonnel of the Peace Corps on an experimental basis.
The following important visitors also came to India from the
United States of America during this period:(i) Mrs. John F. Kennedy, wife of the U. S. President.
(ii) Mr. George S. McGovern, Director for U. S. Peace for
Food Programme.
(iii) Mr. Philip H. Coombs, U.S. Assistant Secretary of State
for Education and Cultural Affairs.
(iv) Mr. Chester Bowles, President Kennedy's Adviser on
African, Asian and Latin American countries.
<pg63>
The National Zoological Park in Washington, an organisation of
the U.S. Government, presented a number of animals to the Zoological Park. New Delhi.
(ii) Canada.-The First Secretary of the Indian High Commission,
Shri K. Sankara Pillai, was shot dead while in office on 19 April 1961
by one Shani Ferizi, a naturalised Canadian national of Yugoslav
origin. The assailant was tried by a Canadian court and has been
sent to a mental hospital.
The Director General of Health Services received a gift of 100,000
doses of oral polio vaccine from the Cannaught Medical Research

Laboratories, Toronto, Canada.
The Prime Minister inaugurated the Canada-India Reactor and a
number of other facilities viz., a Uranium Metal Plant, a fuel Fabrication facility and "Zerlina", a Zero energy reactor for lattice investigations at Trombay on 16 January 1961. Government representatives and leading atomic scientists from abroad attended the inauguration ceremony. Because of Canada's close association with
the Canada-India Reactor, the Hon'ble Mr. Gordon Churchill, Leader
of the Party in the House of Commons and Minister for Veterans'
Affairs, was specially invited to attend the ceremony on behalf of
the Canadian Government, by the Government of India.
The distinguished foreign visitors invited to the formal inauguration of the Canada-India Reactor and other facilities at Trombay
were later taken on a tour of various important places of historical,
cultural and industrial interest in the country as State guests.
Mr. Gordon Churchill inaugurated Power House No. II of the
Kundah Hydro Electric Project and the Kundah III stage extension
Scheme on 18 January 1961. The Kundah Project has received sub-stantial aid from Canada.
On the suggestion of the Food and Agricultural Organization
the Canadian Freedom from Hunger Committee and the Canadian
Institute of Food Technology agreed to assist the Central Food
Technological Research Institute at Mysore in the establishment of
a Food Technology Training Centre for the Far East at Mysore.
CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA.
A delegation of five Youth Leaders from Peru, Chile, Venezuela,
Costa Rica and Bolivia visited India in response to an invitation extended by the World Assembly of Youth.
<pg64>
(i) Argentina.-Major General Tara Singh Bal assumed charge
as Indian Ambassador in Argentina.
The then President of Argentina, Dr. Arturo Frondizi, visited
India from 4 to 8 December 1961.
(ii) Brazil.-Shri S. K. Patil, M.P., Minister for Food and Agriculture visited Argentina and Brazil from 20 to 27 June 1961.
Shri S. Sen, who has been appointed as Ambassador of India to
Brazil, is expected to assume charge of his new post in April 1962.
He has been concurrently accredited as Minister to Venezuela.
(iii) Paraguay and Uruguay.-The Government of India established diplomatic relations with Uruguay and with Paraguay.
The
Indian Ambassador in Buenos Aires has been concurrently accredited

to Paraguay as Ambassador and to Uruguay as Minister.
(iv) Mexico.-Formerly, the Indian Ambassador in Washington
was concurrently accredited to Mexico; now Shri P. L. Bhandari
has been appointed as the resident Ambassador there and presented
his credentials to the President of Mexico on 16 October 1961.
(v) Cuba.-The Indian Ambassador in Mexico has been concurrently accredited to Havana.
(vi) West Indies.-Dr. Eric Williams, Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago, accompanied by Mr. (now Sir) Learie Constantine,
Minister of Trinidad, Miss Williams and two other persons visited
India from 25 June to 30 June 1961. As a result of his talks with
the Prime Minister it was decided to endow a Chair of Indian
studies at the University in Trinidad, and send a representative
selection of books on India and Indian culture. A Representative
of Trinidad will be posted in India. (A technical cooperation agreement is expected to be signed between India and Trinidad and
assistance provided in the field of economic and social planning.
A delegation sponsored by the Engineering Export Promotion
Council toured certain countries of South America
J. EXTERNAL PUBLICITY
(i) General.-Despite some criticism of India in a section of the
Western press and continuing hostile propaganda by Pakistan and
China, there was an improvement in the reporting on India in the
World press during the current year than before. Foreign radio
and television organisations featured more, and better, programmes
on India than previously. Judging from the number and variety
of requests for information on India received by our Posts abroad,
there was a significant increase in interest in India in almost all
parts of the world.
<pg65>
While much of this was undoubtedly due to the basic importance of India in the world of today, the efforts of our external
publicity apparatus to project India abroad properly had also some
effect. Without any significant budgetary increase, the Division
and its 50 Constituent Units (list at Appendix II) met new
responsibilities through a judicious use of resources. They overlooked no fresh opportunity for publicity and did not neglect the
earlier gains.
The inauguration of the Third Five-Year Plan and the Tagore
Centenary Celebrations provided two major opportunities for publicising India's economic progress and cultural attainments. Both
material specially prepared at headquarters and that acquired from
outside sources was sent to our Missions. Information Posts abroad
made good use of them. Special brochures and film shows and
exhibitions were also organised.

(ii) Production of Material.-During the year considerable
emphasis was placed on the production of material for the use of
Missions, as also by various media of information, like the press,
radio and television. In the preparation and production of material
the prevailing political and economic needs of the country and the
regional requirements of the Missions were constantly kept in
view. 38 pamphlets and over 138 feature articles were produced
during the year. In addition, numerous photo-features and background papers were prepared or acquired for distribution to
Missions. Information Posts abroad also placed greater emphasis
on the production of material in the languages of their respective
areas.
Special material was provided to Missions abroad for use by
radio and television organisations. In areas where these organisations operate extensively, the Posts prepared additional material
locally for use in radio and television programmes.
For occasions such as Republic Day, Independence Day, Children's Day and Mahatma Gandhi's Birthday, the Posts produced
either special brochures or carried special features in their bulletins.
The emphasis on production was further reflected in the
material morsecast thrice daily to Missions. The attempt was to
provide them with readily usable publicity items suitable for their
bulletins and brochures as also for the local press.
The monthly Foreign Affairs Record and the daily World Press
Review continued to be prepared at headquarters. Their quality
and contents were improved and their distribution expanded.
Special publications on such subjects as the Report of the officials
<pg66>
of Government of India and China on the Boundary Question, the,
Salient Aspects of the Kashmir Situation, the Farakka barrage,
brochure (a project to save Calcutta), and Indo-Pakistan Relations
were prepared for distribution on a large scale.
(iii) Books and Libraries.-Libraries attached to the Missions
expanded considerably during the year. Over 282 titles, involving
about 13,654 copies, were added to these libraries at an approximate
cost of Rs. 1,25,000. There was an increase in the number of visitors
to the libraries. Books on almost all aspects of India were increasingly in demand.
Over 3600 books, costing about Rs. 25,000, were presented by the
Missions to important individuals and institutions abroad.
A wide range of Indian newspapers and periodicals were supplied to the Missions at a total approximate cost of Rs. 1,15,000,
both for their libraries and for distribution in their areas. In
addition, Government publications, valued at about Rs. 2,00,000,

were sent for distribution abroad.
A pictorial diary for 1962, with the Himalayas as the theme, was
designed and 11,000 copies were printed and despatched for distribution to Missions.
(iv) Films Exhibitions and Audio-Visual Publicity.-Documentary and feature films were regularly supplied to 79 Missions,
while 29 Missions also received the Overseas editions of the Indian
News Review. In many places, some of these films were shown on
television circuits. Several films, relating to the visit to India of
foreign dignitaries and the visits of the Prime Minister abroad,
were made and distributed to Missions. As in the past, the participation of India in International Film Festivals was assisted. Assistance was also given in the selection of films for the second International Film Festival organised by the Information and Broadcasting Ministry. A Festival of Indian Films was organised in
Djakarta.
In collaboration with the Ministry of Scientific Research and
Cultural Affairs, 12 mobile exhibition sets demonstrating on the
life and work of Tagore were assembled. These were sent to
different regions abroad for display by Missions to remain in
circulation during the Tagore Centenary Year. In addition, a large
collection of photographs, posters, books, dolls and costumes were
sent to many Missions for use in local or international exhibitions
in their areas.
Over 69,000 photographs in different sizes and on a wide variety
of subjects were supplied to Missions for publication and display,
<pg67>
and for meeting ad hoc requests. Owing to financial stringency,
the demands for colour transparencies and colour prints could not be
fully met. Photographs of Indian interest received from Missions
abroad were released to the press in India.
A varied selection of suitable gramophone records and tape
recordings was sent to Missions. These were used extensively in
radio and television programmes as also at functions organised by
Missions and various institutions in their regions.
(v) Research and Reference.-The Division's Research and
Reference Section met numerous requests from Missions abroad
for information on various Indian subjects in addition to queries
from within India and from officials of the Ministry. Over 26,600
clippings from Indian newspapers and about 27,700 clippings from
foreign journals were scrutinized and the more important, indexed
and classified. In addition, a great volume of other material.
received from within India and from abroad, was similarly processed.

(vi) Press and Public Relations.-Considerable emphasis was
laid on keeping the press in India and abroad informed of important developments in India's external relations. Daily briefings
were held at headquarters for the large number of Indian and
foreign newsmen stationed in the capital. Abroad, Public Relations
Officers and Press Attaches maintained close contacts with the
press, helping newsmen to understand Indian policies, removing
misunderstandings, correcting distorted and propagandist reporting,
and making available authentic versions of important policy statements. A marked orientation towards public relations, as distinct
from publicity, was a notable feature of the year.
Other opportunities for special publicity efforts were provided
by the visit to India of a number of State dignitaries. Queen
Elizabeth, Mrs. Kennedy and Vice-President Mr. Lyndon Johnson
of the United States were accompanied by large press parties
during their tour of India. The Belgrade Conference of Nonaligned countries and the visit of the Prime Minister to Belgrade,
the Soviet Union, Britain, the United States, Mexico and the
United Arab Republic were well reported. The recent Conference
of the Commonwealth Press Union in Delhi brought to India a large
and influential contingent of pressmen from all the Commonwealth
countries, which toured India extensively.
A Scandinavian Press delegation, two Soviet journalists and
delegations of editors from Burma, Ceylon and Pakistan visited
India at the Government's invitation. A large number of distinguished pressmen, radio and television representatives and film
<pg68>
producers also came to India. The Press Relations Wing of the
Division arranged interviews for most of them with the President,
the Vice-President, the Prime Minister and others. Travel, customs
and other facilities were extended to them.
(vii) Special Publicity.-Towards the end of the year events
culminating in the Goa action necessitated special publicity arrangements. A small cell was created to cope with the work and a great
deal of publicity material was sent to Missions.. The daily morse
transmissions gave extensive coverage to developments in Goa. The
Missions used this material to brief the press and to issue releases
and other background material. Special bulletins and pamphlets
were also brought out by some of the Missions abroad. Daily briefings were held at Hyderabad House to keep the press informed of
developments at every stage.
(viii) Changes in Cadre.-As a result of the reorganisation of the,
Information Service of India and its gradual integration with the
Indian Foreign Service initiated in 1959, the following further
changes were made in the cadre, during the year:(i) One permanent post of Information Officer at headquar-

ters was converted into one in the Senior Scale of the
Indian Foreign Service and an Indian Foreign Service
Officer was appointed to it.
(ii) Five posts of Publicity Officers in the scale of Section
Officers were sanctioned at headquarters. With the
creation of these posts, it was decided to effect the following changes:
(a) three posts of grade IV Assistants of IFS(B) and three
posts of Information Assistants were abolished with
effect from the dates the newly created posts are
filled in,
(b) the number of Information Officers and Assistant
Information Officers at headquarters was reduced by
two in each category within one year of the creation
of these posts.
(iii) The post of Press Attache at Tokyo, which was earlier
held in the senior scale of the IFS, reverted to the I.S.I.
cadre.
(iv) The post of Assistant Press Attache in Damascus was
converted to a post in the junior scale of the I.F.S.
(ix) Organisation and staff.-The External Publicity Division at
headquarters and the Overseas Information Posts employ a total
<pg69>
staff of 548, consisting of 9 Public Relations Officers, 1 Deputy Director, Information Service of India, 1 Under Secretary (Information),
37 Information Officersl/Press Attaches, 26 Attaches/Assistant Information Officers/Assistant Press Attaches, 5 Publicity Officers, 119
India based ministerial staff and 350 locally recruited personnel.
One post of a Cultural Attache was sanctioned during the year
for the information Service of India at Kathmandu.
A new publicity organisation, headed by a Press Attache, was,
created in Lagos (Nigeria). There were pressing demands from
many Missions for the creation of Publicity Wings, but these could
not be met owing to financial stringency.
(x) Budget and Expenditure.-The total budgetary provision for
the External Publicity Division, including Information Units,
amounted to Rs. 1,06,37,800. Of this Rs. 24,99,000 accounted for
expenditure at headquarters.
(xi) Estimates Committee.-Comprehensive evidence on various
aspects of the organisation and working of the External Publicity
Division was tendered before the Estimates Committee of Parlia-

ment. The Estimates Committee has referred in its report to the
Government's awareness of the importance of public relations. The
suggestions and observations made by the Committee are being kept
in view in planning future publicity programmes.
K. MISCELLANEOUS
(i) Central Passport and Emigration Organization.-The decisions arrived at the Conference of Regional Passport Officers held
in September 1960, were fully implemented during the year.
Regional Passport Offices now deal with applications more
promptly. A more simplified procedure for filing applications for
passports enabled District authorities to verify them more expeditiously.
A pamphlet, briefly indicating the procedure for the grant of
Tourist-and other visas for India, was forwarded to all Indian Missions and Posts abroad, with instructions to have copies of it made
in the local official languages for general information and guidance.
Passports.-During the period under review, 504 diplomatic
passports, 3,695 official passports, 367 official India-Pakistan passports
and one Emergency Certificate were issued to officials going abroad
on official assignments. 2,868 visas were granted to foreigners posted in their respective Missions in India.
<pg70>
The position of applications for passports in the five Regional
Passport Offices at Bombay, Madras, Calcutta, Delhi and Lucknow
during the period under review is:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------Applications for passports
-------------------------------------R.P.O.
Received
Accepted
Rejected
No. o
f cases
closed
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Bombay
21560
19781
1576
838
Madras
11758
11155
89
613
Delhi
13467
11711
1434
1059
Calcutta
10592
10100
136
1059
Lucknow
3679
3404
142
170
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Total
61056
56151
3377
3771
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Closed cases mostly consisted of applications of applicants who
have not replied to the queries of the Regional Passport Officers.
3,138 appeals received in the Ministry from 1 January 1961 to
31 March 1962 and 3,004 were dealt with.
Emigration.-Departure of unskilled workers from India to Burma,
Ceylon, Malaya, Singapore and other countries continued to be
banned. Exceptions however were made of wives and minor children
of unskilled workers settled in Ceylon, Malaya and Singapore.
There has been a general increase in requests from Asian-African
countries for recruitment of doctors, teachers and technicians from
India. Such requests have been met as expeditiously as possible,
subject to the provisions of the Indian Emigration Act, 1922, when
applicable, and the availability of such personnel.
Measures to check illicit emigration to Ceylon were intensified
and, according to the latest reports received from the authorities
concerned, there has been a considerable decrease in the illicit
traffic to that country. The following figures show the number of
deportees arriving at Dhanuskodi after being deported by the
Government of Ceylon as illicit emigrants during the period from
August 1960 to October 1961:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------1960
1961
1962
August
361 January
143 August
66 January 42
September 346 February 90
September 94 February 90
October
346 March
216 October 244
November 120 April
116 November 108
December
82 May
198 December 65
June
240
July
113
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg71>
There was a considerable decrease in the number of deportees
from Ceylon. The comparative figures are:-------------------------------------------------------------------Year
Total number of deportees
1960

3657

1961
1693
-------------------------------------------------------------------In view of the many complaints received by the Government
about the maltreatment of domestic female servants in Kuwait and
other Persian Gulf territories, executive orders have been issued
completely banning the emigration of Indian women to those
territories for domestic service.
Administration.-Steps were taken to place the Central Passport
and Emigration organization on a permanent basis. All eligible
officers in the organisation were confirmed. A senior officer of
Grade I of IFS(B) was posted as Regional Passport Officer, Bombay..
The total strength of the Central Passport and Emigration Office
is: Gazetted 33 and non-Gazetted 231. The split-up, region-wise, is
as follows:------------------------------------------------------------------------------Delhi Madras Calcutta Bombay Lucknow
------------------------------------------------------------------------------Per. Tem. Per. Tem. Per. Tem.
Per. Tem. Per. Tem
.
Gazetted

5

1

Non-Gazetted. 29

8
8

12
69

3

2

13 24

7
9

1

1

3

38

18

10

13

------------------------------------------------------------------------------All Regional Passport Offices were inspected by the Chief Passport Officer during the period. The Joint Secretary Incharge also
inspected the Calcutta, Bombay and Madras Offices. As a result of
these inspections, several improvements were made.
(ii) Haj.-As usual, the Government of India made necessary
arrangements to facilitate the Haj pilgrimage to Saudi Arabia by
Indian Muslims.
Next to Yemen and Egypt, the largest number of pilgrims21,357-went for the Haj from India in 1961. A special contingent of
4 doctors (including a lady doctor) and four compounders, equipped
with the necessary supply of medicines, was also sent to Saudi
Arabia. This contingent was in addition to the permanent dispensary at Mecca and the seasonal dispensary, which is established at,
Jeddah during the Haj season every year.
<pg72>
The term of the Central Haj Committee, originally constituted

in 1948 to advise the Central Government on matters relating to
the Haj, was extended by another year. The committee generally
holds three meetings at Bombay and renders valuable advice to the
Government of India on Haj matters.
(iii) Legal and Treaties Division.-The editing work on the Treaty
volume for the year 1958 has been completed and is being sent to
the press for printing. The editing work on the other volumes of
Treaties since 1947 is now in hand.
(iv) Consular Division.-It has been decided to publish a separate
Consular Manual on the basis of the relevant chapters of the
Foreign Service Instructions and other circulars issued from time
to time.
140 documents, consisting of Letters of Request, Commissions
and other processes, were received from the courts in India for
transmission to courts abroad and vice versa and were forwarded
to the authorities concerned after due scrutiny.
The revision of the existing arrangements for service of summons
under section 29(c) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, with Nepal,
France, Spain, the Soviet Union, Kenya, and the United Arab
Republic could not be completed due to the final replies from these
Governments not being received. It is the same with Belgium and
Japan. The Government of Kenya have agreed to continue the
existing arrangements.
Negotiations for making such arrangements with some other
countries which had been initiated in previous years, were pursued.
Burma was declared to be a reciprocating country for this purpose.
The proposal to make similar arrangements with Brazil has been
dropped for want of reciprocity. Pending decision about the mode
of transmission of summons, arrangements with the Federal Republic of Germany and Switzerland have not yet been completed.
With Canada, Argentina, Thailand and Hong Kong correspondence
continues.
No decision could be taken regarding reciprocal arrangements
under section 44A of the Code of Civil Procedure of 1908 to facilitate
the execution of decrees obtained from Indian courts in the Colony
of Tobago and Trinidad and Japan and vice versa, for want of
final replies from their Governments. The proposal to make such
arrangements with Australia has been abandoned for want of sufficient reciprocity.
<pg73>
The proposed arrangements under section 504(3) and 508A of
the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1898, for taking evidence of witnesses in criminal cases with Nepal, the Federal Republic of
Germany, Ghana and Nigeria were pursued. Negotiations for
entering into similar arrangements with Czechoslovakia, Fiji, the
United Arab Republic, the Central African Federation and Mauritius

have been initiated this year.
Action to make reciprocal arrangements under section 14 of the
Notaries Act. 1952 for the mutual recognition of Notarial acts performed by Notaries with the remaining countries which could not
be completed last year were pursued. The Government of Hungary
agreed to enter into such arrangements, and Hungary has been
declared as a reciprocating country. Proposals to make similar
arrangements with Spain, the United Arab Republic, Afghanistan,
Muscat, Yugoslavia, Bulgaria, Brazil, Australia and the Democratic
Republic of Vietnam have been abandoned for want of reciprocity.
The revision of the existing reciprocal arrangements under section 57 of the Administrator General's Act, 1913 (whereby Indian
Diplomatic and Consular Officers are permitted to administer the
estates of deceased Indian nationals dying intestate abroad) with the
Netherlands, Thailand, Argentina, Iraq and Costa Rica are pending
decision. Their final replies are awaited.
47 persons were repatriated from foreign countries. The State
Governments concerned have been asked to recover the repatriation charges from all of them. An amount of Rs. 6,015.47 nP. was
advanced to the repatriates. A sum of Rs. 13,082.57 nP. had to be
written off due to the indigent circumstances of some of the
repatriates.
During the period under review, a disaster, involving a large
number of Indians, occured on the British Steamship Company's
S. S. "Dara". Of the 300 survivors, 75 per cent were Indians.
Arrangements were made to assist these persons at Bahrein, Karachi
and Bombay. Since the shipping company undertook the responsibility for their maintenance in Bombay, no expenditure was incurred by the Government of India on this account.
At present, financial assistance is granted by a Mission to Indian
citizens stranded abroad against the security of Travellers Cheques
and letters of authorisation to bankers in India to repay the amount
advanced. A total amount of Rs. 6,903.87 nP. was granted as financial assistance during the year under review. Out of this amount
a sum of Rs. 2,527.80 nP. has been repaid and efforts are being made
<pg74>
to recover the balance. Besides, an amount of Rs. 170.00 was incurred on the transportation of Indian citizens from troubled areas
in Laos to safer places. These persons were also allowed to deposit.
their valuables with the Embassy.
The Ministry dealt with 43 extradition cases of offenders from
or to India and 53 deportation cases of Indians from abroad.
The grant of Indian citizenship is mainly the concern of the
Ministry of Home Affairs. This Ministry is, however, called upon
to give comments on each application before a final decision is
taken. Besides, the Ministry also handled cases specific-ally referred

to it by Missions for reconsideration of the decisions of the Home
Ministry, and those received from foreign Missions in India or from
private parties. 59 such cases were dealt with.
31 enquiries seeking advice on Indian laws were received from
Indian Missions abroad and foreign Missions in India.
The work relating to the welfare of Indian seamen abroad is
normally dealt with by the Ministry of Transport and Communications. However, some cases relating to seamen are referred by
Missions to this Ministry. 26 such cases involving differences between
seamen and shipping companies, arrests and imprisonment of
seamen abroad, collision between Indian and foreign ships etc. were
dealt with. Several old pension claims, etc. of Indians, pending
with foreign Governments, were also pursued through the Indian
Missions concerned.
During the Second World War, evacuees from, War Zones who
took refuge in India were given repayable advances by the Government of India. The scheme of granting financial assistance to
evacuees commenced in 1942 and closed at the end of February
1948 when the evacuees returned to the places from where they
had been evacuated. A sum of Rs. 7.18 crores was involved.
Recovery of the advances started in March 1948. The policy has
been to effect recoveries taking the financial position of the evacuees
and their capacity to repay into account so as not to cause undue
hardship. The Government of India had their own agency for the
recovery of these advances till June 1958. Since then the work
has been entrusted to the respective State Governments, except West
Bengal, where the work is done by the Burma Loan Recovery Section, under the direct control of the Regional Passport Officer of
Calcutta. The Missions in Burma. Malaya and Singapore are also
effecting recoveries from those at present residing within their
jurisdiction.
<pg75>
Details of the amount recovered, the amount written off and the,
balance outstanding, on 31 December 1957, were given to the Public
Accounts Committee. Of a total amount of Rs. 7.18 crores advanced, only Rs. 28.3 lakhs were recovered; Rs. 196.07 lakhs have been
written off; and Rs. 508.8 lakhs are still outstanding. The rate of
recovery has not been encouraging. It was felt that it might take
decades to complete the work. It was suggested that the whole
of the outstanding amount could be written off, or ways and means
devised to expedite recoveries pending in the States. The Public
Accounts Committee left it to the Government to decide this.
It has been decided to continue recoveries when the possibilities
of it are `good' and write off the amount when they are `bad'. A team
of two officers of the Union Government representing the Ministry of
Finance and the Ministry of External Affairs, has been in touchwith the various State Governments to explore the possibilities of

quick decision on claims involving amounts over Rs. 1,000/-.
India's claims against the Government of Burma, referred to in,
the Annual Report for the year 1960-61, have not yet been settled-'
although efforts were continued to this end.
*Figures relating to important consular items handled by,
Missions are given below:1. Number of cases relating to estates of deceased Indians abroad
handled :
287
2. Number of passports, visas and emergency certificates issued
(a) Passports.
2
9,489
(b) Visas
2,0
2,709
(c) Emergency certificates
9
,736
3. Total revenue from the consular services rendered :
Rs. 15,23,
514.76 nP.
4. Total number of Indians repatriated and the amount spent on
them :
(a) No
3
5
(b) Amount
Rs. 13,4
75.69 nP
5. Number of Indian citizens stranded abroad to whom financial
assistance was granted and the amount of such assistance :
(a) No
28
(b) Amount
Rs. 5,
939-08 nP.
6. Number of deportation cases handled :
1,765
Due to exchange control regulations in some countries, the Missions
were called upon to assist Indian nationals in obtaining remittance
facilities from the local authorities for their dependants in India.
Similar assistance for the repatriation of assets was rendered to
-----------------------------------------------------------------------*Figures to 31 December 1961 based on reports from 75 Missions
only.
<pg76>
Indian citizens who wound up their affairs in the countries concerned for settlement in India. Further, in countries where the stay
permit system exists, Missions helped Indian citizens in securing
them for themselves and their wives and dependants.

(v) Economic and Co-ordination Division.-This Division has been
functioning in the Ministry from 15 July 1961. The principal functions of this Division are to advise the Minister for External Affairs,
the senior officers and the Territorial Divisions in the Ministry of
External Affairs on international economic questions from the political angle; to coordinate within the Ministry the economic aspects
of the work of various Territorial Divisions and help in the development of a closely integrated politico-economic policy; and to
represent the views of the Ministry to other Ministries of the
Government concerned with economic, financial or technical matters.
In addition, the Division scrutinises reports from Indian Commercial/
Trade representatives abroad with a view to the proper utilisation
of the information contained therein,
prepares briefs for Indian
delegations and representatives on the United Nations and other
international economic conferences and commissions and studies,
from the point of view of India's foreign and economic policies, the
economic policies, including foreign aid programmes of other
countries.
The Division briefed various Indian Missions abroad on the
Government's views on the question of Britain's possible accession
to the European Common Market. The Division participated in
trade and financial talks with foreign Governments. Briefs for the
Indian Delegation to the 19th session of the GATT, prepared by the
Commerce and Industry Ministry, have also been examined in the
Division.
(vi) Diplomatic Missions and Consular Posts in India.---At the
end of the period under review there were 50 Embassies, 9 High
Commissions and 3 Legations, including the Apostolic Internunciature. During the year diplomatic relations were established with
Jordan, Syria, Tanganyika and Venezuela; and the Legations of
Bulgaria and Lebanon were raised to Embassies. A list of the diplomatic Missions in India and a list of the sub-offices of the High
Commissions of the Commonwealth countries are given at Appendix
III.
Total number of foreign Consular Posts at the end of the year
was 104. The. Consulate (Honorary) of the Netherlands at Calcutta
was converted into a Consulate General (Honorary) and Consulates
General of Syria and Kuwait were opened at Bombay during the
<pg77>
year. A list of Foreign Consular Offices in India is given at Appendix
IV.
(vii) Distinguished Visitors from Abroad.-Among the distinguished visitors to India since last year's report were Mr. Tom
Mboya of, Kenya (2 of 11 January 1961); Her Majesty Queen
Elizabeth II and His Royal Highness Prince Philip (21 January to
1 February 1961 and 16 February to 2 March 1961); His Highness
the Maharaja of Sikkim (23 January to 20 February 1961); His

Highness the Maharaja of Bhutan accompanied by Mr. Jigmie
P. Dorji, the Prime Minister (8 February to 26 February 1961);
H.E. Mr. N. Kosygin, First Deputy Chairman of the Council of
Ministers, USSR, accompanied by Mrs. Kosygin (20 February to
4 March 1961); a National Assembly Delegation from Bhutan comprising of 43 Members (15 February to 31 March 1961); the Rt.
Hon'ble Earl Attlee, former Prime Minister of the U.K. (21 February
to 8 March 1961); Mr. K. Roberts, Accountant-General of Malaya
(4 to 7 March 1961); H.E. Mr. Zakir Hussain, Home Minister of
Pakistan (8 to 14 March 1961); Mr. Souvanna Phouma, former Prime
Minister of Laos (18 to 22 March 1961); Dr. Rambaran Mishre,
Minister of Agriculture, Government of Surinam accompanied by
Mrs. Mishre (24 March to 7 April 1961); Dr. A. H. van Sherpenberg,
Secretary of State of the Federal Republic of Germany accompanied
by Madame Sherpenberg (29 March to 2 April 1961); H.E. Mr. Dean
Rusk, Secretary of State of the U.S.A. accompanied by Mrs. Rusk
[30 (fore-noon) March to 30 (after-noon) March 1961]; H.E. M.
Couve de Murville, Foreign Minister of France accompanied by
Madame Couve de Murville (1 to 3 April 1961); His Holiness the
Dalai Lama (15 to 20 April 1961); T.E. Mr. Leon Mayrand, Commissioner, Canadian Delegation to the I.C.S.C. Conference on Laos
(26 April to 7 May 1961); H.E. Mr. Jerzy Michalowski, Commissioner,
Polish Delegation to the I.C.S.C. Conference on Laos (26 April to
7 May 1961); The Hon'ble Mr. S. Shriver, Director, Peace Corps
Organisation of the U.S.A. (30 April to 4 May-1961); Chief Abdula
Fundikira, Minister of Legal Affairs and Mr. Rashidi Kawawa,
Minister without portfolio, Government of Tanganyika (5 to 10 May
1961); Mr. Parikshit Narsingh Rana, Joint Secretary, Finance,
Government of Nepal (10 to 21 May 1961); Mr. Busnaik, ViceMinister of Czechoslovakia, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Foreign
Trade (6 to 9 May 1961); Dr. J. G. Geiger, Director, Public Health
of San Francisco accompanied by Mrs. Geiger (13 to 17 May 1961);
Mr. Ahmed Shukairy, Minister of State for U.N., Government of
Saudi Arabia (18 to 20 May 1961); H.E. Mr. Lyndon B. Johnson,
Vice-President of the U.S.A., accompanied by Mrs. Johnson (18 to
20 May 1961); H.E. Mr. Luis Guevara Ortuzar, Governor of Valparaiso (Chile) accompanied by Mrs. Guevara (15 to 21 June 1961.);
<pg78>
Dato Abdul Aziz bin Abdul Majid, Permanent Secretary, PrimeMinister's Department, Federation of Malaya accompanied by Datin
Abdul Aziz (18 to June 1961); H.E. Madame Supeni, Roving
Ambassador of the Republic of Indonesia, accompanied by Mr. Surio
Chandro, Chief of Cabinet to the Foreign Minister of Indonesia (20
to 22 June 1961); H.E. Dr. Eric Williams, Prime Minister of Trinidad
and Tobago accompanied by H.E. Mr. (now Sir) Learie Constantine,
Minister of Transport (25 to 30 June 1961); H.E. Dr. M. 1. Okpara,
Premier of Eastern Region of Nigeria (3 to 23 July 1961); Lt. Gen.
K. M. Shaikh, Minister of Rehabilitation, Government of Pakistan
(6 to 8 July 1961); The Rt. Hon'ble Peter Thorneycroft, M.P.,
Minister of Aviation, Government of U.K. (12 to 16 July 1961); a
Bhutanese Delegation led by Rai Bahadur T. K. Densapa (27 July
to 1 August 1961); H.E. Mr. Habib Chatty, Special Envoy of Tunisian

President (7 to 10 August 1961); Alhaji Muhammadu Rabadu,
Defence Minister of Nigeria (14 to 21 August 1961); Dr. Kurt Hager,
Special Envoy of the German Democratic Republic accompanied by
Dr. Wendel, Deputy Foreign Minister and Secretary (17 to 19 August
1961); a Pakistani Delegation led by Mr. S. K. Dahlavi, Foreign Secretary, Government of Pakistan, for the Indo-Pakistan Conference
to review Grounds Rules (19 to 26 August 1961); Mr. Raul Juliet
Gomez, M.P. from Chile accompanied by Mrs. Gomez (20 to 24
August 1961); Mr. Juan Martinez Camps, M.P. from Chile accompanied by Mrs. Camps (20 to 27 August 1961); H.E. Dr. Ferenc
Munnich, Chairman of the Hungarian Revolutionary Workers' and
Peasants' Government, accompanied by Mrs. Munnich (24 to 27
August 1961); H.E. U Nu, Prime Minister of Burma (28 to 30 August
1961); Their Majesties the King and Queen of Nepal (28 to 29 August
1961); Mr. Jigmie P. Dorji, Prime Minister of Bhutan (10 to 16
September 1961); The Hon'ble Mr. P. B. G. Kalugalla, Minister of
Transport and Works, Government of Ceylon accompanied by Mr.
W. A. E. Molamure, General Manager, Air Ceylon (15 to 21 September 1961); Mr. Tom Mboya and Mr. M. C. Chokwe, African Leaders
[18 September (fore-noon) to 18 September (after-noon) 19611;
The Hon'ble Mr. Juscelino Kubitschek de Oliveira, former President of Brazil (6 to 10 October 1961); H.E. Mr. Aleksander Zawadzki,
President of the Polish People's Republic (11 to 14 October 1961);
Mr. Angel Faivovich, M.P. from Chile accompanied by Mrs. Faivovich
(12 to 22 October 1961); Mr. Abdel Karim-el-Khatib, Minister of
African Affairs, Morocco (20 to 24 October 1961); Mr. Thomas Kanza,
Special Envoy of Congo (20 to 26 October 1961); a Goodwill Delegation from Kuwait led by Mr. S. Alsana (20 to 27 October 1961);
H.E. Mr. Nsilo Swai, Minister of Commerce and Industry of the
Government of Tanganyika (21 to 23 October 1961); and His Majesty
the King of Nepal (26 to 27 October 1961); His Excellency Mr.
<pg79>
Hayato Ikeda, Prime Minister of Japan, accompanied by Mrs. Ikeda
(20 to 23 November 1961); a Goodwill Delegation from the Committee for External Affairs of the French National Assembly (22
November to 5 December 1961); Major Yuri Gagarin, the Russian
Cosmonaut accompanied by Mrs. V. Gagarin (29 November to 7
December 1961); Dr. Arturo Frondizi, the then President of the
Republic of Argentina accompanied by Mrs. Frondizi (4 to 8 December 1961); H.E. Dr. Pham Ngoc Thach, Health Minister of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam (6 to 12 December 1961); Sir Francis
Ibiam, Governor of Eastern Nigeria and Lady Ibiam (6 to 12 December 1961); His Majesty The Yang-di-Pertuan Agong, Paramount
Ruler of Malaya accompanied by Raja Permaisuri Agong (7 to 28
December 1961); His Excellency Mr. L. I. Brezhnev, President of the
Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the U.S.S.R. and Mrs. Brezhnev
(15 to 29 December 1961); a Nigerian delegation to the All-India
Women's Conference comprising Lady Abayomi; Mrs. Ibrahim, Mrs.
Isa Wali and Miss Uloma Wachuku (3 to 27 January 1962); Hon'ble
Mr. A. Beejadhur, Minister for Education and Cultural Affairs of
the Government of Mauritius (6 to 10 January and 28 to 30 January
1962); H.E. U Nu, Prime Minister of Burma (11 to 17 January 1962);

Sir William Worsley, President of the M.C.C. accompanied by Lady
Worsley and their son, Mr. Oliver Worsley (16 to 22 and 25 January
to 1 February 1962); H.E. Mr. Viggo Kampmann, Prime Minister of
Denmark, accompanied by Mrs. Kampmann (18 to 29 January 1962);
The Hon'ble Mr. A. P. Jayasuriya, Health Minister of Ceylon accompanied by his daughter (22 to 30 January 1962); H.E. Field Marshal
Abdel Hakim Amer, Vice-President of the United Arab Republic
(24 January to 1 February 1962); The Hon'ble O. Akinfosile, Minister of Communications, Nigeria (13 to 19 February 1962), Burmese
Election Commission led by U Tin, Chief Election Commissioner
(15 February to 6 March 1962); Dr. Abdul Monei Mufti of the United Arab Republic (18 to 22 February 1962); Mr. Meyer Dohm and
Mr. Schneider, German Experts in connection with setting up of the
Printing Press offered as a Gift by the West German Government
(from 27 February to 29 March 1962); Mrs. John F. Kennedy, wife
of the President of the United States accompanied by her sister,
Princess Radziwill (12 to 21 March 1962); Dr. Bockelmann, Lord
Mayor of Frankfurt and Mrs. Bockelmann (14 March to 1 April
1962); H.E. Mr. J. R. Marshal, Deputy Prime Minister of New
Zealand (18 to 20 March 1962); Dr. Mohammad Hatta, former VicePresident of Indonesia (24 to 28 March 1962) ; and H.E. Air ViceMarshal Iskandar, Air Communications Minister of Indonesia accompanied by Mrs. Iskandar (28 March to 4 April 1962).
INDIA
BHUTAN BANGLADESH USA PORTUGAL FRANCE AFGHANISTAN PAKISTAN CANADA BURMA
CHINA NEPAL YUGOSLAVIA LATVIA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC SRI LANKA TUNISIA
AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND CAMBODIA VIETNAM LAOS SWITZERLAND INDONESIA FIJI
PHILIPPINES MONGOLIA TOTO PERU JAPAN KOREA UNITED KINGDOM IRAN IRAQ JORDAN
KUWAIT LEBANON OMAN TURKEY SAUDI ARABIA SYRIA ALGERIA MOROCCO LIBYA SUDAN
SIERRA LEONE GHANA GABON NIGER NIGERIA MALI SENEGAL GUINEA CONGO LIBERIA
SOUTH AFRICA ANGOLA KENYA UGANDA ETHIOPIA MAURITIUS AUSTRIA BELGIUM
BULGARIA CYPRUS NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK FINLAND GERMANY GREECE HUNGARY
ITALY THE NETHERLANDS POLAND ROMANIA SAN MARINO RUSSIA SPAIN SWEDEN MEXICO
CHILE VENEZUELA BOLIVIA COSTA!!ARGENTINA BRAZIL PARAGUAY URUGUAY CUBA
REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE MALDIVES EGYPT YEMEN HONG KONG THAILAND
Mar 31, 1961

United Nations
PART III
A. UNITED NATIONS
(i) A special session of the General Assembly was held on Aug 21, 1961,

to consider the grave situation in Tunisia. It continued
for five days and adopted a resolution, co-sponsored by India,
Yugoslavia and thirty African-Asian States, which recognised the
sovereignty of Tunisia over Bizerta and called upon France and
Tunisia to enter into immediate negotiations for the withdrawal of
all French armed forces from Tunisia, in accordance with the principles of the United Nations Charter.
(ii) The sixteenth session of the General Assembly was held in
New York from 20 February 1962. It will be resumed in June 1962
to consider further action regarding Ruanda-Urundi. The first part
of the session opened in the wake of the Secretary-General's death
in an air crash in Ndola on 18 September. The Assembly adopted a
resolution, co-sponsored by India and other member States, setting
up an Investigation Commission of five eminent persons to enquire
into the conditions and circumstances resulting in the death of Mr.
Hammarskjold and other members of his party. Meanwhile the
Assembly, on the recommendation of the Security Council, appointed
U Thant of Burma as Acting Secretary-General on 3 November 1961
for the unexpired period of the term of late Mr. Hammarskjold, that
is, till 10 April 1963.
(iii) Disarmament.-A large number of resolutions relating to
disarmament and reflecting the urgency and importance attached to
the problem, were left at the end of the first part of the fifteenth
session of the General Assembly for further consideration when the
session was resumed in March 1961. These included a draft, cosponsored by India, which listed directives for the detailed negotiations which needed to be resumed after the failure of the Disarmament Committee of ten Nations in Geneva in June 1960. At the
resumed session, the delegates of the Soviet Union and the United
States informed the General Assembly that they would be holding
direct negotiations on the problems involved and would report to
the Assembly at its sixteenth session. Further consideration of the
item was therefore deferred till that session.
When the General Assembly convened in September 1961, the
United States and Soviet delegates announced that they had agreed
on a set of General Principles which should provide the basis for a
<pg80>
<pg81>
detailed programme of complete and general disarmament. These
general principles were broadly similar to those contained in the
resolution India had co-sponsored at the fifteenth session; and
although the agreed principles did not go far enough in some respects, India welcomed the United States-Soviet agreement.
Further negotiations were held informally in New York to settle
the main outstanding problem, namely, the composition of a new
negotiating body. It was eventually agreed that the Committee of
10 Nations should be expanded to 18, with Brazil, Burma, Ethiopia,

India, Mexico, Nigeria, Sweden and the United Arab Republic joining
Bulgaria, Canada, Czechoslovakia, France, Italy, Poland, Rumania,
the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States as
members. By resolution 1722(XVI) the General Assembly endorsed
this agreement and requested the new Committee to undertake
negotiations urgently on the basis of the Soviet-American statement of agreed principles, with a view to reaching agreement on
general and complete disarmament under effective international
control.
The conference which had been held at Geneva between the
Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States of America
on a treaty to ban nuclear tests, survived the breakdown of the Disarmament Conference of ten countries, but little progress was made
towards agreement. After the Conference of 18 countries convened
at Geneva in March 1962, the United States and the United Kingdom
presented a draft treaty which they modifled in certain respects at
subsequent meetings. The Soviet Union expressed objection to
various provisions but the main point of disagreement was the
question of inspection. The Western Powers considered on-site
inspection essential for small underground tests, which they maintained might otherwise be indistinguishable from earthquakes, while
the Soviet Union considered national detection systems adequate for
the purpose.
On 30 August 1961, the Soviet Union declared that they were
resuming nuclear testing, as Western military strength and
`aggressive' designs had made this necessary in the interests of Soviet
security. The Western Powers denounced their resumption and on 3
September offered to sign a treaty banning all tests which could be
detected but this was rejected by the Soviet Union. The United
States thereupon, at first, decided to resume testing underground only;
but in February 1962, she announced that she would be compelled to
hold tests above ground also, unless a treaty banning all tests was
concluded by the end of April 1962.
The dangers posed by the resumption of nuclear testing aroused
worldwide anxiety. The Government of India have consistently
<pg82>
urged the suspension of nuclear tests and deeply regretted their
resumption. At its sixteenth session the General Assembly passed no
less than seven resolutions relating to this issue. The Government of
India proposed an item, entitled "Continuation of suspension of
nuclear and thermonuclear tests and obligation of states to refrain
from their renewal" and presented a draft resolution which was
adopted by the Assembly. The resolution urged the Powers concerned to refrain from further test explosions, pending the conclusion
of necessary, internationally binding agreements, and called upon
them to reach such agreements expeditiously. Another resolution,
appealed to the Soviet Government to refrain from exploding a 50megaton bomb in the atmosphere; a second urged the states engaged
in the Geneva negotiations to conclude a treaty permanently pro-

hibiting nuclear weapons tests under effective control; a third called
upon member states to consider and respect Africa as a denuclearised zone; the fourth declared the use of nuclear and thermonuclear weapons to be contrary to the UN Charter and requested the
Secretary-General to consult member states regarding the signing
of a convention for this purpose; the fifth requested the SecretaryGeneral to enquire into conditions under which countries not possessing nuclear weapons might be willing to undertake to refrain from
manufacturing or otherwise acquiring such weapons; and the sixth
called upon states to reach an agreement under which states not
possessing nuclear weapons would undertake not to manufacture such
weapons or otherwise acquire control over them while states possessing nuclear weapons would refrain from relinquishing control of
such weapons and from transmitting information for their manufacture to other states.
At the end of November 1961 the Soviet Union agreed to resume
discussions at Geneva on nuclear testing with the United States and
the United Kingdom but the respective points of view en inspection
remained as wide apart as ever. On 16 January 1962, the talks
adjourned indefinitely. In February 1962, the American President
and the British Prime Minister suggested to the Soviet Prime Minister
that their Foreign Ministers meet in advance of the 18-Nation Disarmament Committee, to consider particularly the nuclear test aspect,
and that the Committee itself should be attended by Foreign Ministers. The Soviet Premier proposed that the Conference should be
attended by Heads of Government or State, but eventually agreed to
the Western proposal. The Prime Minister of India, who was also
addressed by Mr. Khrushchev, replied that the participation at the
Geneva Conference by Heads of State or Government should prove
useful, but for practical reasons hoped that it might take place at the
end of April, after the Conference had been in session for some time.
The Foreign Ministers of Britain, the Soviet Union and the United
<pg83>
States met on 11 March; and the Conference of 18 countries began
on 14 March. The Indian delegation was led by the Minister of
Defence, whose suggestion that the 3 Nuclear Powers form a subCommittee on nuclear tests was accepted. France decided not to,
attend the conference.
(iv) Admission of new members.-The total United Nations
membership rose to 104 during the sixteenth session by the admission
of Sierra Leone, Mauritania, Mongolia and Tanganyika and the
resumption of separate membership by Syria.
(v) Among other important decisions taken by the General
Assembly were:
(a) Representation of China.-The Assembly this time discussed
the question in the plenary session but rejected the Soviet proposal
to replace the Kuomintang representatives by that of the People's
Republic of China. By another resolution it laid down that the

question of the representation of China was an important question
and therefore required a two-thirds majority for decision.
(b) Algeria.-The Assembly expressed regret at the suspension of
negotiations between the Government of France and the Provisional
Government of the Algerian Republic and called upon them to
resume negotiations with a view to implementing the right of the
Algerian people to self-determination and independence and
respecting the unity and territorial integrity of Algeria.
(c) Colonialism.-After considering the situation regarding the
implementation of the declaration on the granting of independence
to colonial countries, the Assembly expressed regret that the provisions of the declaration had not been largely carried out and
showed concern that acts aimed at the partial or total disruption of
the national unity of colonial territories were still being carried out
in certain countries. It set up a Special Committee of seventeen
members to examine the application of the declaration. The President of the Assembly has nominated the following countries to serve
on the Committee: Australia, Cambodia, Ethiopia, India, Italy,
Madagascar, Mali, Poland, Syria, Tanganyika, Tunisia, the Soviet
Union, the United Kingdom, the United States, Uruguay, Venezuela
and Yugoslavia.
(d) Non-self-governing Territories.-The Assembly condemned
Portugal for her non-compliance with the previous resolution of the
Assembly asking her to furnish information on territories under its
administration and for its refusal to co-operate in the work of the.
Committee on Information from Non-self-governing Territories. The,
Assembly further established a special Committee of seven members
<pg84>
to examine available information concerning Portuguese territories
and to submit a report. The Assembly also discussed the question
whether Southern Rhodesia had attained a full measure of selfgovernment and referred the question to the Special Committee of
seventeen nations for consideration with a request to submit a report
to the seventeenth session of the Assembly.
(e) Trust territories.-Two more Trust territories achieved independence, Tanganyika on 9 December 1961 and Western Samoa on
1 January 1962.
(f) South West Africa.-The Assembly dissolved the existing
Committee on South West Africa and established a new United
Nations Special Committee of seven members for South West Africa
with the following objectives:
(a) Visit to South Africa.
(b) Evacuation of all military forces of South African Government from the territory.

(c) Release of all political prisoners.
(d) Repeal of laws establishing apartheid and those meant for
confining the indigenous inhabitants in reserves.
(e) Preparations for general elections to the Legislative
Assembly based on universal adult suffrage.
(f) Advice and assistance to the Government resulting from
the general elections.
(g) Co-ordination of economic and social assistance.
(h) Return of indigenous inhabitants to the territory without
risk for their political activities.
(g) Angola.-The problem of Angola was discussed by the
Assembly at its resumed session when it examined the report of the
sub-committee appointed at the fifteenth session. A resolution was
adopted by the Assembly regretting Portugual's refusal to recognise
Angola as a Non-self-governing Territory. It expressed the view
that Portugal's refusal to recognize the legitimate aspirations of the
Angolan people for self-determination and independence constituted
a permanent source of international friction threatening international
peace and security and recommended to the Security Council to keep
the matter under constant review. It requested the member states
to deny Portugal any support and assistance which she might need
to suppress the Angolan people. It also urged Portugal to set up
freely elected political institutions in Angola with a view to transferring power to them and asked her to submit a report to the
seventeenth session. The Sub-Committee on Angola has been asked
<pg85>
to continue its work and also find out means for securing the implementation of this resolution.
(h) Security Council Elections.-Ghana and Venezuela were
elected to full two years term while Rumania and Philippines agreed
to serve for one year each in the three seats vacated by Ceylon,
Ecuador and Turkey. Ireland took Liberia's seat from 1 January
1962, as suggested earlier in the fifteenth session.
(i) Goa.-The Security Council met on 18 December 1961, at the
request of Portugal, to consider the Goa question following India's
action to liberate Goa, Daman and Diu. Two draft resolutions were
moved. One, cosponsored by Ceylon, Liberia and the United Arab
Republic, asked the Security Council to reject the Portuguese complaint of aggression against India and called upon Portugal to terminate hostile action and co-operate with India in the liquidation of
her colonial possessions in India. The second draft resolution. cosponsored by France, Turkey, the United Kingdom and the United
States, asked the Security Council to call for an immediate cessation

of hostilities and withdrawal of Indian forces immediately to
positions of 17 December 1961, and to urge the parties to seek solution
of their differences by peaceful means in accordance with the principles of the UN Charter. The first draft was rejected by the Council,
receiving only four votes of Ceylon, Liberia, the Soviet Union and
the United Arab Republic in favour, while the rest of the members
voted against it. The second resolution was also not adopted as,
besides 3 other negative votes, the Soviet Union-a permanent member also voted against it.
(vi) Economic and Social Council.-The Economic and Social
Council met for its 31st session in New York in April 1961. India
was not a member of the Economic and Social Council at that time
but due to important topics being on the agenda of the Council, she
was represented by an observer. One of the important items of the
agenda was of elections to the various functional Commissions of the
Council. India was elected to the Executive Board of the United
Nations Children's Fund, the Commission on Human Rights and the
the Population Commission. India did. not offer her candidature for
any other Commission or body.
The 32nd session of the Council was held in Geneva from 4 July
to 4 August 1961. India was again represented by an observer.
During the 16th session of the General Assembly, India was
elected member of the Economic and Social Council for term of
three years, with effect from 1 January 1962.
<pg86>
(vii) Commission on Human Rights.-The Commission on Human
Rights met for its 17th session in New York, from 20 February to 17
March 1961. India was represented by Shri C. S. Jha, Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations. Shri Jha was elected
Chairman of the Commission during this session.
The 18th session of the Commission on Human Rights is meeting.
in New York from 19 March to 13 April 1962. India is once again
being represented by Shri C. S. Jha.
(viii) All India U.N. Day Committee.-The All India United
Nations Day Committee which was formed under a notification issued
by the Ministry of External Affairs and whose Chairman at present
is Shrimati Rajen Nehru, celebrated the United Nations Day on 24
October 1961. Shrimati Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit was the chief guest
at this function.
A poster competition and an essay competition on an all-India
basis was organised by the Committee as part of the celebrations.
(ix) Asian African Legal Consultative Committee.-The 4th
session of the Committee, of which India is a member, was held in
Tokyo from 15 to 28 February 1961. The Government of India was

represented by its member on the Committee, Shri M. C. Setalvad,
assisted by two alternate members i.e., Shri Justice S. K. Dass, and,
Shri B. N. Lokur.
The 5th session of the Committee was held in Rangoon from
January 17 to 30 1962. India's delegation was led by Shri M. C.
Setalvad assisted by Shri B. N. Lokur and Dr. K. Krishna Rao as
alternate member and adviser respectively.
B INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES
India participated in a large number of conferences held abroad'
under the auspices of the United Nations and its Specialized
Agencies. Brief reports of Indian participation in the more
important of these conferences will be found in the reports of the
appropriate Ministries.
A list of the International Organisations, of which India is a
member, is attached as appendix VI.
TUNISIA
INDIA YUGOSLAVIA FRANCE USA BURMA SWITZERLAND BRAZIL ETHIOPIA MEXICO NIGER
NIGERIA SWEDEN BULGARIA CANADA ITALY NORWAY POLAND SLOVAKIA RUSSIA
MAURITANIA MONGOLIA SIERRA LEONE SYRIA CHINA ALGERIA CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC AUSTRALIA CAMBODIA MADAGASCAR MALI URUGUAY VENEZUELA PORTUGAL
WESTERN SAMOA SOUTH AFRICA ANGOLA GHANA PHILIPPINES ECUADOR IRELAND LIBERIA
TURKEY JAPAN
Aug 21, 1961

Appendix I Indian Missions abroad
Jan 01, 1961
APPENDIX I
Indian Missions abroad
--------------------------------------------------------------------------Embassies
Location
1

Afghanistan

2
Argentina
t
o Para-

Kabul
Buenos Aires

Concurrently accredited
guay and Uruguay as Ambassador and Minister

re
s3

pectively.
Austria

Vienna

4 Belgium
to Lu-

Brussels

xembourg as Ambassador.

5 Bolivia
Sa
ntiago
6 Brazil
accred
ited

Ambassador resident in
(Chile).
Rio-de-Janeiro
to

Ambassador

resident

grade.

8

Burma

Rangoon

9

Cambodia

Phnom Penh

10 Chile
accredited
to Boli-

Concurrently
Venezuela as Minister.

7 Bulgaria
i
n Bel-

Santiago

Concurrently
via and

Am
-

Columbia as

bassador.

11 China
accredite
d
to

Peking

12 Colombia
S
antiago
Congo

Concurrenty
Mongolia

Ambassador
.

13

Concurrently accredited

as

Ambassador resident in
(Chile).
Leopoldville

14 Cuba
M
exico.

Ambassador resident in

15 Cyprus
reside
nt at

High Commissioner

Beirut.
16 Czechoslovakia
accredi
ted
to

Prague

Rumania as Ambassador.

17 Denmark
St
ock18

Ethiopia

Concurrently

Ambassador resident in
holm.
Addis Ababa

19 Finland
S
tock-

Helsinki

20

France

Paris

21

Germany

Bonn

22
Be
l-

Greece

Ambassador resident in
holm.

Ambassador resident in
grade.

23 Hungary
M
os-

Budapest

Ambassador resident in
cow.

24 Guinea
A
ccra.

Ambassador resident in

25

Indonesia

Djakarta

26

Iran

Tehran

27

Iraq

Baghdad

------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg87>
<pg88>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------Embassies
Location
---------------------------------------------------------------------------28
Ireland
in
London.
29
Italy

Dublin

Ambassador resident

Rome

Concurrently

accredite
d to Al-

bania as Minister.

30
Ivory Coast
in
Dakar.
31

Japan

Ambassador resident

Tokyo

32
Jordan
in
Beirut.
33

Laos

34
Lebanon
accredite
d to Cy-

Ambassador resident

Vientiane
Beirut

Concurrently
prus as High

Commissio
ner

and Jordan as

Ambassad
or.
35
Liberia
in
Accra.

Ambassador resident

36
Libya
in
Cairo.

Ambassador resident

37
Luxumbourg
in
Brussels.

Ambassador resident

38

Malagasy

Tananarive

39
Mali
in
Accra.
40
Mexico
accredite
d to Cuba

Ambassador resident

Mexico City

as Ambassador.

41
Mongolia
in
Peking
42
Morocco
accredite
d to Tuni-

Concurrently

Ambassador resident

Rabat

Concurrently
sia as Ambassador.

43

Nepal

Kathmandu

44

Netherlands

The Hague

45

Norway

Oslo

46
Paraguay
in
Buenos

Ambassador resident
Aires.

47

Philippines

Manila

48

Poland

Warsaw

49
Rumania
in
Prague.

Bucharest

Resident Charge'd

A
ffair's.
50
Saudi Arabia.
accredite
d to the

Jeddah

Dakar

Ambassador.

52
Somalia
in
Port

Ambassador resident
Louis.

53

Spain

Madrid

54

Sudan

Khartoum
Stockholm

Minister
.

Concurrently
mark and Finland

am
56
Switzerland
accredite
d to the

Concurrently accreditd
Volta and the

Ivory
Coast as

55
Sweden
accredite
d to Den-

Concurrently
Yemen as

Ambassador
.
51
Senegal
t
o Upper

Ambassador resident

bassador.
Berne

Concurrently
Vatican as

57

Syria

Damascus

58

Thailand

Bangkok

59
Tunisia
in
Rabat.
60

Turkey

61
United Arab Republic
accredit
ed to Libya,

Ambassador resident

Ankara
Cairo

Conncurrently

as Ambassador
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg89>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------mbassies
Location
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------62 United States of America

Washington

63 Union of Soviet Socialist
t
o HunRepublic.

Moscow

Concurrently accredited
gary as Ambassador.

64 Upper Volta
Da
kar

Ambassador resident at

65 Yemen.
Je
ddah.

Ambassador resident at

66 Yugoslavia
t
o Greece

Belgrade

Concurrently accredited
and Bulgaria as

Ambassad
or.
High Commissions
1 Australia
accredit
ed
to,

Canberra

2

Canada

Ottawa

3

Ceylon.

Colombo

Concurrently
New Zealand.

4 Ghana
t
o Guinea

Accra

Concurrently accredited
and Liberia and Mali as

Am-

bassador, and to Sierra

Leone
5 Malaya
t
o Singa-

as High Commissioner.
Kuala

Lumpur

Concurrently accredited
pore, as Commissioner

an
d

also to the British

Nort
h

Bornco, territories of

B
runci

and Sarawak.

6 New Zealand
residen
t in

Wellington

7 Nigeria

Lagos

8 Pakistan

(a) Karachi
(b) Dacca

High Commissioner
Deputy High

(E. Pakistan)
(c) Rajshahi

Assistant High

Commissioner.

Commis
sioner

Canberra.

(E. Pakistan)

9 Sierra Leone
residen
t in
10 Tanganyika
11 United Kingdom
t
o Ire-

High Commissioner

High Commissioner
Accra.
Dar-es-Salaam
London

Concurrently accredited
land as Ambassador.

Legations
1 Albania
Rome
.

Minister resident in

2 Vatican

Minister resident in

Bern
e.
3 Vene zuela
Riode-

Minister resident in

4 Uruguay
Bucn
os

Minister resident in

Janeiro.

Aires.

Special Missions
1 Bhutan
reside
nt in

Political

Officer

Gangtok.

2 Sikkim.

Gangtok

3 United Nations

New York

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg90>
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Embassies
Location
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Commissions :
1

Aden

Aden

2 Central African Federaresid
ent in Nairotion (British).

Salisbury

3 East Africa (British)
Fede
ration of Rho-

Nairobi

bi.

missioner and

to Ruanda-

Urundi as

Cons
ul-General.
Fiji

Accredited to
desia and

Nyas
aland as Com-

4

Commissioner

Suva

5

Hong Kong

Hong Kong

6

Mauritius

Port Louis

7 Singapore
resid
ent in Kuala

Singapore

8 The West Indies and
Dutc
h Guiana
Guiana.
Consul-Gen
eral.

Port of Spain

9 Uganda
resid
ent in Nairobi

Commissioner
Lumpur.

.

Accredited to
as

.

Kampala

.

Sydney

Commissioner

Trade Commissions:
1

Australia

2

British East Africa

Mombasa.

3

Canada

Vancouver

4

Kuwait

Kuwait

Consulates General :
1

China

Shanghai

2 Denmark
Consul-Genera
l.

Copeahagen

Hon.

3 Dutch Guiana
res
ident in

Surinam

Consul-General

4

Germany

(a) Berlin
(b) Frankfurt.
(c) Hamburg.

5

Muscat

Muscat.

6 Ruanda-Urundi
res
ident
7 Switzerland
accre
dited as PerReprese
ntative to the

Trinidad.

Consul General
in

Nairobi.
Geneva

Concurrently
manent

European

offic
e of the United

Nations and

ot
her Internation-

al

Organisatio
ns at Geneva.
8

Tibet

9

United States of America.

Lhasa
(a) New York.
(b) San Francisco.

10

Vietnam (North)

Hanoi

11

Vietnam (South)

Saigon.

Consulates :
1 Germany

(a) Munich
(b) Stuttgart

2 Greece

Athens

Hon. Consul
Hon. Consul.
Hon. Consul.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg91>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Embassies
Location
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------3

Iran

Khorramshahr.

4

Indonesia

(a) Sourabaya
(b) Medan.

5

Iraq

Basra

6

Japan

Kobe.

Vice

Consulates

1

Afghanistan

(a) Jalalabad
(b) Kandahat

2

Burma

Mandalay

3

Iran

Zahidan

Trade
1

Agencies

Tibet

(a) Gyantse
(b) Gartok

Hon Consul.

(c) Yaung
-----------------------------------------------------------------------INDIA
AFGHANISTAN ARGENTINA URUGUAY AUSTRIA USA BELGIUM BOLIVIA CHILE
BRAZIL VENEZUELA BULGARIA BURMA CAMBODIA CHINA MONGOLIA COLOMBIA CONGO
CUBA CYPRUS LEBANON CZECH REPUBLIC NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK ETHIOPIA
FINLAND FRANCE GERMANY GREECE HUNGARY GUINEA INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ
IRELAND UNITED KINGDOM ITALY SENEGAL JAPAN JORDAN LAOS LIBERIA GHANA
LIBYA EGYPT MALI MEXICO MOROCCO NEPAL PARAGUAY PHILIPPINES POLAND
ROMANIA SAUDI ARABIA YEMEN SOMALIA SPAIN SUDAN SWEDEN SWITZERLAND
SYRIA THAILAND TUNISIA TURKEY RUSSIA YUGOSLAVIA AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND
CANADA SRI LANKA NIGER NIGERIA PAKISTAN BANGLADESH SIERRA LEONE ALBANIA
BHUTAN KENYA FIJI HONG KONG MAURITIUS REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE UGANDA
KUWAIT OMAN VIETNAM
Jan 01, 1961

Appendix II Indian Information Units Abroad

Jan 01, 1961
APPENDIX II
Indian Information Units Abroad
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.

Accra.
Buenos Aires.
Bangkok.
Belgrade.
Brussels.
Bonn.
Berne.
Baghdad.
Colombo.
Cairo.
Dacca.
Damascus.
Djakarta.
Gangtok.
The Hague.
Istanbul.
Jeddah.
Kathmandu.
Karachi.
Kabul.
Khartoum.
London.
New York.
New York (Indiadel).
Rio de Janeiro.

26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

Nairobi.
Ottawa.
Peking.
Phnom Penh.
Prague.
<pg92>
<pg93>

31. Paris.
32. Rome.
33. Rangoon.
34. San Francisco.
35. Sydney.
36. Kuala Lumpur.
37. Salisbury.
38. Stockholm.
39. Tokyo.
40. Tehran.
41. Washington.
42. Lagos.
43. Addis Ababa.
44. Hong Kong.
45. Kampala.
46. Manila.
47. Moscow.
48. Post Louis.
49. Suva.
50. Trinidad.
INDIA
GHANA ARGENTINA YUGOSLAVIA BELGIUM USA GERMANY SWITZERLAND IRAQ SRI
LANKA EGYPT SYRIA INDONESIA TURKEY SAUDI ARABIA NEPAL PAKISTAN
AFGHANISTAN SUDAN UNITED KINGDOM KENYA CANADA CAMBODIA CZECH REPUBLIC
FRANCE ITALY AUSTRALIA MALAYSIA SWEDEN JAPAN IRAN ETHIOPIA HONG KONG
UGANDA PHILIPPINES RUSSIA FIJI
Jan 01, 1961

Appendix III FOREIGN DIPLOMATIC MISSIONS IN INDIA

Jan 01, 1961
APPENDIX

III

FOREIGN DIPLOMATIC MISSIONS IN INDIA
(i) Embassies
1.

Afghanistan.

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.

30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.

Argentina.
Austria.
Belgium.
Brazil.
Bulgaria.
Burma.
Cambodia.
Chile.
China.
Colombia.
Cuba.
Czechoslovakia.
Denmark.
Ethiopia.
Finland.
France.
Germany (Federal Republic of).
Greece.
Hungary.
Indonesia.
Iran.
Iraq.
Italy.
Japan.
Jordan.
Laos.
Lebanon.
Mexico.

Mongolia.
Morocco.
Nepal.
Netherlands.
Norway.
Philippines.
Poland.
Rumania.
Saudi Arabia.
Spain.
Sudan.
Sweden.
Switzerland.
Syria.
Thailand.
Turkey.
U.A.R.
U.S.A.
U.S.S.R.
Yugoslavia.
Venezuela.
(ii) High Commissions

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Australia.
Canada.
Ceylon.
Ghana.
Malaya.

<pg95>

6.
7.
8.
9.

New Zealand.
Pakistan.
Tanganyika.
U.K.
(iii) Legations

1.
2.
3.

Albania (Stationed at Cairo).
Apostolic Internunciature (Holy See).
Uruguay.

<pg96>

(iv) Sub-offices of High Commission
1. Office of the Assistant High Commissioner
Madras.

for Ceylon at

2. Office of the Ceylon High Commissioner's
Tiruchirapalli.

Visa Office at

3. Office of the Assistant High Commissioner
Madras.

for Malaya at,

4. Office of the Deputy High Commissioner for Pakistan at
Calcutta.
5. Office of the Assistant High Commissioner for Pakistan at
Shillong.
6. Office of the Deputy High Commissioner for U.K. at
Bombay.
7. Office of the Deputy High Commissioner for U.K. at
Calcutta.
8. Office of the Deputy High Commissioner for U.K. at:
Madras.
9. Office of the High Commissioner for U.K. at Patna.
INDIA
AFGHANISTAN ARGENTINA AUSTRIA USA BELGIUM BRAZIL BULGARIA BURMA
CAMBODIA CHILE CHINA COLOMBIA CUBA NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK ETHIOPIA
FINLAND FRANCE GERMANY GREECE HUNGARY INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ ITALY JAPAN
JORDAN LAOS LEBANON MEXICO MONGOLIA MOROCCO NEPAL PHILIPPINES POLAND
SAUDI ARABIA SPAIN SUDAN SWEDEN SWITZERLAND SYRIA THAILAND TURKEY
YUGOSLAVIA VENEZUELA AUSTRALIA CANADA GHANA NEW ZEALAND PAKISTAN UNITED
KINGDOM ALBANIA EGYPT URUGUAY
Jan 01, 1961

Appendix IV Foreign Consular Offices in India

Jan 01, 1961
APPENDIX IV
Foreign Consular Offices in India
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Country
Location
Status
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------1.

Afghanistan

Bombay

Consulate General.

2.
3.
4.
5.

Austria
Austria
Austria
Belgium

Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay

Hon. Consulate.
Hon. Consulate.
Hon. Consulate.
Consulate General.

6.
7.

Belgium
Belgium

Madras
Calcutta

Hon. Consulate.
Consulate General.

8.
Bolivia
Gene
ral.
9.
Brazil
(Vacant).

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

Bombay

Consulate

10.
11.

Brazil
Burma

Calcutta
Calcutta

Consulate.
Consulate General.

12.
13.

Burma
China

Madras
Bombay

Vice-Consulate.
Consulate General.

14.

China

Calcutta

Consulate General.

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

Madras

Hon. Consulate

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

Calcutta

Hon. Consular

Bombay

Consulate General.

Calcutta

Consulate General.

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate.

15. Colombia
(Vac
ant).
16. Costa Rica
Gene
ral.
17. Costa Rica
Gene
ral.
18. Cuba
Agenc
y.
19. Czechoslovakia
20.

Czechoslovakia

21. Denmark
Gene
ral.
22. Denmark

23.
24.
25.
Gene
ral.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.

Denmark
Denmark
Dominican Republic

Cochin
Madras
Bombay

Hon. Consulate.
Hon. Consulate.
Hon. Consulate

Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Ell. Salvador
Ethiopia
Finland
Finland
France

Calcutta
Calcutta
Calcutta
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay

Hon. Consulate.
Hon. Consulate.
Hon. Consulate.
Hon. Consulate.
Hon. Consulate.
Hon. Consulate.
Consulate General.

33.

France

Calcutta

Consulate General.

34. France
Agenc
y.
35. France
36. Germany

Cochin

Hon. Consular

Madras
Bombay

Consulate.
Consulate General.

37.

Calcutta

Consulate General.

Germany

<pg97>
<pg98>
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Country
Location
Status
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------38.
Germany
39.
Greece
G
eneral.
40.
Greece
G
eneral.
41.
Haiti

Madras
Bombay

Consulate.
Hon. Consulate

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

Bombay

Hon. Consulate.

42.

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate.

Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay

Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate

Calcutta

Consulate

Bombay

Consulate

Bombay
Bombay

Consulate.
Consulate.

Haiti

43.
Indonesia
44.
Indonesia
45.
Iran
Genera
l.
46.
Iran
Genera
l.
47.
Iraq
Genera
l.
48.
Israel
49.
Italy

50.
Italy
Genera
l.
51.
Italy
Ag
ency.
clo
sed)
52.
Japan
Genera
l.
53.
Japan
Genera
l.
54.
Japan
55.

Liberia

56.
Luxembourg
Consul
ate.
57.
Monaco
G
eneral.
58.
Monaco
(
Vacant).
59.
Nepal
Genera
l.
60.
Netherlands
Genera
l.
61.
Netherlands
G
eneral.
62.
Netherlands

Calcutta

Consulate

Madras

Hon. Consular
(temporarily

Bombay

Consulate

Calcutta

Consulate

Madras

Hon. Consulate.

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate.

Bombay

Hon. Vice

New Delhi

Hon. Consulate

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

Calcutta

Consulate

Bombay

Consulate

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

Cochin

Hon. Consulate.
(temporarily

c
losed)
63.
Netherlands

Madras

Hon. Consulate.

64.

Nicaragua

Bombay

Hon. Consulate.

65.

Nicaragua

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate.

66.
Norway
Genera
l.
67.
Norway .
G
eneral.
68.
Norway
Vice-Consul
ate.
69.
Norway

Bombay

Consulate

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

Cochin

Hon.

Madras

Hon. Consulate.

70.

Bombay

Consulate

Panama

Genera
l.
71.
Panama
(
Vacant).
72.
Peru
Genera
l.
73.
Philippines
G
eneral.
74.
Poland
75.
Poland
76.
Saudi Arabia
Genera
l.
c
losed)
77.
Spain
Genera
l.
78.
Spain
Vice-Consul
ate.
79.
Spain
Vice-Consul
ate.
80.
Sudan
Genera
l.

Madras

Hon. Consulate

Calcutta

Consulate

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay

Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate
(temporarily

Bombay

Consulate

Calcutta

Hon.

Madras

Hon.

Bombay

Consulate

<pg99>
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Country
Location
Status
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------81.
Gene
ral.
82.
83.
84.

Sweden

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

Sweden
Sweden
Switzerland

Calcutta
Madras
Bombay

Hon. Consulate.
Hon. Consulate.
Consulate General.

85.
86.
Agenc
y.
87.
Agenc
y.
88.

Switzerland
Switzerland

Calcutta
Cochin

Hon. Consulate.
Hon. Consular

Switzerland

Madras

Hon. Consular

Syria

Bombay

Consulate General.

89.

Thailand

Calcutta

Consulate General.

90.
Gene
ral.
91.
Gene
ral.
92.
Gene
ral.
93.

Turkey

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

Turkey

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

Turkey

Madras

Hon. Consulate

U.S.S.R.

Bombay

Consulate General.

94.

U.S.S.R.

Calcutta

Consulate General.

95.

U.A.R.

Bombay

Consulate General.

96.

U.A.R.

Calcutta

Consulate General.

97.

U.S.A.

Bombay

Consulate General.

98.

U.S.A.

Calcutta

Consulate General.

99.

U.S.A.

Madras

Consulate General.

100.

Yugoslavia

Bombay

Consulate General.

101.

Yugoslavia

Calcutta

Consulate General.

102.

Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam

New Delhi

Consulate General.

103.

Republic of Viet-Nam

New Delhi.

Consulate General.

INDIA
USA AFGHANISTAN AUSTRIA BELGIUM BOLIVIA BRAZIL BURMA CHINA COLOMBIA
COSTA!!CUBA NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK DOMINICA ECUADOR ETHIOPIA FINLAND
FRANCE GERMANY GREECE HAITI INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ ISRAEL ITALY JAPAN
LIBERIA MONACO NEPAL CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC NICARAGUA PANAMA PERU
PHILIPPINES POLAND SAUDI ARABIA SPAIN SUDAN SWEDEN SWITZERLAND SYRIA
THAILAND TURKEY YUGOSLAVIA
Jan 01, 1961

Appendix V TREATIES, CONVENTIONS AND AGREEMENTS

APPENDIX V
TREATIES, CONVENTIONS AND AGREEMENTS CONCLUDED
OR RENEWED BY INDIA WITH OTHER COUNTRIES DURING
1961-62
1. Trade Agreement with Democratic People's Republic of
Korea signed on Jun 02, 1961 at New Delhi.

2.

Trade Agreement with Iran signed on 2 May 1961 at Tehran.

3.

Trade Agreement with Ceylon signed on 28 October 1961 at
New Delhi.

4.

Trade Agreement with Afghanistan signed on 10 November
1961 at New Delhi.

5.

Letters exchanged on 7 and 14 March 1961 in New Delhi
extending the Trade Arrangement with France.

6.

Letters exchanged on 16 September 1961 in Baghdad renewing the Trade Agreement with Iraq.

7.

Letters exchanged on 5 October 1961 at Rabat renewing the
Trade Agreement with Tunisia.

8.

Protocol signed on 6 February 1962 at New Delhi renewing
the Trade Agreement with Yugoslavia.

9.

Protocol signed on 13 February 1962 at New Delhi renewing
Trade Agreement with Rumania.

10.

Letters exchanged on 29 March 1962 at New Delhi renewing
the Trade Agreement with Greece.

11.

Trade Agreement with Pakistan which was to expire on
20 March 1962, has automatically been extended upto
20 March 1963, since neither of the parties gave three
months termination notice before 21st December 1961 under
Article IX of the Agreement.

12. Trade Arrangement was concluded with Jordan on 3 July
1961.
<pg100>
INDIA
KOREA IRAN AFGHANISTAN
PAKISTAN JORDAN

FRANCE

IRAQ

MOROCCO

TUNISIA

YUGOSLAVIA

Jun 02, 1961

Appendix VI INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS OF WHICH INDIA IS A MEMBER

APPENDIX VI
INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS OF WHICH INDIA IS A
MEMBER
UNITED NATIONS

GREECE

1. General Assembly.
2. Committees and Commissions of the General Assembly:(a) Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.
(b) Committee to consider the question of convening a
general conference to review the U.N. Charter.
(c)

Committee on Information from non-self-governing territories (upto Dec 31, 1961).

(d)
(e)

Scientific Committee on the effects of Atomic Radiation.
Peace Observation Commission.

(f)

Disarmament Commission.

(g)

International Law Commission.

(h)

Committee on Contributions.

(i)

Administrative Tribunal.

(j)

Fifteen Member Working Group on the examination of
the Administrative and Budgetory procedure of the
United Nations.

(k) Disarmament Committee.
(l) Special Committee on Colonialism.
3. Economic and Social Council (from 1 January 1962).
4. Functional Commissions of the Economic and Social Council:(a) Human Rights Commission.
(b) Commission on International Commodity Trade (C.I.C.T.)
--(upto 31 December 1961).
(c) Narcotic Drugs Commission.
(d) Statistical Commission.
(e) Population Commission (from 1 January 1962).
5. Regional Commissions of the Economic and Social Council:(a) Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East
(ECAFE).
<pg101>
6. Other Subsidiary Bodies of the Economic and Social Council:(a) United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund
(UNICEF).
(b) Standing Committee for Industrial Development.

(c) Permanent Central Opium Board.
7. Trusteeship Council.
8. International Atomic

Energy Agency: -

(a) Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy
Agency.
9. Specialised Agencies:(a) Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO).
(b) General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs (GATT).
(c) International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(IBRD).
(d)

International Monetary Fund (IMF).

(e)

International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO).

(f)

International Development Association (IDA).

(g)

International Telecommunications Union (ITU).

(h)

Universal Postal Union (UPU).

(i)

International Labour Organisation (ILO).

(j) United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation (UNESCO).
(k)

World Meteorological Organisation (WMO).

(l)

International Finance Corporation (IFC).

(m) International
(IMCO).

Maritime

Consultative

Organisation

Other International Organisations:1. Asian African Legal Consultative Committee, New Delhi.
2. Commonwealth Air Transport Council.
3. Commonwealth Advisory Aeronautical Research Council,
Teddington.
4. International Association for Bridges and Structural.
Engineering, Zurich.
5. International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage, New
Delhi.
6. International Commission on Large Dams, Paris.
7. International Committee of the Red Cross, Geneva.
<pg103>

8. International Conference of Social Works, Paris.
9.

International Cotton Advisory Committee, Washington.

10.

International Council of Archives, Paris.

11.

International Council of Building Research Studies and
Documentation, Paris.

12.

International Criminal Police Commission, Paris.

13.

International Customs,

14.

International Electro-Technical Commission, Geneva.

15.

International Federation of Documentation, The Hague.

16.

International Federation for Housing and Town Planning,
The Hague.

17.

International Federation for University Women, London.

18.

International Hydrographic Bureau, Monte Carlo.

19.

International Institute for Administrative Science, Brussels.

20.

Federation International des Agences de Voyage, Paris.

21.

International

Mathematical Union, Zurich.

22.

International

Organisation of Legal Meteorology, Paris.

23.

International

Organisation for Standardisation, Geneva.

24.

International

Railway Congress Association, Brussels.

25.

International

Scientific Radio Union, Brussels.

26.

International

Tea Committee, London.

27.

International

Union of

28.

International

Union of Crystallography, Cambridge.

29.

International

Union of Geodesy and Geophysics, Paris.

30.

International

Union of Geography, New York.

31.

International

Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry, Paris.

32.

International

Union of Pure and Applied Physics, Paris.

33.

International
Delft.

Union of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics,

34.

Permanent International Association of Road Congress,
Brussels.

35.

Union International Contre le Cancer, Paris.

Tariff Bureau, Brussels.

Biological Sciences, Paris.

36.

World Power Conference, Paris.

37.

International Union of Official Travel Organisation, Geneva,
and its Regional Commission viz. the South Asian
Travel Commission.
38. International Hide and Allied Trade Improvement Society,
Surrey (UK).
<pg104>
39. Asian Broadcasting Conference.
40. Commonwealth Agricultural Bureau (U.K.).
41.

Commonwealth Broadcasting Conference.

42.

International Union for the Protection of Literary
Artistic Works and Universal Copy Right Convention,,
Geneva.

43.

American Society of Travel Agents, New York.

44.

International Association of Hydraulic Research, Delft.

45.

International Bureau of Weights and Measures, Serras
(France).

46.

International
London.

Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea,

47.

International

Commission of Table of Constants.

48.

Commonwealth Statisticians Conference.

49.

International Diary Federation (IDF), Brussels.

50.

International Society of Soil Mechanics and Foundation
Engineering, London.

51.

International Union of Astronomy, Greenwich (U.K.)

52.

International Union of the History and Philosophy of
Sciences, Paris.

53.

International Statistical Institute Conference, The Hague.

54.

International Wheat Council, London.

55.

International Council for Museums, Paris.

56.

International Committee on Monuments, Artistics and Historical Sites and Archeological Excavations.

57.

Committee on Space Research, The Hague.

58.

International Lead and Zinc Group, New York.

59.

Permanent Court of Arbitration, The Hague.

and

60.

Asian Statisticians Conference.

61.

Pacific Area Travel Association, San Francisco.

62.

International Seed Testing Association, Washington.

63.

International Society for Photogrammetry, London.

64.

Permanent International Association of Navigation Congress, Brussels.

65.

League of Red Cross Societies, Geneva.

66.

International Union against the Venereal Diseases and the.
Treponematosis, Paris.

67.

International Folk Music Council, London.

<pg105>

68. International Council for Bird Preservation, British Museum
(National History), London.
69. Asian Productivity Organisation, Tokyo.
70. International Council of Scientific Union, London.
71. International Union of Anthropological Sciences, Mexico.
72.

World Poultry Science Association.

GMGIPND-DME-15EA-2,500-10-5-62.

INDIA
USA SWITZERLAND LATVIA FRANCE BELGIUM UNITED KINGDOM CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC JAPAN MEXICO
Dec 31, 1961


