   java script is required for this page java script is required for this
   page java script is required for this page java script is required for
   this page java script is required for this page java script is required
   for this page

   Fri, February 06, 2015 at 05:12:31 IST Indian Flag
   Ministry of                      Print Content Small Font Medium Font      
    External       MEA Library      Large Font                                
    Affairs,   Ministry of External   * Sitemap                               
   Government  Affairs, Government    * Contact Us                            
    of India         of India         * Feedback                              
                                      * _____________________           [  ]  

     * Home
     * Director's Office
          * Director Lib & Info
          * Library Officers & Staff
     * Journals
          * Current Journals
          * Online Journals
          * CD-ROMs Databases
     * Online Services
          * Business Monitor Online
          * EIU
          * JSTOR
          * Janes Online Services
          * Kessing World News Archive
          * Marketline MDIC
          * Online Service Links
     * Newspapers
          * E-Newspapers
          * Subscribed Print Newspapers
     * Library Bulletins
          * Foreign Affairs Documentation Bulletin
          * Recent Additions
          * Chronicle of Events
     * Alert
          * Book Alert
          * Article Alerts
     * Important Abbrevations

 Annual Reports Prior to 1999                                                                      
   * Home >   Annual Reports Prior to 1999 >   Annual Report 1973-74               * Home          
 Annual Report 1973-74                                                             * Director's    
                                                                                     Office        
 Contents                                                                          * Journals      
 S.No.  CHAPTER                                                            PAGE    * Online        
        Introduction                                                       1         Services      
 I.     India's Neighbours                                                 7       * Newspapers    
 II     South East Asia                                                    31      * Alert         
 III.   East Asia                                                          38      * Important     
 IV.    West Asia and North Africa                                         45        Abbrevations  
 V.     Africa (South of the Sahara)                                       48      * Back          
 VI.    Europe                                                             53                      
 VII.   The Americas                                                       73                      
 VIII.  United Nations and International Conferences                       78                      
 IX.    Technical and Economic Co-operation                                95                      
 X.     External Publicity                                                 106                     
 XI.    Cultural Relations                                                 111                     
 XII.   Protocol Matters                                                   117                     
 XIII.  Passport, Visa and Consular Services                               118                     
 XIV.   Administration and Organisation                                    121                     
 APPENDICES                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 NUMBER                                                   PAGE                                     
                                                                                                   
 I.       International Conferences, Congresses, Seminars in which                                 
          India participated in 1973-74                    127                                     
                                                                                                   
 II.      International Organisations of which India became a                                      
          member/ceased to be a member                      141                                    
                                                                                                   
 III.     Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or renewed by                                  
          India with other countries in 1973                 142                                   
                                                                                                   
 IV.      ITEC Programme                                      158                                  
                                                                                                   
 V.       Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad                                    
          during 1973-74.                                     163                                  
                                                                                                   
 VI.      List of Indian Missions/Posts opened in 1973-74     165                                  
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
  INDIA                                                                                            
 Introduction                                                                                      
                                                                             Top                   
 INTRODUCTION                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 The year under review witnessed further confirmation of the viability and                         
 continuing validity of aims, principles and practise of the policy of                             
 non-alignment. The Fourth Summit Conference of the non-alignment nations held                     
 at Algiers from Sep 05, 1973 to 9 September 1973, added a new dimension to the                    
 continuing struggle of the majority of the world's population, as represented                     
 at the Summit, for genuine independence, peace and international security. The                    
 non-aligned nations, meeting at Algiers, decided to reinforce their common                        
 action in order to promote the principles of economic security in international                   
 relations. To this end, they decided to increase co-operation among themselves                    
 and demanded that economic exploitation of their resources by the developed                       
 world should end. While noting, with satisfaction, the general trend towards                      
 detente, the conference warned that the process should not be confined to the                     
 prosperous areas of the world because peace is indivisible. Peace would remain                    
 precarious unless it is extended to the third world which has remained                            
 condemned to insecurity and domination the most powerful.                                         
                                                                                                   
 As in the past India participated actively in the deliberations of the Summit                     
 and her significant contributions were generally welcomed and appreciated. Of                     
 special interest to India was the recognition by the conference of the                            
 realities in the Indian sub- continent and its unanimous recommendation for the                   
 admission of Bangladesh into the United Nations.                                                  
                                                                                                   
 pg1>                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 India has noted with appreciation that the trend towards detente that developed                   
 last year has maintained its momentum. The gradual reduction of tension between                   
 rival blocs, which India and the non-aligned nations have long been urging, is                    
 now clearly noticeable. The recent improvement of relations between the great                     
 Powers and the increase in contacts between the Soviet Union and the United                       
 States on the one hand and the United States and China on the other are                           
 indications of this continuing trend. India has welcomed the agreement                            
 concluded between the United State of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist                   
 Republics in June 1973, for preventing nuclear war and the understanding                          
 between them in several other fields. India has also noted with satisfaction                      
 the Four Power Agreement on Berlin, the treaties between the two German States                    
 and between the Federal Republic of Germany and Poland and the convening of the                   
 Conference on European Security and Co-operation. The simultaneous admission of                   
 the two German States to the United Nations was welcomed by India as an augury                    
 of the beginning of a new era of understanding and co-operation in Central                        
 Europe. In this context, it is not surprising to note that the European                           
 partners of the Atlantic alliance were cool to the American call for a new                        
 Atlantic Charter and were apprehensive over the nuclear alert given by the                        
 U.S.A. during the West Asian war in October.                                                      
                                                                                                   
 While welcoming the gradual process of mutual accommodation and co-operation                      
 and the consequent reduction of tension in the developed world, India could not                   
 but note with sorrow and con- cern that great Power rivalry continues to show                     
 itself in many ways and in many areas especially in the developing World. While                   
 the Paris Agreements promise to usher in a period of peace and reconstruction                     
 in the war-torn Vietnam, and the mutual understanding among the parties in Laos                   
 has raised hopes for stability in that country, India is deeply distressed at                     
 the continuing tension in Cambodia.                                                               
                                                                                                   
 The recent hostilities in West Asia are yet another indication of the tragic                      
 international situation where peace is denied where                                               
                                                                                                   
 pg2>                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 it is needed. India is convinced that a just peace can be secured in this area                    
 only on the basis of two basic principles, namely. the evacuation of all                          
 territories occupied by Israel since 5 June. 1967 and the restoration of the                      
 legitimate rights of the Pales- tinians. The convening of the Geneva Conference                   
 has increased the chances of arriving at a durable settlement. India hopes that                   
 the Geneva Conference would yield results and that Israel would show the same                     
 flexibility and realism as shown by the Arabs.                                                    
                                                                                                   
 For her own part, India continued, during the year under re- view, her sincere                    
 efforts to eliminate once and for all the politics of confrontation and to                        
 usher in an era of good neighbourly and harmonious co-operation in the                            
 sub-continent. The Delhi Agree- ment of 28 August 1973, between India and                         
 Pakistan is a Significant step in this direction, taken on the initiative of                      
 India and in conformity with the joint Indo-Bangladesh declaration of 17 April                    
 1973. Simultaneous repatriation of Bengalees from Pakistan, Pakistanis from                       
 Bangladesh and prisoners of war and civilian internees from India has been                        
 taking place with creditable speed and efficiency, although the movement of                       
 Pakistanis from Bangladesh has been somewhat at a slower pace. In the light of                    
 the steady progress in the implementation of the Delhi Agree- ment, India feels                   
 that further progress should now be made in the implementation of the Simla                       
 Agreement of July 1972, particularly in respect of the normalisation measures                     
 envisaged in paragraph 3 of that Agreement. Accordingly, India has again taken                    
 the initiative to suggest to Pakistan that talks may be held towards resuming                     
 communications, trade, travel and cultural links between the two countries.                       
                                                                                                   
 The reciprocal recognition by Pakistan and Bangladesh of each other is a                          
 positive step towards normalisation and stability in the sub-continent.                           
 Pakistan's unconditional recognition of Bangladesh, announced on the eve of the                   
 Islamic Summit at Lahore, has vindicated the joint stand taken by India and                       
 Bangladesh that the unresolved problems among the three countries can only be                     
 solved through direct negotiations among the parties on the basis of equality                     
 and sovereignty. India has                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 pg3>                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 welcomed this development which, it is hoped, will pave the way for further                       
 progress towards harmonious relations in the sub-continent.                                       
                                                                                                   
 Meanwhile India has continued her efforts to promote the closest friendship and                   
 wide-ranging co-operation with her most immediate neighbours. India's                             
 developing relations with Bangladesh have been wide-ranging and far-reaching.                     
 sides co-operation in the international field, as for example in the                              
 non-aligned group, the Commonwealth and various United Nations specialised                        
 agen- cies, India and Bangladesh have now strengthened the growing economic                       
 collaboration between them. The initial emphasis, in India's co-operation with                    
 Bangladesh, on the supply of essential commodities and relief goods has shifted                   
 now to close co-operation and collaboration in the fields of trade, industry,                     
 transportation, utilisation of water resources, etc. with a view to                               
 strengthening the economy of Bangladesh and to developing mutually beneficial                     
 economic relations. India's relations with Nepal have continued to grow and                       
 strengthen. The stage is now well set for further- expansion and                                  
 diversification of Indo-Nepal co-operation in vari- ous fields. With Sri Lanka,                   
 India has continued her efforts to, resolve-outstanding issues and develop                        
 co-operation in the eco- nomic and other fields. The mutual desire for further                    
 strengthen- ing of Indo-Sri Lanka relations has been reflected in the visits                      
 exchanged at the highest levels between the two countries. India's relations                      
 with Burma continue to be cordial and reflect their mutual confidence. India                      
 welcomed the emergence of the Repub- lic of Afghanistan and has strengthened                      
 political and economic ties with that country. With Iran, India has maintained                    
 a conti- nuous dialogue to reach a greater understanding of policies of each                      
 other and to strengthen co-operation in the economic and cultural fields.                         
                                                                                                   
 Farther afield, India has strengthened her mutually beneficial relations with                     
 the countries in the South-East-Asian-Pacific region. A growing understanding                     
 between India on the one hand and Malaysia, Indonesia, Singapore, Thailand and                    
 the Philippines on the other hand has been evident in many ways. India welcomes                   
                                                                                                   
 pg4>                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 the recent efforts by Australia and New Zealand to move closer to the countries                   
 in the region. India's own contacts with Australia and New Zealand, her                           
 partners in the Commonwealth, have been further strengthened by the growing                       
 identity of interests between India and these two countries. The visits of the                    
 Prime Ministers of Australia and New Zealand to India during the year under                       
 review have served to underline the basic identity of views among them on                         
 matters of common interest.                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 India's continued interest in keeping the Indian Ocean an Ocean of Peace, free                    
 from Big Power rivalry, has been demons- trated during the year under review by                   
 the steps taken at various international forums like the Non-aligned Summit,                      
 the Common- wealth Conference and the United Nations. India has expressed deep                    
 concern over the increased military presence of Big Powers in the Indian Ocean.                   
 The recent decision of the U.S.A. to further expand the military facilities in                    
 the Indian Ocean island of Diego Garcia has deeply disturbed all the countries                    
 in the region. This development, which is clearly inconsistent with the U.N.                      
 General Assembly resolution, has added an urgency to the need to mobi- lise                       
 international support for the idea of Nuclear-free Indian Ocean.                                  
                                                                                                   
 India's relations with the European countries have registered a steady                            
 progress. The recent accord between India and the European Economic Community                     
 provides a general framework for commercial co-operation and trade exchange to                    
 the mutual benefit of India and the member countries of the EEC.                                  
                                                                                                   
 India's friendship, with the Soviet Union has stood the test of time. The                         
 desire of both countries to expand and deepen their mutually advantageous                         
 co-operation in all fields has been evident in the continuous exchange of                         
 visits between the two countries: at the highest levels culminating in the                        
 recent visit of the Soviet leader, Mr. Brezhnev. A noteworthy aspect of                           
 Indo-Soviet relations is the respect shown by each for the views of the other                     
 and the absence of any effort by either side to interfere with the indepen-                       
 dence of judgement and action of the other. Based on mutual                                       
                                                                                                   
 pg5> recognition of independence and equality, Indo-Soviet friendship has                         
 strengthened India's non-alignment as well as the climate of international                        
 peace.                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 India has welcomed recent indications of a change in the United States'                           
 attitude towards the Indian sub-continent and towards relationship, with India                    
 in particular. There is no basic conflict of interests between India and the                      
 United States of America and as such India hopes that Indo-U.S. relations will                    
 soon enter a phase where a constructive, co-operative and mature relationship                     
 can be built up.                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 Notwithstanding India's sincere desire for normalising her relations with                         
 China, India regrets that there has been no positive response from that                           
 country. China's attitude towards India and towards the recent developments in                    
 the sub-continent continues. to be unhelpful.                                                     
                                                                                                   
 pg6> Sep 05, 1973                                                                                 
 India's Neighbours                                                                                
                                                                             Top                   
 CHAPTER I                                                                                         
 INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 Afghanistan                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 The Vice-President paid a State visit to Afghanistan from Jun 07, 1973 to 14                      
 June 1973. A Republican Government was established in Afghanistan in July 1973.                   
 Mr. Mohammad Naim, Special Envoy of the President of Afghanistan, visited India                   
 from 20 to 24 September 1973 and again from 25 to 28 February 1974. The                           
 Minister of External Affairs, Sardar Swaran Singh paid a visit to Afghanistan                     
 from 29 October to 1 November 1973. Bilateral and general questions were                          
 discussed at these meetings. Further measures of economic and technical                           
 collaboration have been decided upon and the Government of India looks forward                    
 to increasing friendly co-operation with Afghanistan.                                             
                                                                                                   
 Bangladesh                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 Close consultations between the Governments of India and Bangladesh through                       
 normal diplomatic channels and by Special Emissaries resulted in major                            
 Indo-Bangladesh initiatives for resolving the humanitarian issues on the                          
 sub-continent arising out of the conflict with Pakistan in 1971. The Prime                        
 Minister's Special Emissary, Shri P. N. Haksar, visited Dacca from 1 to 6                         
                                                                                                   
 pg7> April 1973. His visit was followed by the visit of the Bangladesh Foreign                    
 Minister, Dr. Kamal Hossain, to New Delhi from 13 to 16 April 1973. These                         
 discussions, and consultations through diplo- matic channels, culminated in the                   
 Indo-Bangladesh Joint Declara- tion of 17 April 1973, which provided a means                      
 for the resolution of humanitarian issues by simultaneous repatriation of the                     
 Pakistani prisoners of war and civilian internees in India, except- ing those                     
 required for trial on criminal charges, of Bengalees in Pakistan and of                           
 Pakistanis in Bangladesh. The Foreign Secretaries. of Bangladesh and India met                    
 in New Delhi on 22 and 23 May 1973, for discussion on the Pakistani response to                   
 the Joint Decla- ration and these discussions were followed by further                            
 discussions in Dacca from 15 to 17 August 1973, of the Prime Minister's Special                   
 Emissary, Shri P. N. Haksar, India's Foreign Secretary, Shri Kewal Singh, and                     
 other officials, preparatory to discussions with the Pakistani delegation in                      
 Delhi which commenced on 18 August 1973. The discussions with Pakistan saw the                    
 signature of the Delhi Agreement of 28 August 1973. The Delhi Agreement                           
 provided for the simultaneous repatriation of all Bengalees in Pakistan, a                        
 substantial number of Pakistanis in Bangladesh and all Pakistani POWs and                         
 civilian internees in India, except 195 POWs, who would remain in India pending                   
 further discussions between India, Bangladesh and Pakistan.                                       
                                                                                                   
 Throughout the discussions with the Pakistani delegation in New Delhi in August                   
 1973 and earlier in Islamabad from 24 to 31 July 1973, close and constant touch                   
 was kept with the Bangladesh Government. The relations of the fullest                             
 confidence existing between the Governments of India and Bangladesh were                          
 evident during these consultations and in the Delhi Agreement, which had the                      
 complete support of the Government of Bangla- desh.                                               
                                                                                                   
 The Minister of External Affairs paid a return visit to Bangladesh from 13 to                     
 15 February 1974, at the invitation of the Bangladesh Foreign Minister. The                       
 visit was preceded by the third official level Indo-Bangladesh bilateral                          
 consultations which took place at Dacca from 9 to 12 January 1974. During these                   
                                                                                                   
 pg8> discussions the progress of repatriation of Bengalees. Pakistanis and                        
 POWs. consequent on the Delhi Agreement was exhaustively reviewed and the hope                    
 was, expressed that Pakistan would issue quicker clearance to honour its                          
 commitments to receive back its nationals from Bangladesh expeditiously.                          
 Detailed discussions covering various aspects of bilateral relations resulted                     
 in the expression of mutual satisfaction on the wide-ranging and growing                          
 co-operation between the two countries in all fields. The discussions revealed                    
 a unanimity of views on the international situation.                                              
                                                                                                   
 On 22 February 1974, Prime Minister Bhutto announced Pakistan's recognition of                    
 Bangladesh. The announcement was made during the time the Islamic Summit was                      
 being held in Pakistan. Following the announcement, a Bangladesh Delegation led                   
 by the Prime Minister, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, attended the Islamic Summit. The                    
 Prime Minster and the Minister of Ex- ternal Affairs welcomed Pakistani                           
 recognition of Bangladesh as an essential step for the normalisation of                           
 relations between Bangladesh and Pakistan and for peace and co-operation in the                   
 sub-continent.                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 In its rapidly developing external relations, Bangladesh has India's full                         
 support, wedded as both are to common tenets in international affairs, of                         
 non-alignment, anti-colonialism, peaceful co-existence, non-interference and                      
 co-operation for mutual benefit. India's diplomatic Missions actively supported                   
 Bangladesh's admission to numerous international organisations. Bangladesh is                     
 now a member of the Non-aligned Group of Nations, the Colombo Plan, the                           
 Commonwealth and various U.N. specialised and related agencies and                                
 inter-governmental and international organisations.                                               
                                                                                                   
 As in other spheres, periodic consultations between border officials of                           
 Bangladesh and India continued to co-ordinate efforts to suppress smuggling and                   
 undesirable trans-border activities. The Directors of Land Records and Surveys                    
 of Bangladesh and West                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 pg9> Bengal and Tripura met in March and November 1973, to review the progress                    
 of field work and the programme of mapping and restoration of damaged pillars                     
 on the borders.                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 Besides co-operation in the international field, and economic collaboration, as                   
 mentioned in subsequent paragraphs, Indo- Bangladesh activities ranged over                       
 diverse fields during the year. A parcel service was introduced between India                     
 and Bangladesh from I March 1973; progress was made in the implementation of                      
 the Cultural Co-operation Agreement; a five-year agreement on the Peaceful Uses                   
 of Atomic Energy and Scientific Research was signed on 31 August 1973. This                       
 provides for exchange of informa- tion, experience and scientists for the                         
 progress of nuclear research work.                                                                
                                                                                                   
 Economic Relations with Bangladesh                                                                
                                                                                                   
 On the emergence of Bangladesh as an independent sovereign nation India                           
 promised economic aid to the extent of Rs. 200 crores in the shape of grants                      
 and loans to rehabilitate and recon- struct the war shattered economy of                          
 Bangladesh. The Indian people and voluntary organisations manifested their                        
 fraternal spirit by sending relief goods worth approximately another Rs. 20                       
 crores. Thanks to the efforts of the Government and people of Bangladesh and                      
 the help of the international community, Bangladesh has successfully                              
 rehabilitated her economy and has launched her First Five-Year Plan of economic                   
 reconstruction and development. The- initial emphasis on the supply of                            
 essential commodities and relief goods has now been shifted to close                              
 co-operation and collaboration in the fields of trade, industry,                                  
 transportation, water management etc., for strengthening the economy of                           
 Bangladesh and developing economic relations for the mutual benefit of the                        
 peoples of the two countries.                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 The actual expenditure for the period ending 31-3-1973 amounted to Rs. 142.67                     
 crores. The balance of Rs. 57.33 crores has been earmarked for expenditure                        
 during 1973-74 and 1974-75.                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 pg10>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 In addition to the amount of Rs. 200 crores, India has agreed. to give the                        
 following government-to-government aid and commer- cial credits:-                                 
                                                                                                   
 (1) Rs. 10 crores for the purchase of equipment.                                                  
                                                                                                   
 (2) Rs. 25 crores special bank credit for the supply of items like railway                        
 wagons and coaches, pumps, tubewells, transmission lines, power shipment etc.                     
                                                                                                   
 (3) Rs. 15 crores temporary bank accommodation for 365 days for the supply of                     
 textiles, especially sarees and lungis.                                                           
                                                                                                   
 In May 1973, the Indian Planning Minister, Shri D. P. Dhar, accompanied by a                      
 team of senior officials visited Bangladesh and held wide-ranging discussions                     
 on economic co-operation between the two countries.                                               
                                                                                                   
 The Komorrah Limestone Company in Meghalaya has been supplying limestone to the                   
 Chhatak Cement Factory in Sylhet in Bangladesh on an ad hoc basis, that is                        
 under the Limited Pay- ments Agreement or under the Rs. 18.58 crores Refugee                      
 Relief Grant given to Bangladesh in early 1972. Recently a draft agree- ment                      
 for the supply of 2 lakh tonnes of limestone annually to the. Chhatak Factory                     
 by the Komorrah Limestone Company for a period of 20 years has been initialled.                   
 The formal approval of the Bangladesh Government for this agreement is awaited.                   
                                                                                                   
 In order to explore the scope for further co-operation in clinker/ cement                         
 between India and Bangladesh, the Government of India has commissioned a                          
 feasibility study costing Rs. 1 lakh.                                                             
                                                                                                   
 The Government of India has sanctioned another feasibility study in respect of                    
 fertilizer co-operation. The study costing Rs. I lakh has been entrusted to the                   
 Fertilizer Corporation of India.                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 India has also sanctioned technical assistance in the field of sponge iron. The                   
 cost of this feasibility study, which would be                                                    
                                                                                                   
 pg11>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 about Rs. 13 lakhs, as well as the other studies, would be borne by the                           
 Government of India.                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 Under the technical assistance programme India is providing training facilities                   
 to Bangladesh Railway probationers and bank executives. Schemes for training in                   
 other fields are being pro- cessed.                                                               
                                                                                                   
 An Indian ship "Vishva Darshan" renamed "Banglar Sampad" was delivered to                         
 Bangladesh on 11 July 1973. This was in addi- tion to "Vishva Prem" delivered                     
 in 1973 and two Fokker Friend- ship aircrafts supplied even earlier under a Rs.                   
 6 crores credit.                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 During 1973, contracts were signed under the Rs. 10 crores credit agreement                       
 (forming part of the Rs. 200 crores aid programme), entered into on 16 May                        
 1972, for                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 (1) the rehabilitation of the Bangladesh Railway system-Rs. 8 crores;                             
                                                                                                   
 (2) the supply of telecommunication equipment Rs. 30 lakhs; and                                   
                                                                                                   
 (3) the supply of power equipment-Rs. 1.70 crores.                                                
                                                                                                   
 The Bhairab bridge on the river Meghna which restored rail communication                          
 between Dacca and Chittagong was repaired by the Indian engineers in a record                     
 time of four months. The bridge was reopened by the Prime Minister of                             
 Bangladesh on 27 Septem- ber 1973. Arrangements have also been completed for                      
 the inter- change of railway wagons and carriage of goods on each other's                         
 railways.                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 Upto 27 September 1973, trade between the two countries was regulated under a                     
 three-tier system viz. the Limited Payment Arrangement (LPA), Border Trade and                    
 Trade in free foreign exchange. Trade under LPA envisaged movement of                             
 commodities to the extent of Rs. 25 crores each way. This arrangement came to                     
 an end on 27 September 1973. A Delegation led by the Minister of Commerce,                        
 Prof. D. P. Chattopadhyaya, arrived at a new agreement known as the Balanced                      
 Trade and Payments Agree- ment (BTPA) which came into effect on 28 September                      
 1973, for a                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 pg12>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 period of three years. A trade protocol was also signed with a validity of one                    
 year for the exchange of goods to the extent of Rs. 30.5 crores each way.                         
                                                                                                   
 A coal agreement was signed on 25 August 1973, for the supply from India to                       
 Bangladesh of 650,000 tonnes of coal during 1973-74. Also an Indo-Bangladesh                      
 agreement came into force on 20 September 1973, providing for the exchange of                     
 books, newspapers, and periodicals worth Rs. 22 lakhs each way. Both these                        
 agree- ments were under the BTPA.                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 The Inland Water Transport Organisations of India and Bangladesh signed an                        
 agreement on 18 August 1973, for the pro- per sealing of cargoes for security                     
 in transit and devised ways and means of developing inland waterways for                          
 carriage of goods.                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 Considerable progress was made in initiating joint studies on flood control and                   
 on the possibilities of co-operation in respect of the waters of the                              
 Ganga-Brahmputra-Meghna systems and in the field of electric power. The Joint                     
 Rivers Commission of the two countries have held six meetings so far.                             
                                                                                                   
 A delegation headed by Mr. Khondekar Moshtaque Ahmed, the Bangladesh Minister                     
 for Water Resources, Flood Control and Power visited New Delhi in July 1973 and                   
 held discussions on matters relating to operation of Farakka Barrage with the                     
 Indian delegation headed by the Minister of External Affairs, Sardar Swaran                       
 Singh. These discussions proved useful and will be continued so as to find                        
 agreed solutions.                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 A number of delegations from each country visited the other to discuss                            
 co-operation in various fields of mutual interest. A number of Committees/Study                   
 Groups were also set up to con- sider co-operation in various fields:-                            
                                                                                                   
 (1) The Ministry of External Affairs has set up a study group for studying the                    
 broad areas for cement co-opera- tion for detailed study by technical                             
 consultants.                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 pg13>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 (2) A joint Indo-Bangladesh Study Group on Jute Co-opera- tion which was set up                   
 in 1972, to protect the interest of jute and jute manufacture in the world                        
 market held two meetings this year, one in April 1973, in New Delhi and the                       
 concluding session in Dacca in September, 1973.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 (3) A Transport Co-ordination Group was set up to review and solve transport                      
 problems in India and Bangla- desh. Sub-groups were set up in Calcutta and                        
 Paksey (in Bangladesh) which will meet periodically for co- ordination of their                   
 work.                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 (4) The Joint Power Board which was set up for co-ordinat- ing the generation                     
 and transmission in both the countries held its first meetings in May and                         
 December 1973.                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 (5) The Inland Water Transport Standing Committee met in August 1973, in New                      
 Delhi.                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 Bhutan                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 India's relations with Bhutan continued to be very cordial and friendly and                       
 were marked by very close understanding and co-operation in all fields. His                       
 Majesty, King Jigme Singye Wangchuk continued to follow the policy of his late                    
 father in forging close ties between India and Bhutan.                                            
                                                                                                   
 Bhutan was admitted to the Non-aligned Group at the Non- aligned Summit meeting                   
 held in Algiers during the first week of September 1973. Bhutan's application                     
 for the membership had been earlier reviewed by the Steering Committee and for-                   
 warded for the consideration of the Foreign Ministers' meeting in Algiers.                        
 India has welcomed this development.                                                              
                                                                                                   
 Dr. Karan Singh, the then Minister of Tourism and Civil Aviation, paid an                         
 official visit to Bhutan from 20 to 23 October 1973. During his brief stay in                     
 Bhutan Dr. Karan Singh had                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 pg14>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 useful discussions with the King and other dignitaries. The talks centred                         
 mainly around the development of tourism in Bhutan.                                               
                                                                                                   
 The Minister of External Affairs, Sardar Swaran Singh, visit- ed Bhutan from 4                    
 to 6 February 1974 During his stay in Bhutan, he had fruitful discussions on                      
 Indo-Bhutan co-operation With His Majestly, the King of Bhutan, the Bhutanese                     
 Foreign Minis- ter and other important dignitaries. These discussions were                        
 characterised by deep warmth and cordiality and underlined the identity in the                    
 view point of the two countries.                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 In the months of January and February 1974, India also received several                           
 delegations from Bhutan. These included a 10- member Tshongdu (National                           
 Assembly) delegation, a students delegation and a farmers delegation.                             
                                                                                                   
 Recent years have witnessed socioeconomic transformation in Bhutan in several                     
 vital sectors, particularly agriculture, in- dustry, road construction,                           
 transport and education. Bhutan's Third Five Year Plan (1971-76) provides for                     
 an outlay of Rs. 35 crores. India is actively co-operating in the programmes                      
 envisaged under this Plan and has agreed to provide Rs. 33 crores by way of                       
 developmental assistance. Detailed co-operation between planning experts and                      
 specialists in various fields has also been carried out.                                          
                                                                                                   
 The Government of India have undertaken to finance the Chukha Hydro-electric                      
 Project and the Pagli Cement Plant in Bhutan. The projects are estimated to                       
 cost Rs. 64.3 crores and Rs. 7 crores respectively. ln addition, during the                       
 plan period 1971-76, a sum of Rs. 2.13 crores has also been approved for                          
 geological and mineral exploration in Bhutan. The Ministry of Agriculture,                        
 Government of India, carried out a pre-investment survey of forest resources                      
 for the exploitation of Bhutan's forest wealth during the current year. A                         
 technical team of the Planning Commission visited Bhutan and reviewed the                         
 implementation of the annual plan for: 1972-73. The experts in Animal                             
 Husbandry,                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 pg15>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Power, Industries and Minerals, Health and Education, who were included in the                    
 delegation, held useful discussions with their counterparts in Bhutan.                            
                                                                                                   
 Burma                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 In accordance with India's policy of developing good re- lations with her                         
 neighbours, several steps were taken to strengthen further the relations with                     
 Burma.                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 As a result of the discussions held in Rangoon between the Indian and Burmese                     
 officials from 23 to 31 May 1973, an Air Agreement was concluded between the                      
 two countries.                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 The Minister of External Affairs paid an official visit to Burma from 5 to 9                      
 April 1973. He was accompanied by a team of officials from the Ministries of                      
 External Affairs, Irrigation and Power, Commerce, Food and Agriculture,                           
 Industries and Petro- leum and Chemicals. It was in the nature of a goodwill                      
 visit but preliminary proposals to develop closer relations in economic and                       
 cultural matters between the two countries were also dis- cussed. As a                            
 consequence of the discussions held during the visit, a 15-member Scientific                      
 and Technical Delegation led by Dr. Nyi Nyi, Deputy Minister for Education of                     
 Burma, visited India in July 1973. The Delegation was taken to various                            
 scientific and educational institutions and industrial sites to acquaint then                     
 with the progress made in India in these fields.                                                  
                                                                                                   
 The joint boundary demarcation work between the two countries has been making                     
 satisfactory progress. A 12-member Burmese Delegation led by Col. Kyi Maung                       
 visited India from 10 to 22 November 1973, in connection with the 14th and 15th                   
 Meetings of the Joint Boundary Commission.                                                        
                                                                                                   
 Nepal                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Indo-Nepal relations continued, to evolve and strengthen, in a spirit of                          
 cordiality and mutual understanding. The Prime Min- ister's visit to Nepal at                     
 the beginning of 1973, had set the stage                                                          
                                                                                                   
 pg16>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 for further expansion and diversification of Indo-Nepal co- operation in                          
 various fields.                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 Since then the two countries have exchanged several high level visits,                            
 culminating in the first ever State visit to India by Their Majesties King                        
 Birendra and Queen Aishwarya of Nepal (from 12 to 19 October 1973). While in                      
 India, Their Majesties visited various places of cultural and religious                           
 importance as also several sites of modem economic significance in India. In                      
 Delhi H. M. King Birendra held talks with the President and the Prime Minister                    
 and the Minister of External Affairs. He also discussed various aspects of                        
 Indo-Nepal co-operation With other Ministers of the Government of India. The                      
 Joint Communique issued during the visit stressed the importance of the                           
 principles of peace- ful co-existence in the conduct of international                             
 relations. It also reaffirmed that the two countries should constantly                            
 endeavour to strengthen friendship and deepen understanding between them and                      
 work towards these ends.                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 Earlier, in April-May 1973, the Union Minister for Planning accompanied by                        
 several experts, visited Nepal to meet Nepalese planning officials. Several                       
 agreements were reached on Indo- Nepal co-operation in fields such as                             
 irrigation and power, communications, agriculture, horticulture, and                              
 industries. The most important of these agreements was one on harnessing the                      
 hydroelectric potential of river Karnali in Nepal. India has agreed to purchase                   
 the bulk of the power to be generated by the proposed Karnali project.                            
                                                                                                   
 The third meeting, of the Indo-Nepal Joint Review Committee was held in India                     
 from 26 December 1973 to 4 January 1974, to discuss problems relating to                          
 Nepal's trade and transit. Agreements were reached, inter alia, on facilities                     
 for Nepalese goods at Calcutta port and on supply of essential commodities by                     
 India to Nepal. The Foreign Secretary to the Government of Nepal, accompanied                     
 by a delegation, also paid a Visit to India from 12 February 1974 to discuss                      
 further the supply of petroleum products to Nepal.                                                
                                                                                                   
 pg17>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 During the year 1973-74, economic co-operation between the two countries was                      
 further developed and intensified, based on the recognition that such                             
 co-operation was of mutual benefit and symbolised the warm and friendly                           
 relations between the two countries and peoples. A sum of Rs. 9.00 crores was                     
 provided in the budget for the year 1973-74, by way of developmental assis-                       
 tance from India. A standby credit of Rs. 10.00 crores was also extended. The                     
 construction of the Central Sector of the Mahendra Raj Marg (East-West Highway)                   
 progressed satisfactorily. The work of improving and black-topping of                             
 Kathmandu-Godawri Road is also progressing, The survey for construction of a                      
 bridge on river Kamla on the East Sector of the. Mahendra. Raj Marg has been                      
 completed and the construction of the bridge is expected to be taken up                           
 shortly. The Eastern Sector of Mahendra Raj Marg and Kosi area roads, are                         
 nearing completion. A Letter of Exchange is shortly to be signed for                              
 black-topping and improve- ment of Kathmandu-Trisuli Road from Ranipsuwa to                       
 Trisuli. The work on Chatra Canal is nearing completion. Work on the desilting                    
 basin of the Trisuli Hydel Project also progressed. A high-level Nepalese                         
 delegation visited India to study the working of important soil conservation                      
 centres in connection with imple- menting soil conservation measures in Nepal.                    
 As a sequel to the visit, a detailed soil conservation scheme under Indian aid                    
 to Nepal is now being drawn up. Indian assistance in the fields of                                
 horticulture, veterinary, water supply, rural development etc., has continued                     
 this year.                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 Indian Teaching staff including professors, readers and lecturers have                            
 continued to be deputed to the Tribhuvan Uni- versity. Other technicians and                      
 coaches have also been sent to Nepal.                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Pakistan                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 India continued its search for normalisation of relations and establishment of                    
 durable peace in the sub-continent. Repeated                                                      
                                                                                                   
 pg18>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 initiatives were taken over the year to accelerate the process of                                 
 reconciliation with Pakistan within the framework of the Simla Agreement.                         
 Paragraph 4 of the Simla Agreement had already been implemented in full with                      
 the delineation of the line of control in Jammu and Kashmir and the withdrawal                    
 of troops from occupied territories on the western border. India now sought                       
 further implementation of the provisions of this, Agreement.                                      
                                                                                                   
 Accordingly, in January 1973, India communicated to, Pakistan its willingness                     
 to enter into bilateral negotiations for implementation of normalisation                          
 measures listed in paragraph 3 of the Simla Agreement. These measures include                     
 resumption of communications, air links and overflights, trade, restoration of                    
 normal travel facilities and promotion of scientific and cultural exchanges.                      
 Pakistan, however, responded negatively to this offer on the plea that the                        
 prisoners of war issue had assumed first priority and that implementation of                      
 normalisation measures would have to await their repatriation to Pakistan.                        
 Thus, no progress could be made.                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 India consequently directed its efforts to the early resolution of the                            
 humanitarian issues arising out of the conflict of 1971. These issues related                     
 to the need for repatriation of the Bengalees detained in Pakistan, the                           
 Pakistani prisoners of war and civilian internees in India who had surrendered                    
 to the joint Indo- Bangladesh Command, and the Pakistani nationals in                             
 Bangladesh, namely, those who had declared their allegiance to Pakistan. The                      
 resolution of these humanitarian problems was held up due to Pakistan's policy                    
 of continued non-recognition of Bangladesh. which prevented the setting-up of a                   
 tripartite meeting in which Bangladesh could participate on the basis of                          
 sovereign equality.                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 It was against this background that discussions were held between the                             
 Governments of India and Bangladesh during April 1973, with a view to                             
 defreezing the situation and finding a                                                            
                                                                                                   
 pg19> solution to the humanitarian problems arising out of the December 1971,                     
 conflict. As a result of these discussions, Governments of India and Bangladesh                   
 issued a joint declaration on 17 April 1973, which separated political problems                   
 from humanitarian issues by proposing the simultaneous repatriation of the                        
 Pakistani prisoners of war and civilian internees, except those required by the                   
 Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh for trial on criminal                           
 charges, the repatriation, of Bengalees forcibly detained in Pakistan and the                     
 repatriation of Pakistanis in Bangladesh, i.e. all non-Bengalees who owed                         
 allegiance to and had opted for repatriation to Pakistan. Thus, the Declaration                   
 provided a fair, balanced and practical formula for the repatriation of                           
 Pakistani prisoners and other citizens and Bengalees displaced by the December                    
 1971 conflict. It demons- trated once again that contrary to Pakistani                            
 propaganda India was not interested in using the POW issue for seeking any                        
 political concessions from Pakistan. Moreover, the Joint Offer took into                          
 account Pakistan's declared views on various issues including war trials of                       
 Pakistani POWs, Pakistani nationals in Bangladesh etc.                                            
                                                                                                   
 It was heartening to note that the international community as a whole warmly                      
 welcomed the Indo-Bangladesh initiative in the matter. It was, therefore,                         
 disappointing when Pakistan responded by issuing a statement on 20 April 1973,                    
 in which it set forth an extreme position calling for the one-sided resolution                    
 of issues affecting Pakistan. The statement also sought to introduce political                    
 considerations in the resolution of purely humanitarian issues. In its official                   
 communication of 23 April, Pakistan while referring to its statement of 20                        
 April, made the suggestion that a representative of the Government of India                       
 should visit Islamabad to discuss these matters.                                                  
                                                                                                   
 In consultation with the Government of Bangladesh, India sent a reply to                          
 Pakistan, on 8 May in which it was emphasised that the Indo-Bangladesh Joint                      
 Declaration had sought to resolve simultaneously the humanitarian issues                          
 arising out of the                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 pg20>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 armed conflict of 1971, and that Bangladesh had deliberately set aside                            
 political considerations, although they were of vital impor- tance to her. It                     
 was further suggested that if Pakistan Government were to indicate their                          
 agreement in principle to the solution set out in the Joint Declaration of 17                     
 April 1973, the proposed talks between India and Pakistan could be purposeful                     
 and lead to quick results. In such an eventuality the representatives of India                    
 and Pakistan could work out modalities for implementing the solution of these                     
 problems.                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 After an exchange of correspondence, Pakistan finally agreed to hold                              
 discussions with India within the framework of the Joint Declaration. A                           
 delegation led by the Special Emissary of the Prime Minister of India, Shri P.                    
 N. Haksar, visited Rawal- pindi and Islamabad and held discussions with the                       
 Pakistan Delegation led by Mr. Aziz Ahmed, Pakistan's Minister of State for                       
 Defence and Foreign Affairs, from 24 to 31 July 1973. During the course of                        
 these talks questions relating to simulta- neous repatriation of the three                        
 categories of persons mentioned in the Joint Indo-Bangladesh Declaration of 17                    
 April 1973, were discussed in full detail. The Pakistan side acknowledged the                     
 fact that the Joint Indo-Bangladesh Declaration, was a step forward and paved                     
 the way for an early resolution of the relevant issues. Some progress was made                    
 in defining these issues and it was agreed between the two Delegations that a                     
 point had been reached where further consideration by both sides was necessary.                   
 In pursuance of this decision, the discussions were resumed at New Delhi from                     
 18 August 1973 and continued till 28 August 1973. These discussions took place                    
 in consultation with the Bangladesh Government.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 As a result of these talks, an Agreement was signed on 28 August 1973, between                    
 the Government of India and Pakistan. The Agreement envisaged the simultaneous                    
 repatriation of all Pakistani prisoners of war (except the 195 prisoners                          
 required for trials by Bangladesh), the repatriation to Bangladesh of all                         
 Bengalees in Pakistan and initially a substantial number of                                       
                                                                                                   
 pg21>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Pakistanis now in Bangladesh to Pakistan. Regarding the 195 POWs, the Agreement                   
 provided that no trials shall be held during the process of repatriation, that                    
 in the meantime they shall remain in India and that tripartite discussions will                   
 be held for reaching a settlement on this issue. It was further agreed that                       
 discussions shall be held between Pakistan and Bangladesh to decide what                          
 additional number of Pakistanis in Bangladesh may be permitted to return to                       
 Pakistan. Bangladesh made it clear that it will participate in such meetings                      
 only on the basis of sovereign equality.                                                          
                                                                                                   
 Pakistan had, in May 1973, before the signing of the Delhi Agreement, sent an                     
 application to the International Court of Justice to issue an interim                             
 injunction against the transfer of the 195 POWs required for trials in                            
 Bangladesh. India challenged the jurisdiction of the Court to entertain                           
 Pakistan's application. The court did not grant an interim injunction and in an                   
 order issued on 13 July 1973, it ruled that it must first of all satisfy itself                   
 that it had jurisdiction in the matter. In December 1973, Pakistan Government                     
 decided to withdraw its application from the International Court. India                           
 welcomed this move and expressed the hope that Pakistan would now move forward                    
 to resolve the- issue of the 195 prisoners of war in accordance with the Delhi                    
 Agreement.                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 In May 1973, the Government of Pakistan requested the ICAO Council to take up                     
 at its session in June 1973, Pakistan's complaint against India's ban on                          
 over-light of Pakistani aircraft over its territory. Subsequently it informed                     
 the President of the Council to defer the consideration of the cases until                        
 either of the parties requested it to do so. India sent a communication to the                    
 Council stating that it had no objection to such deferment. As the position                       
 stands today, the matter will not be taken up by the ICAO Council unless either                   
 party requests it to do so.                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 The three-way process of repatriation under the Delhi Agreement commenced on 19                   
 September 1973 and by 18 February                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 pg22>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 1974, a total of 217,681 persons had been repatriated to their res- pective                       
 countries. Unfortunately, the rate at which the Pakistan Government gave                          
 clearances for its nationals to be repatriated from Bangladesh was rather slow                    
 and this had affected the overall. process of repatriation. India, in                             
 consultation with Bangladesh suggested to Pakistan, on 3 November that Pakistan                   
 should speed up these clearances so that the overall pace of repatriation could                   
 be enhanced in accordance with the principle of simulta- neity contained in the                   
 Delhi Agreement.                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 Under the Delhi Agreement, the repatriation of Pakistani POWs and civilian                        
 internees had been progressing satisfactorily. It was, therefore, felt that                       
 India should reiterate her willingness to enter into discussions with Pakistan                    
 in accordance with para 3 of the Simla Agreement for the implementation of                        
 normalisation measures. The Minister of External Affairs, in a statement in the                   
 Lok Sabha on 21 December reiterated India's willingness to start these                            
 discussions at the earliest moment. He said that it would be in the mutual                        
 interests of both Pakistan and India, and in the interests of a large number of                   
 people in the two countries if there was no further delay in this matter and                      
 therefore, agreements, were worked out to resume communications. trade, travel                    
 and cultural links between the two countries. This would give rise to greater                     
 confidence and improve the atmosphere and thereby facilitate the task of                          
 discussing more complicated issues. On 31 December 1973, this was formally                        
 conveyed to Pakistan through an aide-memoire. Pakistan in its reply dated 19                      
 January 1974, came out with a very limited response which in actual effect had                    
 very little practical utility. They suggested opening of discussions only to                      
 resume postal, telegraphic, land and sea communications while keeping out                         
 discussions for the resumption of air-links including over-lights which were                      
 also included in Paragraph 3(1) of the Simla Agreement.                                           
                                                                                                   
 It was, therefore, decided to send another message to Pakistan on 24 January,                     
 in which it was emphasised that the main aim of the two countries should be to                    
 restore travel between the two                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 pg23>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 countries in order to alleviate the hardship of thousands of people. In doing                     
 this it would be logical and in accordance with Paragraph 3(i) and (ii) of the                    
 Simla Agreement if discussions took place not only on resumption of postal,                       
 telegraphic, land and sea communications but also included other items such as                    
 aft links, over-flights and resumption of travel facilities.                                      
                                                                                                   
 In terms of the Simla Agreement, the final settlement of the Kashmir issue has                    
 to be in the context of normalisation of relations and establishment of durable                   
 peace with Pakistan. In recent months. Pakistan has been more vocal about this                    
 issue. In September 1973, the Prime Minister of Pakistan referred to Kashmir                      
 during his statement in the United Nations General Assembly. After the Pakistan                   
 Prime Minister's statement; Minister of External Affairs, in his comments to                      
 the press in New York, stated that there was little point in raising this issue                   
 in the U.N. as both sides had agreed at Simla that this problem would be                          
 discussed and settled bilaterally and peacefully.                                                 
                                                                                                   
 The Prime Minister of Pakistan, during his visit to Pakistan occupied Kashmir                     
 in November 1973, issued some statements which were contrary to the provisions                    
 of the Simla Agreement. particularly those regarding non-interference in each                     
 other's internal affairs. This was brought to the notice of the Govern- ment of                   
 Pakistan, making it clear that such statements by the highest authority in                        
 Pakistan could only cause apprehensions in India regarding Pakistan's                             
 intentions about the implementation of the Simla Agreement. The Minister of                       
 External Affairs also wrote to the Pakistan's Minister of State for Defence and                   
 Foreign Affairs asking him to clarify Pakistan Government's position so that we                   
 could understand where we stood in terms of the Simla Agreement. In his reply,                    
 the Pakistan Minister of State tried to explain that the speeches of the Prime                    
 Minister of Pakistan, read as a whole, could not justify the kind of impression                   
 created in India. He further stated that the Prime Minister of Pakistan had                       
 been repeatedly advocating that war would not solve the Kashmir issue and that                    
 three wars fought during the last 26                                                              
                                                                                                   
 pg24>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 years had left the issue unresolved. According to him, Pakistan Government                        
 remained committed to promoting friendship and harmonious relations with India                    
 and to implementing the Simla Agreement in letter and spirit.                                     
                                                                                                   
 In a statement in Parliament on 6 December 1973, the Minister of External                         
 Affairs while taking note of the clarification given by Pakistan, expressed                       
 unhappiness over the statements of the Prime Minister of Pakistan and hoped                       
 that Pakistan Govern- ment would fulfil the assurance contained in its reply.                     
 He reiterated that India's objective was to stabilise peace and to reverse the                    
 trend of confrontation in its relations with Pakistan. The Minister of External                   
 Affairs also explained in the Lok Sabha that any move by Pakistan to change the                   
 status of Pakistan occupied Kashmir would also be illegal as the whole of Jammu                   
 and Kashmir became a part of the Indian Union as a result of the State's                          
 accession in 1947.                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 Sri Lanka                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 In pursuance of her policy to have very close and friendly relations with                         
 immediate neighbours, India made constant efforts to resolve outstanding issues                   
 and develop co-operation with Sri Lanka in the economic and other fields. The                     
 mutual desire for further strengthening Indo-Sri Lanka relations was reflected                    
 in the visits exchanged between the two countries.                                                
                                                                                                   
 At the invitation of Mrs. Bandaranaike, Prime Minister of the Republic of Sri                     
 Lanka, the Prime Minister of India paid an official visit to Sri Lanka from 27                    
 to 29 April 1973. In the joint communique issued at the end of the I visit both                   
 the Prime Ministers expressed similar views on many international issues. For                     
 speedy implementation of the 1964 Agreement, India agreed to an annual                            
 progressive increase of 10% over the rate of repatriation (35,000) contemplated                   
 in the 1964 Agreement. It was also agreed that an early decision would be                         
 reached in regard to the status and future of the remaining 150,000 persons                       
                                                                                                   
 pg25>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 of Indian origin in Sri Lanka, Kachchativu and related matters such as the                        
 median line and fishing rights.                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 As a follow-up of the Prime Minister's visit to Sri Lanka in April 1973, a Sri                    
 Lanka delegation consisting of Mr. W. T. Jayasinghe, Secretary of Defence and                     
 External Affairs and Mr. C. W. Pinto, Legal Adviser to the Ministry of External                   
 Affairs of Sri Lanka, visited India from 9 to 13 June 1973. The Sri Lanka                         
 delegation held talks in an atmosphere of mutual understanding with senior                        
 Indian officials of the Ministry of External Affairs on matters of interest to                    
 India and Sri Lanka.                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 A team of Indian officials led by the Foreign Secretary Shri Kewal Singh,                         
 Visited Colombo from 15 to 18 October to discuss various outstanding issues                       
 between India and Sri Lanka, including economic co-operation.                                     
                                                                                                   
 Mr. Lakshman Jayakody, Deputy Minister for Defence and External Affairs,                          
 Government of Sri Lanka, visited India from 20 to 26 November 1973. During his                    
 stay in New Delhi, he called on the President, the Minister of-, External                         
 Affairs and the Minister of Defence. A wide-range of subjects of mutual                           
 interest was discussed in his meeting with Shri Surendra Pal Singh, Minister of                   
 State in the Ministry of External Affairs.                                                        
                                                                                                   
 The Prime Minister of Sri Lanka, Mrs. Sirimavo R. D. Bandara- naike, visited                      
 India from 22 to 29 January 1974, at the invitation of the Prime Minister of                      
 India. In the discussions between the two Prime Ministers, there was a close                      
 identity of views regard- ing the recent international developments.                              
                                                                                                   
 The two Prime Ministers also discussed bilateral issues. While reviewing the                      
 economic and technical co-operation between the two countries, they noted with                    
 satisfaction the progress in the economic and technical co-operation between                      
 the two countries.                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 The Prime Ministers agreed that the implementation of the 1964 Agreement was                      
 proceeding satisfactorily. An Agreement was also reached on the remaining                         
 150.000 persons of Indian origin who                                                              
                                                                                                   
 pg26>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 were left over by the 1964 Agreement for a later decision. Sri Lanka would                        
 confer citizenship on 75,000 of this number and India would accept for                            
 repatriation 75,000. Thereafter, it was observed with satisfaction that the two                   
 countries would have finally settled the problem of all persons of Indian                         
 origin in Sri Lanka.                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 The visit of Sri Lanka Prime Minister was a landmark in the relation between                      
 the two countries and contributed to a further strengthening of their warm and                    
 friendly relations.                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 INS Nilgiri visited Colombo from 21 to 25 July 1973. Indian Naval Training                        
 Squadron consisting of INS Delhi, Krishna and Cauvery also visited Colombo from                   
 15 to 17 October 1973.                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 The Speaker of the National State Assembly of Sri Lanka Mr. Stanley                               
 Tillekaratne, visited India from 20 November to 6 December 1973, at the                           
 invitation of the Speaker of the Lok Sabha.                                                       
                                                                                                   
 Sikkim                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 The Fifth General Elections of Sikkim in February-March 1973 were followed by                     
 widespread protests, the opposition parties charging the Sikkim authorities                       
 with malpractices, corruption and rigging of elections. Measures with which the                   
 authorities countered these protests led to a further deterioration in the                        
 situation, finally leading to a, complete breakdown of law and order throughout                   
 the State.                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 The Chogyal found the situation out of his control and requested the Government                   
 of India initially to take over responsibility for law and order and                              
 subsequently for the administration of Sikkim. The Joint Action Committee                         
 consisting of Opposition parties which spearheaded the protests against the                       
 Chogyal and his administration also made similar demands to the Government of                     
 India. In response to these requests, on 6 April, the Government of India took                    
 over the responsibility for                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 pg27>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 law and order in specified parts of Sikkim and on 8 April, further                                
 responsibilities for the whole of Sikkim. Shri B. S. Das, was appointed as                        
 Chief Administrator and other measures were taken to restore law and order and                    
 strengthen the administration. With these measures confidence was restored and                    
 the situation soon returned to normal.                                                            
                                                                                                   
 On 8 May 1973, after intensive consultations between the leaders of various                       
 political parties, the Chogyal and the Government of India, a Tripartite                          
 Agreement was signed. The Agreement assured the people of Sikkim basic human                      
 rights and fundamental freedoms, and provided for a new Assembly to be elected                    
 by the people of Sikkim on the basis of the principle of "one man one vote",                      
 care being taken to ensure that no single section acquires a dominant position                    
 due mainly to its ethnic origin. The Sikkim Administration is now headed by, a                    
 Chief Executive who is appointed by the Chogyal on nomination by the Government                   
 of India. Under the Agreement the Chief Executive has been assured of all the                     
 powers necessary for the discharge of his functions and responsibilities.                         
                                                                                                   
 The leaders of the political parties, by signing the Agreement as                                 
 representatives of the people of Sikkim, have for the first time in the history                   
 of Sikkim made the people a party to such a, constitutional document which is                     
 so vital to their political, social and economic well-being and uplift. The                       
 Agreement is thus a great landmark in the annals of the development of                            
 democratic institutions in Sikkim.                                                                
                                                                                                   
 Efforts to evolve a formula acceptable to all the parties in Sikkim for holding                   
 fresh general elections to the Assembly envi- saged under 8 May 1973 Agreement                    
 were continued. The Foreign Secretary and the Chief Election Commissioner paid                    
 visits to the Sikkimese capital and held consultations with the Chogyal and the                   
 leaders of the political parties. The three private visits of the Chogyal to                      
 Delhi provided opportunities for further consultations. As a result of                            
 discussions held at various levels and                                                            
                                                                                                   
 pg28> with all the, parties involved, a formula to serve as a basis for the                       
 elections to the Assembly has been worked out. The Proposed Assembly would have                   
 a strength of 32 members out of which 15 each are to represent the                                
 Bhutia-Lepcha and the Nepalese com- munities. Of the remaining two, one has                       
 been set aside for the Scheduled Castes and the other for a representative of                     
 the monas- teries. The constituencies have been delimited. The elections for                      
 which fresh electoral rolls have been prepared under the auspices of the Chief                    
 Election Commission of India are scheduled to be held on 15 April, 1974 and the                   
 results of the poll would be announced on 19 April 1974, The voting in the                        
 election would be on the basis of one man one vote. By giving equal                               
 representation to the two principal communities in Sikkim, it has been ensured                    
 that no community would dominate over the other.                                                  
                                                                                                   
 The Chogyal's private visit to New Delhi from 16 to 20 September 1973, offered                    
 an opportunity for discussions between him and representatives of the                             
 Government of India on matters of mutual interest. Speaking at a Press                            
 Conference in New Delhi on 19 September the Chogyal described his talks with                      
 the Prime Minister on the situation in Sikkim and the future political set-up                     
 of the State as "free, frank, honest and fruitful".                                               
                                                                                                   
 Many measures for the welfare of the people have been undertaken since May                        
 1973, in continuation of the policy of co-operation and involvement in the                        
 efforts to raise living standards and extend social benefits which the                            
 Government of India have consistently followed in Sikkim. Text books at                           
 subsidised rates have, been distributed to school children and schools are                        
 being provided sports and recreational facilities. Special arrangements were                      
 made to supply medicines to the Government of Sikkim to, equip various                            
 hospitals in the State which were short of medicines. Mobile Medical Units                        
 provided much-needed medical relief in remote areas and now arrangements are                      
 being made to get mobile dispensaries so that people all over the State                           
 continue to get medical attention. India has announced a grant of Rs. 10 lakhs                    
 to the Sikkim Durbar to meet the initial cost of clearing roads                                   
                                                                                                   
 pg29>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 blocked during the recent floods and also to subsidise the cost of transport of                   
 essential commodities to the flood-affected areas.                                                
                                                                                                   
 Sikkim's Fourth Five Year Plan (1971-76) contemplates an outlay of Rs. 20                         
 crores, of which Government of India's contribution would be Rs. 18.5 crores,                     
 entirely by way of grants. In 1971-72, a sum of Rs. 2.20 crores and in 1972-73,                   
 a sum of nearly Rs., 3 crores were given to Sikkim for the implementation of                      
 its Annual Plans. For the year 1973-74, a sum of Rs. 5.9 crores. has been                         
 earmarked. Work commenced last year on Rs. 5.93 crores Lagyap Project which on                    
 completion will generate 6000 KW of electricity.                                                  
                                                                                                   
 pg30>                                                                                             
 South East Asia                                                                                   
                                                                             Top                   
 CHAPTER II                                                                                        
 SOUTH EAST ASIA                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 India's friendly relations with the countries in South East Asia, Thailand,                       
 Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines, were further strengthened                     
 by exchange of visits and mutual col- laboration in the political, cultural,                      
 educational and commercial fields. Promotion of joint ventures and various                        
 other projects of economic co-operation have also been making significant                         
 progress.                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 Indonesia                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 The 4th round of bilateral talks at official and Ministerial level between                        
 India and Indonesia was held in New Delhi from Mar 30, 1973 to 3 April 1973.                      
 During the Ministerial level talks, the Indonesian Delegation was led by Dr.                      
 Adam Malik, Foreign Minister of Indonesia. During the talks, bilateral                            
 relations and recent international developments were discussed. The discus-                       
 sions revealed similarity in the position of both Governments on various                          
 issues. The two sides reviewed important developments that had taken place in                     
 the international situation, particularly in Asia, since their last meeting in                    
 Jackstraw in August, 1971. The Minister of External Affairs of India welcomed                     
 the progress achieved by the countries of ASEAN and reiterated the support of                     
 the Government of India for the Kuala Lumpur Declaration                                          
                                                                                                   
 pg31>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 calling for a Zone of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality in South- East Asia. The                      
 Foreign Ministers also discussed various ideas regarding wider regional                           
 co-operation in Asia. They reaffirmed that the elimination of Great Power                         
 tension and rivalry from the Indian Ocean would contribute greatly to peace and                   
 stability in the region and felt that India and Indonesia should have more                        
 frequent exchange of views on this subject and co-operate closely in the U.N.                     
 Ad hoc Committee. Regarding the situation in the sub-continent the two Foreign                    
 Ministers agreed that recognition and acceptance of existing realities in the                     
 sub-continent was ne- cessary for furthering the process of normalisation of a                    
 durable peace among the countries concerned.                                                      
                                                                                                   
 In the field of economic and technical co-operation between India and Indonesia                   
 there has been satisfactory progress. Four new India-Indonesia joint ventures                     
 have already been approved. India participated in the Djakarta Fair 1973, from                    
 16 to 28 June 1973, and a 3-member team of National Electronic and Electrical                     
 Institute, Bandung (Indonesia), visited Pilani Central Electronics Engineering                    
 Research Institute and the Research Sur- vey and Planning Organisation of the                     
 Council of Scientific and Industrial Research.                                                    
                                                                                                   
 During its visit to Indonesia from 7 to 15 June 1973, INS Nilgiri held joint                      
 exercises with Indonesian naval ship Lambung Mang Kurat while on its way from                     
 Djakarta to Bali INC Nilgiri also visited Bangkok, Singapore and Colombo in                       
 June/ July 1973.                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 General G. G. Bewoor, Chief of the Army Staff, accompanied by Mrs. Bewoor.                        
 visited Indonesia from 30 October to 5 Novem- ber 1973.                                           
                                                                                                   
 Malaysia                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 Important visitors from Malaysia during the years were:--                                         
                                                                                                   
 (i) Tan Siew Sin, Finance Minister,                                                               
                                                                                                   
 pg32>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 (ii) Mr. Mohammed Ghazali Bin Shafie, Minister for Infor- mation & Special                        
 Function; and,                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 (iii) Tan Sri Lee Siok Yew, Health Minister.                                                      
                                                                                                   
 The Vice-Chief of Army Staff, Lt. Gen. Har Prasad, paid a visit to Malaysia                       
 during April 1973.                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 An Indian football team participated in the Merdeka Foot- ball Tournament held                    
 at Kuala Lumpur in July/August 1973, and an Army Polo Team visited Malaysia                       
 from 2 to 25 Novem- ber 1973. India also participated in the Quran Reading                        
 Competi- tion held in Malaysia from 15 to 16 October 1973.                                        
                                                                                                   
 In the field of economic co-operation, with the approval of new proposals for                     
 Indo-Malaysian joint ventures the total num- ber of joint ventures under                          
 implementation/production has reach- ed 26.                                                       
                                                                                                   
 Singapore                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 From Singapore the important visitors were: Inche Othman bin Wok, Minister of                     
 Social Affairs, and Mr. Chua Sian Shin, Minister for Health and Home Affairs,                     
 who visited Bombay on 27 January and 2 May 1973, respectively.                                    
                                                                                                   
 A wholly Indian Trade Exhibition was held in June-July in Singapore. It helped                    
 appreciably to promote trade between India and Singapore. Indian sports                           
 teams-karate, badminton and golf-visited Singapore during the period.                             
                                                                                                   
 Thailand                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 As a result of wide-spread agitation and violence, the Govern- ment of Prime                      
 Minister Thanom Kittikachorn resigned on 14 October 1973, and the King                            
 appointed Mr. Sanya Dharamasakti, Prime Minister.                                                 
                                                                                                   
 pg33>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 For the promotion of cultural ties between India and Thai- land a number of                       
 programmes were organised in Thailand. More important of these in 1973 were:                      
 (i) a photographic ex-. hibition depicting religious, economic and cultural                       
 life of India;. (ii) a film show of Satyajit Ray's award-winning film                             
 "Charulata"; and (iii) a Bharat Natyam dance performance by Miss Meenakshi                        
 Sabanayagam.                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 Two baby camels were presented to the Chiang Mai Zoo, a pair of spotted deer to                   
 the Khon Kaen University and Bodhi tree- saplings to the World Fellowship of                      
 Buddhists and the Supreme Patriarch of Thailand. Professor Pisit Choroon Wongsa                   
 of the Silpakorn University and Mr. Wikon Suthiragsa, Curator, Fine Arts;                         
 Department, visited India and, in turn, Professor Sisir Kumar Ghosh of the                        
 Vishwa Bharati University, Shantiniketan, visited Chulalongkorn and other                         
 Universities for lectures and meetings.                                                           
                                                                                                   
 New Zealand                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 At the invitation of the Government of New Zealand, Prof. Sher Singh, the then                    
 Minister of State for Agriculture, visited New Zealand in May 1973. During his                    
 discussions with the authorities, of the New Zealand Government, possibilities                    
 of fur- ther co-operation in the fields of animal husbandry and pasture and                       
 fodder development were discussed.                                                                
                                                                                                   
 India participated in the New Zealand International Fair held at Auckland in                      
 August 1973. A direct shipping service between India and New Zealand has been                     
 introduced since the beginning, of the year.                                                      
                                                                                                   
 The Prime Minister of New Zealand, Rt. Hon'ble Norman, N. S. Kirk, visited                        
 India from 27 December 1973 to 1 January 1974. The visit was a landmark in the                    
 friendly rfelations already existing between the two countries and opened                         
 avenues of                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 pg34>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 further co-operation. The New Zealand Prime Minister called on the President                      
 and held talks with the Prime Minister. The- Minister of External Affairs, the                    
 Minister of Agriculture and the Minister of Planning called on him for talks.                     
                                                                                                   
 The Prime Minister of New Zealand welcomed the role of India in international                     
 affairs and reaffirmed his support for the concept of Indian Ocean as a 'Zone                     
 of Peace' free from power rivalry, tensions and military escalation. The New                      
 Zealand Prime Minister expressed his understanding and appreciation of the                        
 initiatives taken by India for normalisation and the establishment of durable                     
 peace in the sub-continent. It was also agreed that (a) trade delegations will                    
 be exchanged in order to expand mutual trade (b) the possibility of an Indo-New                   
 Zealand joint venture in paper manufacture should be further explored and (c)                     
 agricultural experts of both countries should discuss the setting up of                           
 demonstration farms for experimental research of a practical nature. The New                      
 Zealand Prime Minister conveyed his Government's intention to continue                            
 Commonwealth tariff preferences in respect of India.                                              
                                                                                                   
 Australia                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 At the invitation of the Prime Minister of India, the Prime Minister of                           
 Australia, the Hon'ble Mr. Edward Gough Whitlam, Q.C., M.P., visited India from                   
 3 to 6 June 1973. The discussions between the Prime Ministers of India and                        
 Australia covered a wide-range of important international questions and                           
 bilateral relations. These discussions revealed a close similarity of views and                   
 approach between the two Governments.                                                             
                                                                                                   
 At the invitation of the Government of Australia, Prof. Sher Singh, the then                      
 Minister of State for Agriculture, Government of India visited Austarlia in May                   
 1973.                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Under the sponsorship of the Indian Council for Cultural Relations, a 30-member                   
 Australian Ballet Troupe, visited India in July 1973 and gave two performances.                   
                                                                                                   
 pg35>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Four eminent agricultural scientists from Australia came to India in December                     
 1973 and visited Indian Agricultural and Animal Husbandry Projects and                            
 discussed matters of mutual interest with Indian officials.                                       
                                                                                                   
 An Australian Parliamentary Goodwill Delegation led by Mr. Les Johnson, M.P.,                     
 Minister for Housing and Construction, visited India from 12 to 17 January,                       
 1974 as guests of the Lok Sabha.                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 At the Indo-Australian bi-lateral talks, held in Canberra in February 1974,                       
 there was, inter alia. identity of views on keeping the Indian Ocean free from                    
 power rivalry and tension and increas- ing the scope for further expansion of                     
 trade.                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 Fiji                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 Relations between India and Fiji continued to be very friendly. An Air Services                   
 Agreement between India and Fiji was initialled at Suva in September 1973.                        
 Subject to the approval of the two Governments, the Agreement will be signed at                   
 an early date.                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 A replica of an Indian soldier was presented to the Fiji Minister for                             
 Communications and Works in August 1973, as a gift from the Chief of Staff of                     
 the Indian Army to the Royal Fiji Military Forces.                                                
                                                                                                   
 Visits to India by the following important personalities from Fiji, show the                      
 growth of mutual relations: (i) Mr. J. B. Naisara, Minister for Education,                        
 Youth and Sport (2) Mr. Sakiasi Waqani- vavalagi, Assistant Minister,                             
 Rehabilitation, Development, Hous- ing and Social Welfare, (3) Mr. S. M. Koya,                    
 Leader of the Opposi- tion in the Fiji House of Representatives, (4) Mr. Apesai                   
 Tera, Member of the Fiji House Representatives and President of the Fiji                          
 Council of Trade Unions, (5) Mrs. Irene Jai Narayan, Member                                       
                                                                                                   
 pg36>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 of the Fiji House of Representatives, (6) Mr. Justice Mod Tikaram. Ombudsman of                   
 Fiji.                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Under the ITEC programme, the service of two experts from India were made                         
 available to the Government of Fiji-(1) Dr. M. K. Kamath, an Entomologist, who                    
 has been attached to the Koronivia Agricultural Research Station near Suva and                    
 (2) Shri B. S. Verma of the U.P. Government Roadways Corporation was deputed to                   
 head the Rewa, Provincial Development Company Limited.                                            
                                                                                                   
 An Exhibition of Hindi Books was held in Suva and Nadi, in April 1973, under                      
 the auspices of the Central Hindi Directorate of the Government of India.                         
                                                                                                   
 Fiji's first Flour Mill, which is India's first joint venture with Fiji, was                      
 opened by H.E. Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara, the Prime Minister of Fiji on 10                           
 September 1973.                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 Tonga                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Medicines and clothing worth Rs. 10,000/- were presented to the Government of                     
 Tonga in May 1973, as Government of India's contribution towards relief of                        
 cyclone victims. A Tonga-India Friendship Week was celebrated in Tonga in March                   
 1973. A photographic exhibition depicting 25 years of Indian Indepen- dence was                   
 inaugurated by Her Majesty the Queen of Tonga. The special attractions of the                     
 week were a dolls exhibition and two performances of Indian dances and music.                     
                                                                                                   
 Western Samoa                                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 Mr. Falesa S. Saili, Finance Minister of Western Samoa, visited India from 30                     
 September to 3 October 1973, as a guest of the Government of India. He was                        
 accompanied by the Finance Secretary and the Manager of the Bank of Western                       
 Samoa.                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 pg37>                                                                                             
 East Asia                                                                                         
                                                                             Top                   
 CHAPTER III                                                                                       
 EAST ASIA                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 China                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 There was no significant change in India's relations with China- While India                      
 continued to seek normalisation of relations, there was little response from                      
 China.                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 China's anti-Indian propaganda continued apace. Through public statements and                     
 publicity media, the Chinese sought to give a wrong impression of our                             
 relationship with our neighbouring countries like Nepal and the Soviet Union.                     
                                                                                                   
 The Chinese also made representations about Dalai Lama's visit to Europe in                       
 1973, on the ground that the visit was meant to- expand "the scope of                             
 anti-China activities". The Government of India had pointed out to the Chinese                    
 that the visit was a purely personal one, with no political implications. And                     
 this was more than borne out by the facts of the visit.                                           
                                                                                                   
 Despite this lack of positive response, India continued to adopt an attitude of                   
 friendship and restraint. In April 1973, India waived visa requirements for                       
 Chinese passengers in direct transit                                                              
                                                                                                   
 pg38>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 through India (with permission to stop for a period of 24 hours). India also                      
 brought the propaganda war on the border to an end by stopping the radio                          
 broadcasts at the border passes of Nathu. La, Jelep, La and Cho La in                             
 February-March 1973.                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 Japan                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 The year was marked by growing all-sided contacts between India and Japan.                        
                                                                                                   
 The 8th Indo-Japan bilateral talks between the Foreign Offices of India and                       
 Japan took place in Tokyo on May 16, 1973 and 17 May 1973. Secretary in the                       
 Ministry of External Affairs, Shri V. C. Trivedi, led the Indian side, while                      
 Vice-Foreign Minister Hogan led the Japanese side.                                                
                                                                                                   
 The prestigious Indo-Japan Committee for Studies of Economic Development in                       
 India and Japan, held a joint meeting in Tokyo from 4 to 6 June 1973.                             
                                                                                                   
 The 6th joint meeting of the Business Co-operation Committees of India and                        
 Japan was held in Kyoto from 25 to 27 September 1973. The Indian side was led                     
 by Shri Charat Ram, while Dr. S., Nagano led the Japanese delegation. For the                     
 first time specific fields of proposed economic collaboration were identified                     
 and it was decided to set up a Standing Committee to go into the matter.                          
                                                                                                   
 Mr. N. Kishi, former Prime Minister of Japan, visited India as a leader of                        
 30-member group under the auspices of U.N. Family Planning Association (13 to                     
 17 October 1973). Two groups of Japanese Parliamentarians also visited India in                   
 the months of October and November.                                                               
                                                                                                   
 Indo-Japanese Mixed Commission on Cultural Relations held its 3rd meeting in                      
 Delhi on 23 October 1973. The Japanese side was led by Mr. S. Hod,                                
 Director-General, Cultural Affairs,                                                               
                                                                                                   
 pg39>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Division of the Japanese Foreign Office. Proposals for cultural exchanges in                      
 1973-74 were finalised.                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 At the end of the year, the Japanese Government also signified its willingness                    
 to offer aid to set up 3 fertiliser plants in India during the 5th Five-Year                      
 Plan.                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Republic of Korea                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 Relations with the Republic of Korea continued to grow closer a large number of                   
 visits of important dignitaries were exchanged.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 An Indian Parliamentary delegation led by the Speaker Dr. G. S. Dhillon,                          
 visited ROK from 25 to 30 June 1973.                                                              
                                                                                                   
 Mr. Kyu Hah Choi, Special Assistant for Foreign Affairs to the ROK President,                     
 visited India from 26 to 29 August 1973, as a Special Envoy of the President.                     
 The Chairman of the Atomic Research Institute of the ROK visited India on 10                      
 and 11 October 1973. A three-member Judiciary team also visited New Delhi from                    
 25 to 27 September 1973.                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 The Speaker of the National Assembly of ROK, Mr. Il-Kwon Chung, visited New                       
 Delhi at the head of a 9-member Parliamen- tary delegation from 20 to 25                          
 December 1973. During their stay they called on the President, Vice-President                     
 Prime Minister, the, Minister of External Affairs and the Minister for                            
 Parliamentary Affairs.                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 The relationship between the two countries marked a notable mile-stone when                       
 India and ROK decided to establish diplomatic relations at the Embassy level in                   
 each other's capital as of 10 December 1973.                                                      
                                                                                                   
 In the field of trade there was a steady improvement over 1971-72, with the                       
 two-way trade reaching Rs. 8.25 crores.                                                           
                                                                                                   
 pg40>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Democratic People's Republic of Korea                                                             
                                                                                                   
 India's relations with DPRK continued to remain friendly. A DPRK Government                       
 delegation led by Mr. Kim Gwan Sop visited India from 17 to 22 March. The                         
 delegation called on the Presi- dent, Vice-President, Prime Minister and the                      
 Minister of External Affairs and held wide-ranging talks with the Indian side                     
 led by the Minister of State Shri Surendra Pal Singh. The DPRK dele- gation                       
 explained their country's position on the question of re- unification of Korea.                   
                                                                                                   
 The Indian delegation welcomed the moves taken by the two Governments of Korea                    
 for starting a direct dialogue with a view to settling their differences and                      
 working for peaceful re-unification, of the country without any external                          
 interference.                                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 An Indian Trade delegation visited Korea in April 1973. The delegation                            
 concluded a new Trade Arrangement with DPRK. A trade delegation from DPRK led                     
 by the Deputy Minister for Foreign Trade, Mr. Kim Sok Jin visited India in                        
 February, 1974 and the first Indo-DPRK trade agreement was signed in Delhi on                     
 18 February 1974.                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 The Governments of India and the DPRK decided to establish diplomatic relations                   
 at the Embassy level in each other's capital as of 10 December 1973.                              
                                                                                                   
 Mongolia                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 As a result of the visit to India of the Prime Minister of Mongolia, Mr. Yu.                      
 Tsedenbal, in February 1973, specific, measures are being taken to promote                        
 greater economic and cultural co-operation between the two countries. An Indian                   
 film festival was held in Mongolia in September 1973.                                             
                                                                                                   
 An Indian Trade delegation visited Ulan Bator in April 1973, to work out                          
 details of the Trade Plan. Mongolia has shown                                                     
                                                                                                   
 pg41>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 interest in buying Rayon Brocade, snuff and other items from India.                               
                                                                                                   
 Democratic Republic of Vietnam                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 India's friendly bilateral relations with the DRVN continued to register a                        
 steady growth during the period under review. In pursuance of Government's                        
 declared policy of making its contri- bution to the economic rehabilitation of                    
 the DRVN, a number of concrete measures were initiated. The DRVN Government is                    
 particularly keen on co-operation in the agricultural field and a team of                         
 Indian Agricultural Experts visited the DRVN in October- November 1973, in                        
 order to make an on-the-spot study of the requirements and to identify the                        
 specific areas where Indian assis- tance could be made available. A number of                     
 steps like the supply of certain vaccines and seeds are already in the process                    
 of im- plementation. The various other proposals suggested by the DRVN                            
 Government are also under active study.                                                           
                                                                                                   
 Earlier, Government had also acceded to the DRVN request for providing special                    
 facilities to their students in India for the study of English. A group of 15                     
 DRVN students arrived in India in August 1973 and are now undergoing a special                    
 course in the English language at the Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi.                     
                                                                                                   
 Republic of Vietnam                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 Bilateral relations with the Republic of Vietnam suffered a set- back during                      
 1971-72. However, in 1973, the Government of the Republic of Vietnam signified                    
 its interest in normalising relations with India and sent a delegation to India                   
 in August 1973, led by Senator Tran. Quang Thuan.                                                 
                                                                                                   
 Laos                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 The signing of the Peace Agreement in Vientiane on 21 February 1973, was                          
 followed by a Protocol signed by the two                                                          
                                                                                                   
 pg42>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Laotian parties in Vientiane, on 14 September 1973. The February Agreement had                    
 declared among other, things, that the Inter- national Commission for Control                     
 and Supervision in Laos, with India as its Chairman, will continue to function                    
 and the Septem- ber 14 Protocol spelt out the functions of the Control                            
 Commission basically in conformity with the Geneva Agreement of 1962. India on                    
 her part welcomed these Agreements between the two Laotian sides and assured                      
 all concerned of her full co-operation in the task entrusted to it under the                      
 Geneva Agreement. The Central Joint Commission has already been formed and an                     
 agree- ment on the Mixed Police Force and the Administration of the two                           
 Capitals was signed on 6 February 1974 and the Provisional Government of                          
 National Union was expected to be formed shortly. It was India's hope that this                   
 would happen soon and the provi- sions of the Peace Agreement would be speedily                   
 implemented.                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 India continued to take keen interest in the economic develop- ment of Laos.                      
 She extended assistance to Laos under the Colombo Plan and the Indian Technical                   
 and Economic Co-operation Programme. Among the items of such assistance were                      
 the feasi- bility study by Water and Power Consultancy Services (India) Ltd.,                     
 for the Ban Mark Nao Lift Irrigation Project; a feasibility study for the                         
 setting up of a Small Scale Industrial Estate; equipment for two Sediment                         
 Testing Laboratories, the deputation of a foretry expert and a Bridge Engineer.                   
 Two Laotian Forestry officials came to India on a study tour. India made                          
 provision for training of two forestry trainees. She would also contribute As.                    
 11 lakhs in the second phase of the Nam Ngum Hydro Electric Project in Laos.                      
 The Indian contribution would be in the form of supplies of machinery and                         
 equipment required for the project. Three gift consignments of vegetable seeds                    
 were sent to Laos in 1973.                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 Cambodia                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 The situation in Cambodia remained fluid with fighting in progress in many                        
 parts of the country. India's policy continued                                                    
                                                                                                   
 pg43>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 to be one of non-interference in the internal affairs of Cambodia and                             
 affirmation of the belief that any final settlement will have to be arrived at                    
 by the Cambodian peoples themselves without any outside interference. However,                    
 in view of the war situation, India was forced to cut down the size of its                        
 Embassy personnel in Phnom Penh. They were finally totally withdrawn in March                     
 1974. India continued to maintain contacts with Prince Sihanouk and the Prime                     
 Minister met the Prince at Algiers during the Non-aligned Summit Conference in                    
 September 1973.                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 pg44>                                                                                             
 West Asia And North Africa                                                                        
                                                                             Top                   
 CHAPTER IV                                                                                        
 WEST ASIA AND NORTH AFRICA                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 India's bilateral relations with the countries of the area conti- nued to be                      
 friendly. The Indian Minister of External Affairs visited Syria and Iraq in May                   
 1973 and Iran in July 1973 and February 1974, while the Iranian Foreign                           
 Minister came to India in December 1973. During the year resident Ambassadors                     
 took over charge at Muscat, Abu Dhabi, Bahrain and Qatar. Economic and                            
 technical co-operation have also increased with countries in this region,                         
 especially with Iran. India has been assured of un- diminished supplies of oil                    
 by the concerned oil-producing count- ries.                                                       
                                                                                                   
 Fierce fighting erupted in West Asia on Oct 06, 1973, between Israel on the one                   
 hand and Egypt and Syria on the other. Within a few days, a number of other                       
 Arab countries also joined the fighting while others gave material and                            
 financial help. When the war broke out on 6 October 1973, the Government of                       
 India, consistent with their stand in the past, pointed out that Israeli                          
 intransigence was clearly the basic cause leading to the outbreak of                              
 hostilities and stated that India's sympathies were entirely with the Arabs.                      
                                                                                                   
 India was active in the Security Council when the matter came up there. India                     
 gave support to the Security Council Resolution                                                   
                                                                                                   
 pg45>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 No. 338 of 22 October 1973, calling for an immediate cessation of fighting and                    
 for a start to the implementation of Security Council Resolution No. 242 and                      
 deciding that negotiations start between the parties concerned to establish a                     
 just and durable peace. This Resolution was accepted by all the parties                           
 directly involved, including Israel, but the latter continued to make                             
 territorial gains even after the cease-fire. By two further Resolutions No. 339                   
 of 23 October and 340 of 25 October 1973, the Security Council called for                         
 withdrawal of both parties to the cease-fire line of 22 October and set up a                      
 U.N. Emergency Force for the area.                                                                
                                                                                                   
 The recent fighting has once again demonstrated that Israel can gain security                     
 only through the acceptance and implementation of the principles of                               
 international behaviour and by heeding world opinion and not by acquisition of                    
 territory or by having its frontiers along any particular lines. The Government                   
 of India feel that Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338 should be, fully                      
 implemented. Israel has been resisting various suggestions, for taking concrete                   
 steps which could be considered to be even a partial fulfilment of the two                        
 basic principles on which a settle- ment has to be based, namely, the                             
 withdrawal of Israel from all territories occupied since 5 June 1967 and the                      
 restoration of the rights of the Palestinians. India welcomes all moves which                     
 could lead to a just peace based on these principles.                                             
                                                                                                   
 While the fighting was going on, India sent medicines and medical equipment to                    
 both Egypt and Syria. In addition, she sent a medical team to Syria. After the                    
 war, was over, the Government of India have gifted tents to Syria for the use                     
 of some of the people whose houses had been destroyed during the war. Mone-                       
 tary and material help to Egypt and Syria have been rendered also by some                         
 citizens' groups and private individuals.                                                         
                                                                                                   
 A Peace Conference convened in Geneva on 21 December 1973, attended by Egypt,                     
 Jordan, Israel, U.S.A. and the Soviet Union and presided over by the U.N.                         
 Secretary-General. The Syrian                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 pg46>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Arab Republic, though invited, did not attend. The Conference adjourned on 22                     
 December but meetings of the military working group comprising of                                 
 representatives of the U.N., Egypt and Israel continued to take place. An                         
 agreement on military disengagement between Egypt and Israel was signed on 18                     
 January 1974, and withdrawals have been taking place according to its terms.                      
                                                                                                   
 The President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, Mr. Anwar el- Sadat, visited India                   
 from 24 to 25 February, 1974, and had wide- ranging discussions with Indian                       
 leaders on all matters of mutual interest.                                                        
                                                                                                   
 Cooperation with Iraq in all fields continued to grow apace. From 1ndia the                       
 Minister of External Affairs, the Minister of Petroleum and Chemicals and the                     
 Miniser of Planning visited Iraq. The Iraqi Minister of Higher Education paid a                   
 visit to India. A cultural agreement has been signed between the two countries.                   
                                                                                                   
 Relations with Iran also continued to grow stronger. Her Imperial Highness                        
 Princess Ashraf Pahlavi visited India from 26 August to 9 September 1973.                         
 Sardar Swaran Singh visited Iran in July, 1973. Mr. Abbas Ali Khalatbary,                         
 Iranian Foreign Minis- ter, visited India from 10 to 16 December, 1973.                           
 Discussions in depth relating to all aspects of relations between Iran and                        
 India were held during these two visits. A meeting of the Joint Com- mission of                   
 the two countries was held in New Delhi from 14 to 16 January 1974 and                            
 continued in Tehran on 20 and 21 February 1974. Important decisions have been                     
 taken at this meeting and India looks forward to mutually beneficial                              
 cooperation with Iran.                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 pg47>                                                                                             
 Africa                                                                                            
                                                                             Top                   
 CHAPTER V                                                                                         
 AFRICA                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 (South of the Sahara)                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 India's relations with African countries continued to reflect a deep and                          
 abiding interest in political and economic development of independent African                     
 countries and achievement of freedom and independence by Africans in areas                        
 still under colonial and racist exploitation. India responded to increasing                       
 demand for Indian expertise and technical know-how from independent African                       
 countries to the maximum extent within her resources. Similarly, increasing                       
 numbers of African trainees were received in India to share our experience in                     
 different fields of socio- economic development. India resorted to                                
 simplification of proce- dures for selection of candidates at short notice                        
 while ensuring that the candidates selected were highly qualified for the jobs.                   
                                                                                                   
 India responded positively to Zambia's request for economic assistance when the                   
 borders between Zambia and Rhodesia had to be closed due to aggressive and                        
 provocative actions of Rho- desia. India expressed her readiness to offer                         
 Indian capital goods and equipment needed by Zambia on especially soft terms,                     
 and agreed to provide services of Indian experts and technicians from                             
                                                                                                   
 pg48>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 her contributions to the Commonwealth Technical Assistance Fund as well as                        
 under her Technical and Economic Co-operation pro- grammes. As a token of her                     
 concern for the difficulties faced by Zambia in obtaining essential supplies,                     
 India donated drugs and medicines valued at Rs. 3.75 lakhs on an immediate                        
 basis. On the political plane she extended complete support to Zambia in the                      
 United Nations Security Council as well as outside in solving. the problem of                     
 developing alternative import-export routes due to the closure of its borders                     
 with Rhodesia. India also expressed her appreciation for Zambia's restraint in                    
 face of provocation by Rhodesia.                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 The problem of compensation for assets left behind by several thousands of                        
 Indians expelled from Uganda in the latter half of 1972, engaged India's utmost                   
 attention, but unfortunately there was no progress since no positive steps were                   
 taken by the Government of Uganda for payment of compensation for assets left                     
 behind. In spite of India's appeals to the Government of Uganda for humane                        
 treatment and fair and equitable compensa- tion to Indian nationals for                           
 properties and assets left behind, there was no favourable response apart from                    
 some general assurances against confiscation. President Idi Amin met the Prime                    
 Minister of India at Algiers during the Conference of Non-aligned countries                       
 held there in September 1973 and reiterated his Govern- ment's commitment to                      
 pay compensation to Indian nationals on the basis of the declaration of assets                    
 left behind. He also said that he would invite a delegation from India to                         
 discuss matters relating to compensation. The Prime Minister conveyed the deep                    
 concern of the Government of India at the great hardships imposed on the                          
 expellees and the serious humanitarian aspects of the problem. Full                               
 co-operation of the Government of India was offered to the Committee appointed                    
 in Uganda in its work of evaluation of assets of expellees. So far, India has                     
 received no invitation from Uganda as indicated by President Amin for a                           
 delegation to go there to discuss matters connected with compensation for                         
 assets left behind.                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 pg49>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 The Government of India announced assistance to the Indian expellees from                         
 Uganda in their rehabilitation and resettlement in India. The Government of                       
 India also remained in touch with the Government of U.K. with a view to helping                   
 families expelled from Uganda, which had been split, to get united in the U.K.                    
 on humanitarian grounds. The Government continued to hold the view that Asians                    
 who hold British passports are the responsi- bility of, the U.K. and that they                    
 should be allowed unrestricted and immediate entry into the U.K. While the                        
 events in Uganda naturally created a sense of uncertainty and nervousness among                   
 Indians and persons of Indian origin in other African countries, there has been                   
 no large scale exodus of such persons from African countries. The Government of                   
 India remain in touch with the African countries concerned in this matter and                     
 take the view that non-citizens who have lived in those countries for genera-                     
 tions be treated in a fair and equitable manner without discrimi- nation on the                   
 basis of race or colour. In case their business and property are taken over,                      
 they should be paid adequate compen- sation to enable them to rehabilitate                        
 themselves elsewhere.                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 India hailed the declaration of independence by Guinea-Bissau and accorded                        
 recognition to the Pew State on Oct 07, 1973. India has expressed her                             
 willingness to extend assistance to the new Republic for training the                             
 administrative cadres for its Government.                                                         
                                                                                                   
 In pursuit of her policy to extend full political, moral and material support                     
 for the liberation movements in Portuguese colonies in Africa as well as those                    
 in white minority regimes in South Africa, the Prime Minister of India met the                    
 leaders of the liberation movements in Algiers during the Fourth Non-aligned                      
 Summit Meeting there. Some of these leaders visited India and briefed the                         
 Government of India on the developing situation there.                                            
                                                                                                   
 The Organisation for African Unity celebrated the tenth year of its existence.                    
 To mark the occasion, the Education Ministry                                                      
                                                                                                   
 pg50>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 announced a scholarship named after late Dr. Amilcar Cabral for African                           
 nationals associated with liberation movements in Africa for study and training                   
 in India.                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 India condemned the large-scale massacre of innocent African men, women and                       
 children by the Portuguese colonial authorities in Mozambique. India expressed                    
 the confidence that no amount of brutality and inhumanity could succeed in                        
 keeping Mozam- bique and other Portuguese colonial territories in bondage and                     
 that the liberation struggle in these territories would redouble themselves so                    
 as to overthrow the Portuguese domination.                                                        
                                                                                                   
 The Rhodesian and South African Governments continued to flout the United                         
 Nations and the international public opinion in maintaining and strengthening                     
 white minority rules. India appealed in the United Nations and other forums                       
 that all powers they should co-operate in enforcing effective sanctions against                   
 Rhodesia and South Africa. India supported the resolution in the United Nations                   
 that South Africa had no locus standi in Namibia and as the talks that the U.N.                   
 Secretary-General's representative had been conducting with South Africa had                      
 failed, they should be discontinued.                                                              
                                                                                                   
 During the year several leading personalities from African countries visited                      
 India. These included Mr. S. Boolell, Minister of Agriculture and National                        
 Resource and Mr. Gaetan Duval, Foreign Minister, from Mauritius, Dr. Okoi                         
 Arikpo, Foreign Minister of Nigeria, Mr. Nguza Karl-i-Bond, Foreign Minister of                   
 Zaire, Mr. Mohd. Lamine Toure, Minister of Mines and Geology of Guinea, Chief                     
 Adam Sapi Nkwawa, Minister in the Office of President of Tanzania, and Mr.                        
 Jacques Adande, Special Envoy of the Dahomean Head of State.                                      
                                                                                                   
 The Vice-President of India, Shri G. S. Pathak, visited Tan- zania at the                         
 invitation of the first Vice-President of Tanzania, Mr. Aboud Jumbe and                           
 participated in the celebrations marking the 10th Anniversary of the Revolution                   
 in Zanzibar.                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 pg51>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Among other Indian visitors to Africa were Shri Y. B. Chavan, Minister of                         
 Finance, who visited Kenya to participate in the IBRD/IMF meetings, Dr. Nurul                     
 Hasan, Minister of Education, and Shri A. C. George, Deputy Minister of                           
 Commerce. Matters of mutual interest were discussed during these visits and                       
 India reiterated her continuing support and co-operation in the develop- ment                     
 of countries in Africa.                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 pg52>                                                                                             
 Europe                                                                                            
                                                                             Top                   
 CHAPTER VI                                                                                        
 EUROPE                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 Western Europe                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 An important evolution in Western Europe is the slow but sure movement towards                    
 greater foreign policy co-ordination in the European Community. This evolution                    
 is coming about as much from internal dynamism as from external compulsions.                      
 The United States handling of the Middle East crisis and the cease-fire, Dr.                      
 Kissinger's criticism of European policies during and after the crisis and the                    
 Arab use of oil as a political weapon were some of the external factors which                     
 led the member States of the European Community to take joint decisions. It is                    
 true that the pro-.Arab declaration of the Nine does not mean that there are no                   
 differences among them. Nevertheless it is a constructive move and also                           
 indicates that the trend towards foreign policy co-ordination is gaining                          
 strength.                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 An important element in the process of European detente, viz., the European                       
 Security Conference, has moved forward from the Helsinki first stage to the                       
 Geneva second stage. The Euro- pean Security Conference has come a, long way                      
 since the Bucharest Declarations of July 1966. It is hoped that the                               
 deliberations now in progress in Geneva would meet with the                                       
                                                                                                   
 pg53>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 success attained in Helsinki. These efforts towards peace and reconciliation in                   
 Europe are specially welcome to India as they are in accord with India's                          
 policies of peaceful co-existence and international co-operation. There is                        
 indeed greater confidence today in building a system of lasting peace on the                      
 European- continent which has witnessed two world wars in this century.                           
                                                                                                   
 Related to the Conference on European Security are the consultations now on in                    
 Vienna for the reduction of forces and armaments in Central Europe. 19                            
 countries are participating: 12 from NATO and 7 from the Warsaw Pact. Their                       
 declared objective is to reach agreement on measures that will contri- bute to                    
 a more stable mutual relationship and to strengthening of peace and security in                   
 Europe. It is agreed that any particular measure taken in this context will not                   
 prejudice the security of either side in any way. The nature of the talks thus                    
 makes pro- gress in them inevitably slow.                                                         
                                                                                                   
 Bilateral contacts and consultations at all levels continued to be an important                   
 feature of India's relations with countries in Western Europe. These led to                       
 better mutual appreciation and understanding. Despite considerable Pakistani                      
 propaganda on the question of POWs, West European Governments saw the issue in                    
 the perspective of relations among the three countries of the sub-continent and                   
 the need for an overall settlement of the problems created by the war of                          
 December 1971. There was sympathy and support for India's earnest efforts to                      
 seek a modus vivendi with Pakistan for normalisation of relations among the                       
 countries of the sub-continent. In this context, wel- come was accorded by West                   
 European nations to the Joint Indo-Bangladesh Declaration of April 1973 and to                    
 the subse- quent Indo-Pakistan Agreement of Aug 28, 1973.                                         
                                                                                                   
 The United Kingdom                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 Relations with the United Kingdom remained close and friendly and contacts at                     
 the highest level continued to be main- tained. The Prime Minister, Shrimati                      
 Indira Gandhi, on her way                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 pg54>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 back from an official visit to Canada, made a stopover in London on 25 June                       
 1973. She held discussions with Prime Minister Edward Heath and senior                            
 Ministers of the British Government. Later in the year, the annual bilateral                      
 consultations at the official level were held in London from 20 to 23 November                    
 1973. The Indian delegation was led by the Secre- tary in the Ministry of                         
 External Affairs, Shri V. C. Trivedi and the U.K. delegation by its Permanent                     
 Under Secretary in the Foreign Office. These talks covered a review of the                        
 interna- tional scene, developments in the sub-continent and bilateral                            
 relations in all fields. The frank and friendly talks should help remove some                     
 of the existing irritants in Indo-British relations, particularly in regard to                    
 immigration and visitors entry into Britain. The British have agreed to look                      
 into their current pro- cedures for the grant of entry certificates with a view                   
 to rationalising them. They showed great understanding for India's economic                       
 problems, particularly in regard to her trade with the EEC and evinced interest                   
 in increasing Indo-British economic collaboration in economic and other fields.                   
                                                                                                   
 A delegation led by Mr. David Lane, Parliamentary Under Secretary of State at                     
 the U.K. Home Office visited India from 12 to 16 January 1974. He was                             
 accompanied by, among others, the Chief Inspector of Immigration. The purpose                     
 of the visit was to see the working of the immigration control system in the                      
 British High Commission as well as to discuss with authorities in India                           
 questions relating to immigration into the U.K. The problem of illegal entry                      
 into Britain was also discussed with the delegation. The need to eliminate                        
 harassment to casual visitors from India and unnecessary delays in the issue of                   
 entry certificates as well as the question of distressed and divided families,                    
 including those from East Africa, were also taken up with the delegation.                         
                                                                                                   
 Federal Republic of Germany                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 Relations between India and the Federal Republic of Germany continued to                          
 develop satisfactorily in the political,                                                          
                                                                                                   
 pg55> economic and cultural fields. These were reviewed at the annual bilateral                   
 consultations held in Bonn on 22 and 23 May 1973. The Indian delegation was led                   
 by Secretary in the Ministry of External Affairs, Shri V. C. Trivedi and the                      
 Delegation of FRG by its State Secretary. Among other things, the two sides                       
 dis- cussed ways of further expanding mutual co-operation on the basis of the                     
 understanding which already exists in various fields.                                             
                                                                                                   
 Dr. Erhard Eppler, Minister for Economic Co-operation of the Federal Republic                     
 of Germany, paid an official visit to India from I I to 19 November 1973, as                      
 guest of the Government of India. Dr. Eppler had discussions with the Prime                       
 Minister and the Ministers of Finance, Planning, Industrial Development and                       
 Science and Technology. His talks achieved constructive results in the field of                   
 West German economic co-operation with India and transfer of technology. He                       
 indicated his Government's ap- preciation for the priorities laid down in the                     
 Fifth-Five-Year- Plan in the fields of agriculture, energy, public                                
 transportation, and in important agricultural inputs such as irrigation                           
 facilities, fertilizers and pesticides.                                                           
                                                                                                   
 France                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 Mr. Andre Malraux visited India in April 1973, at the invita- tion of the                         
 Government of India. He met the President, the Prime Minister and exchanged                       
 views with the Minister of Exter- nal Affairs and other Ministers of Government                   
 on wide-ranging topics of international interest. In September, Mr. Malraux was                   
 awarded the Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Under- standing for 1972.                    
 Through this award, India honoured an elder Statesman of France, a                                
 distinguished man of letters and, above all, a courageous fighter for human                       
 liberty and dignity.                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 The French Finance Minister M. Giscard d'Estaing paid an official visit to                        
 India from 16 to 19 November as guest of the Government of India. His talks                       
 with the Prime Minister and the Ministers of Finance, Planning and Commerce                       
 centred round general economic relationship and trade between India, France                       
                                                                                                   
 pg56>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 and the EEC. He envisaged greater French participation in Indian development                      
 projects, particularly off-shore oil prospect- ing and fertilizer production.                     
                                                                                                   
 Turkey                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 Mr. Umit Haluk Bayulken, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey,                   
 accompanied by senior officials of the Turkish Government, paid an official                       
 visit to India from 21 to 23 August 1973. His discussions with the Minister of                    
 External Affairs revealed an identity of views on many matters of inter-                          
 national interest. The Turkish Foreign Minister expressed his Government's                        
 appreciation of the steps taken by India to bring about normalisation of                          
 relations among the countries of the sub- continent. On bilateral relations,                      
 the two Foreign Ministers agreed on the need to expand cultural and trade                         
 exchanges. The signing of a trade Agreement in September between the two                          
 countries, it is hoped, would lead to greater economic co-opera- tion and                         
 collaboration between India and Turkey.                                                           
                                                                                                   
 Earlier in February 1973, the Turkish Government instituted a ban on a number                     
 of books. These included the Gita, the Upanishads and Dr. Radhakrishnan's "The                    
 Hindu View of Life". The Turkish action was apparently taken under the mistaken                   
 impression that the Indian books constituted religious propa- ganda. This                         
 misunderstanding was remedied when the correct position was explained to the                      
 Turkish Government. The Turkish Government withdrew the ban in May 1973.                          
                                                                                                   
 At the invitation of the Turkish Government Dr. Karan Singh, the then Minister                    
 of Tourism and Civil Aviation, led a special delegation to Ankara to attend the                   
 50th anniversary celebrations of the Turkish Republic from 28 to 31 October                       
 1973. The delegation was received with much courtesy and warmth. To mark the                      
 anniversary, seminars were held in educational institu- tions in India on the                     
 life and achievements of Kamal Ataturk and a road in New Delhi was named after                    
 him.                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 pg57>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Luxembourg                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 At the invitation of India's Minister of External Affairs, the Foreign Minister                   
 of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, Mr. Gaston Thorn, came to India on a                            
 five-day-visit from 29 April to 3 May 1973. This was the first ever visit of a                    
 Foreign Minister, of Luxembourg which is the seat of many an important institu-                   
 tion of the European Economic Community. During his stay in Delhi, Mr. Thorn                      
 held discussions with the Minister of External Affairs on matters of common                       
 interest with particular reference to India's relations with the EEC. Mr. Thorn                   
 reiterated his Government's understanding of India's trading problems with the                    
 enlarged European Economic Community.                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Spain                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 In February 1974, Prince Don Juan Carlos and Princess Dona Sofia of Spain came                    
 on an official visit to India accompanied by the new Foreign Minister of Spain,                   
 Mr. Pedro Cortinay Mauri. The Prince and Princess are already acquainted with                     
 this country having been here before on a private visit. This is the second                       
 official visit of a Spanish dignitary to India, the first one being that of the                   
 former Foreign Minister Sr. Lopez Bravo's in 1972.                                                
                                                                                                   
 There are possibilities for increased trade between India and Spain. India has                    
 shown interest in buying ships from Spain which is the world's third largest                      
 producer of ships. The talks revealed a similarity of views on the situation in                   
 West Asia.                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 Scandinavian Countries                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 With the Scandinavian countries, India continued to develop closer co-operative                   
 relationship in the industrial, technical and technological fields. This                          
 received a fillip when, at the invitation of the Foreign Ministers of the                         
 respective countries, the Minister of External Affairs paid official visits to                    
 Norway, Sweden, Finland and Denmark during the period 14 June to 23 June 1973.                    
 He                                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 pg58>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 held discussions on wide-ranging topics of mutual interest with his                               
 counterparts and with other senior Ministers of the Govern- ments concerned.                      
 The Minister of External Affairs a so met people from a wide spectrum of                          
 society and was deeply impress- ed by the feelings of friendship and                              
 understanding they enter- tained for India.                                                       
                                                                                                   
 Relations between India and Western Europe are thus deve- loping satisfactorily                   
 on all fronts. There is good-will for India, a better appreciation of her                         
 policies aimed at bringing about stable and durable relationships in the                          
 sub-continent and a desire to co-operate in the economic and commercial fields.                   
                                                                                                   
 THE SOVIET UNION AND EASTERN EUROPE                                                               
                                                                                                   
 The Soviet Union                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 The visit of the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist                      
 Party of the Soviet Union and Member of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet,                      
 Mr. L. I. Brezhnev, to India from 26 to 30 November 1973, gave a further                          
 momentum to the successfully developing friendly and co-operative relations                       
 between India and the Soviet Union in all fields. The very warm and cordial                       
 welcome given by all sections of people to General Secretary Brezhnev on his                      
 arrival in Delhi and throughout his stay in the Capital was a spontaneous                         
 expression of the friendly feelings entertained towards the Soviet Union, a                       
 country which has given principled support to India, at all times.                                
                                                                                                   
 General Secretary Mr. L. I. Brezhnev held extensive and wide-ranging talks with                   
 the Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi. He was assisted in the talks by a                     
 high-level Soviet dele- gation including the Foreign Minister and Member of the                   
 Politbureau, Mr. A. A. Gromyko, Member of the Politbureau and First Secretary                     
 of the Kazakistan Communist Party, Mr. D. A. Kunaev, Deputy Prime Minister and                    
 Chairman of the State Planning Committee (Gosplan), Mr. N. K. Baibakov and the                    
 Chairman of the State Committee for External Economic Rela- tions, Mr. S. A.                      
 Skatchkov and other senior officials. Separate                                                    
                                                                                                   
 pg59>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 discussions were also held by members of the Soviet delegation with their                         
 Indian counterparts: Sardar Swaran Singh, Minister of External Affairs, Shri Y.                   
 B. Chavan, Minister, of Finance, Shri D. P. Dhar, Minister of Planning, Shri                      
 Surendra Pal Singh, Minister of State in the Ministry of External Affairs, Shri                   
 Kewal Singh, Foreign Secretary and Shri P. N. Dhar, Secretary to the Prime                        
 Minister. Apart from the talks, there were public engage- ments, such as a                        
 Reception at the Red Fort by the citizens of Delhi and Mr. Brezhnev's Address                     
 to Members of Parliament.                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 The talks were held in a most cordial atmosphere of friendship and mutual                         
 understanding and there was a broad identity of views on all questions                            
 discussed. The Joint Indo-Soviet Declara- tion, which was signed by the Prime                     
 Minister and General Secre- tary Brezhnev on 29 November 1973, reflects the                       
 desire of both countries to expand and deepen their mutually advantageous co-                     
 operation in all fields.                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 In the Joint Declaration, General Secretary Mr. L. I. Brezhnev paid specific                      
 tribute to India's policy of non-alignment. The Indian side highly appraised                      
 the foreign policy of the Soviet Union which is aimed at consolidating                            
 international peace. The Joint Declaration took note of the Indo-Soviet Treaty                    
 of Peace, Friendship and Co-operation concluded in August 1971, as a                              
 contributing factor for the further expansion of co-operation between the two                     
 countries in the political, economic, scientific, technological, cultural and                     
 other fields. The Soviet support for India's position and initiatives for                         
 normalisation of relations in the Indian sub-continent, in accordance with the                    
 Simla Agree- ment between India and Pakistan, was also reiterated. There was a                    
 broad identity of views on all questions discussed.                                               
                                                                                                   
 The other documents signed. during General Secretary Mr L. I. Brezhnev's visit                    
 were:                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 (i) An agreement on the further development of Economic and Trade Co-operation;                   
                                                                                                   
 pg60                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 (ii) An Agreement on Co-operation between the Planning Commission of India and                    
 the State Planning Committee of the USSR; and                                                     
                                                                                                   
 (iii) A Consular Convention.                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 Under the 15-Year Economic and Trade Co-operation Agree- ment which specifies                     
 areas of Soviet assistance in India's pro- grammes of industrialisation, the                      
 USSR will extend further co- operation in the fields of ferrous and non-ferrous                   
 metallurgy; oil prospecting and refining; heavy engineering; power generation;                    
 petro-chemical industry; ship-building and other branches of industry;                            
 agriculture and in the training of personnel.                                                     
                                                                                                   
 In this context, the capacities of existing Soviet-assisted plants will be                        
 expanded and the Soviet Union will also assist in the setting up of new plants.                   
 Specific examples mentioned both in the Agreement on Economic and Trade                           
 Co-operation and in the Joint Declaration are the expansion of the Bhilai and                     
 Bokaro steel plants to an annual capacity of 7 and 10 million tons                                
 respectively; the construction of the Mathura Oil Refinery with an annual                         
 capacity of 6 million tons; the setting-up of a copper-mining complex at                          
 Malanjkhand; and the realisation of the Calcutta underground railway project.                     
                                                                                                   
 The Soviet Union has also undertaken to extend fresh credits to India and has                     
 expressed her readiness to streamline and im- prove the existing credit                           
 relations between the two countries.                                                              
                                                                                                   
 India and the USSR have further aimed at doubling. their bilateral trade                          
 turn-over by 1980. (The trade turn-over during 1973, was Rs. 410 crores). To                      
 achieve this objective, the two countries have agreed to create additional                        
 capacities in their res- pective countries to meet the long-term requirements                     
 of the other, taking into account specialisation and co-operation in the manu-                    
 facture of individual industrial products.                                                        
                                                                                                   
 pg61>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 The very useful visit of General Secretary Brezhnev's greatly reinforced the                      
 existing bonds of friendship, understanding and co- operation between India and                   
 the Soviet Union. This friendship, based on the principles of peaceful                            
 co-existence, is not directed against any country, and is an important factor                     
 in promoting world peace and international amity.                                                 
                                                                                                   
 After General Secretary Brezhnev's return to Moscow, the Politbureau ofthe CPSU                   
 Central Committee, the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR and the USSR                   
 Council of Ministers jointly passed a Resolution which highly assessed the                        
 results of General Secretary Mr. L. I. Brezhnev's visit to India as having                        
 "raised to a higher level" the relations between the two countries.                               
                                                                                                   
 Other high level exchange of visits between India and the Soviet Union,                           
 included the visit of the Minister of Defence Shri Jagjivan Ram to the USSR in                    
 July 1973, at the invitation of the Soviet Minister of Defence, Mr. A. Grechko.                   
 Shri Jagjivan Ram also had discussions with Chairman Kosygin. The President of                    
 the Indian National Congress, Dr. S. D. Sharma visited the USSR from 1 to 9                       
 July 1973 and was received by General Secretary Mr. L. I. Brezhnev.                               
                                                                                                   
 The Agreement for the supply of 2 million tons of wheat, on a loan basis, by                      
 the Soviet Union concluded on 2 October 1973, was warmly appreciated by the                       
 Government and people of India. The augmentation of food supplies was most                        
 timely, in the context of the severe drought suffered by India in the past year                   
 and the steep rise in the world price of foodgrains. The loan is interest-free                    
 and repayable over a 5-year period commencing from 1976. This friendly Soviet                     
 assistance is a reflection of the USSR's continuing interest in co-operation                      
 with India to the mutual benefit of both countries.                                               
                                                                                                   
 India followed with interest and sympathy the Soviet Union's initiatives aimed                    
 at relaxation of tensions and pro- motion of international detente based on the                   
 principles of                                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 pg62>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 peaceful co-existence between States. The visit of General Secretary Mr. L. I.                    
 Brezhnev to the USA in June 1973 and the conclusion of far-reaching agreements                    
 between the USSR and the USA have been welcomed by India in the context of                        
 con-. solidation of world peace. The Government of India hope that the                            
 development of detente between the major powers would not adversely affect in                     
 any way the interests of third coun- tries. General Secretary Mr. L. I.                           
 Brezhnev's visit to Bonn in May 1973 and to Paris in June 1973, have also been                    
 welcomed as a positive possible contribution towards the process of streng-                       
 thening of European peace and security.                                                           
                                                                                                   
 In his address to the Members of Parliament on 29 Novem- ber 1973, General                        
 Secretary Mr. L. I. Brezhnev stressed "the long-standing historical traditions                    
 of peaceful good-neighbourly relations between India and the Soviet Union". He                    
 declared: "The Soviet Union attaches great importance to the strengthen- ing of                   
 friendship and to the all-round development of its relations with India ......                    
 Our countries are also drawn together by the profoundly peace-loving nature of                    
 their foreign policies. The con- solidation of Soviet-Indian friendship is                        
 today acquiring primary importance both from the standpoint of the national                       
 interests of the two countries and from the standpoint of strengthening peace                     
 and invigorating the international situation on the whole of our planet".                         
                                                                                                   
 In the same address, General Secretary Mr. L. I. Brezhnev referred to the                         
 "growing interest in the idea of safeguarding of security in Asia through                         
 collective efforts". He declared :                                                                
                                                                                                   
 "This is why it seems opportune to hold a thorough and comprehensive discussion                   
 on the idea of collective se- curity in Asia which would help trace a common                      
 approach, acceptable to all the States concerned, to the problems of peace and                    
 security in the continent. In a word, we are calling for an active, broad and                     
 construc- tive discussion which would help to bring about a                                       
                                                                                                   
 pg63>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 deeper understanding of the urgent talks. The oppor- tunity has arrived and the                   
 present situation in Asia has created adequate prerequisites. Asia can and must                   
 become a continent of peace, friendship and co-operation. This goal is worth                      
 the efforts and the struggle".                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 The position of the Government of India on this subject has been made clear on                    
 a number of occasions. Speaking in the Lok Sabha on 21 December 1973, the                         
 Minister of External Affairs, Sardar Swaran Singh, stated :-                                      
                                                                                                   
 "The-emergence of Asia as an area of peace and tranquillity as a result of                        
 relaxation of tension is a desirable objec- tive. However, we have to keep in                     
 view the situation as it prevails in Asia and the political complexity in the                     
 Continent of Asia . . . .                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 "Our own thinking is that an adherence to such principles as renunciation of                      
 the use of force, peaceful co-existence, respect for sovereignty of all                           
 countries, non-interference in internal affairs and broad development of                          
 economic and other co-operation on the basis of equality and mutual benefit                       
 will assist such a process . . . .                                                                
                                                                                                   
 "It is Government of India's belief that an atmosphere of friendship and peace                    
 can prevail not by means of military blocs; nor by any system of grouping of                      
 coun- tries directed against any other country or group of countries, but                         
 through goodwill and co-operation. More intensive co-operation in the economic                    
 field, in the first instance, would help in strengthening mutuality of inte-                      
 rests amongst countries of the region".                                                           
                                                                                                   
 Czechoslovakia                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 The close ties of friendship and co-operation between India and Czechoslovakia                    
 were further strengthened during the year                                                         
                                                                                                   
 pg64>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 President V. V. Giri paid an official visit to Czechoslovakia from 6 to 10                        
 October 1973, at the invitation of President Ludvic Svoboda of the Czechoslovak                   
 Socialist Republic. In the course of his visit, the President had a very useful                   
 exchange of views on bilateral and international issues with Czechoslovak                         
 leaders. The warm reception accorded to the President in Czechoslovakia testi-                    
 fied once more to the deep mutual sympathy and understanding between the two                      
 countries.                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 The General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Czechoslovak Communist                      
 Party, Dr. Gustav Husak paid a visit to India from 3 to 9 December 1973. The                      
 joint Indo-Czechoslovak Declarations signed at the end of the visit, paid                         
 tribute to India's peaceful foreign policy based on non-alignment and the                         
 principles of peaceful co-existence. The Czechoslovak side also expressed its                     
 appreciation of India's untiring efforts in seeking to achieve durable peace on                   
 the Indian sub-continent. India reiterated her appreciation of the constructive                   
 role played by Czechoslovakia in promoting peaceful and co-operative relations                    
 amongst the States of the European Continent.                                                     
                                                                                                   
 During Dr. Husak's visit, the third Economic Co-operation Agreement was signed                    
 between the two countries on 5 December 1973. Czechoslovakia has agreed to                        
 provide fresh credits of the value of Rs. 800 million on more favourable terms                    
 than the previous Czechoslovak credits. Under the Agreement, Czechoslo- vakia                     
 has undertaken to continue her assistance in the strengthening of India's                         
 industrial base, especially in the fields of power generation, electrification                    
 of railways, engineering industries and fertilizer production. The bilateral                      
 trade turn-over is also planned to be increased to Rs. 1,500 million in 1974,                     
 as compared to Rs. 800 million in 1973.                                                           
                                                                                                   
 Among the other high-level exchanges of visits were the visit by the Minister                     
 of External Affairs, Sardar Swaran Singh, to Czechoslovakia from 29 May to 1                      
 June 1973, at the invitation of                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 pg65> the Czechoslovak Foreign Minister, Mr. Bohuslav Chnoupak. The Minister of                   
 External Affairs had meetings and talks with the loading political                                
 personalities in Czechoslovakia including Dr. Gustav Husak, President Svoboda                     
 and Dr. Lubomir Strougal. An Indo-Czechoslovak Agreement on Scientific,                           
 Technical and Industrial Co-operation was signed during the visit.                                
                                                                                                   
 Poland                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 The ties of co-operation and mutual understanding between India and Poland were                   
 further strengthened during 1973-74. The visit of the Polish Minister of                          
 Shipping Mr. Jarzy Szopa to India, from 29 March to 6 April 1973, has led to                      
 further Indo-Polish Co-operation in the sphere of Ship-building and Fisheries                     
 Develop- ment. As a result of Mr. Szopa's discussions with the Indian Minister                    
 for Planning and the Minister for Shipping and Transport, an Indo-Polish                          
 Agreement on Co-operation on Marine Fisheries was concluded between the two                       
 Governments on 6 April 1973.                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 The Polish Minister for Internal Trade, Mr. Edward Sznajder visited India from                    
 1 to 5 April 1973, to head the Polish Delegation to the Meeting, of the                           
 Indo-Polish Committee on Trade Exchanges. At the meeting, both sides noted with                   
 satisfaction the progress made in the expansion of trade relations between the                    
 two coun- tries and expressed their determination to implement the long- term                     
 trade protocol for 1973-75 which was concluded in January 1973, during the                        
 visit of the Prime Minister of Poland to India. The Indo-Polish trade turn-over                   
 has increased from Rs. 4 million in 1953 to Rs. 747 million in 1972. The first                    
 meeting of the Indo- Polish Joint Commission which was held in Warsaw from 2                      
 to- 8 November 1973, marked an important mile-stone in the develop- ment of                       
 economic co-operation between the two countries. The Indian Delegation was                        
 headed by the Minister for Steel and Heavy Industries, Shri T. A. Pai, while                      
 the Polish side was headed by the Polish Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. J. Mitrega.                   
                                                                                                   
 pg66>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 The Polish Government and Press welcomed the Indo- Pakistan Agreement concluded                   
 in Delhi on 28 August 1973, as a concrete steps in the normalisation of                           
 relations on the Indian sub- continent.                                                           
                                                                                                   
 German Democratic Republic                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 With the establishment of diplomatic relations between India and GDR at Embassy                   
 level in October 1972, the close and friendly co-operation between the two                        
 countries has been growing con- sistently in all fields. The GDR welcomed the                     
 Indo-Bangladesh Joint Declaration of 17 April 1973 and the Indo-Pakistan Agree-                   
 ment of 28 August 1973. She also extended consistent support to India's efforts                   
 to achieve speedy normalisation in the Indian sub- continent.                                     
                                                                                                   
 A delegation led by the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the GDR, Mr.                      
 Willi Stoph, visited New Delhi on 19 and 20 March 1973, on its return journey                     
 from the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. Discussions were held on matters of                      
 mutual interest between Mr. Willi Stoph and the Prime Minister.                                   
                                                                                                   
 The Minister of External Affairs Sardar Swaran Singh paid an official visit to                    
 GDR from 25 to 29 May 1973. During his stay he was received by the First                          
 Secretary Mr. Willi Stoph and also called on the Acting Chairman of the Council                   
 of Ministers Mr. Horst Sindermann, besides having detailed talks with the GDR                     
 Foreign Minister, Mr. Otto Winzer.                                                                
                                                                                                   
 The Deputy Premier and the Chairman of the State Planning Commission Mr.                          
 Gerhard Schuerer led a fourteen-member dele- gation on an official visit to                       
 India from 7 to 17 October 1973, at the invitation of the Minister of Planning                    
 Shri D. P. Dhar. A Protocol for long-term co-operation envisaging trade                           
 expansion and technological co-operation was signed during the visit.                             
                                                                                                   
 pg67>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Rumania                                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 The cordial relations already existing With Rumania were further strengthened                     
 during the year. Rumania had welcomed the Indo-Pakistan Agreement of 28 August                    
 1973, as a positive step towards normalisation of the situation in the Indian                     
 sub-continent.                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 A nine-member Indian Parliamentary Delegation led by the Speaker of the Lok                       
 Sabha, Shri G. S. Dhillon, visited Rumania from 24 to 30 May 1973.                                
                                                                                                   
 The Minister of Planning, Shri D. P. Dhar paid a 4-day visit to Rumania from 2                    
 to 6 July 1973 and held discussions with the Deputy Chairman of the Council of                    
 Ministers of Rumania and the Chairman of the Planning Commission Mr. Manean                       
 Manescu. It was decided to increase co-operation between the Planning bodies of                   
 the two countries. Agreement was also reached to speedily set up an                               
 inter-government Joint Commission for Economic, Scientific and Technical                          
 Co-operation.                                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 An Indian Trade Delegation visited Rumania from 16 to 22 October and negotiated                   
 a new Trade Protocol. A decision was arrived at to increase the volume of the                     
 trade between the two countries.                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 President V. V. Giri paid a State visit to Rumania from 3 to 6 October 1973, on                   
 the invitation of President Ceausescu. He was accorded an enthusiastic welcome                    
 by the people and Government of Rumania.                                                          
                                                                                                   
 Mr. Manean Manescu, Deputy Prime Minister of Rumania and Chairman of the State                    
 Planning Commission, paid a visit to India from 9 to 15 January 1974.                             
                                                                                                   
 During the visit, letters were exchanged for the setting up of a Joint                            
 Commission for Economic, Scientific and Technical Co- operation between India                     
 and Rumania. An agreement for estab- lishing a Study Group of Experts for                         
 promoting co-operation                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 pg68>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 between the Planning Bodies of the two countries was also signed. The Rumanian                    
 Government has expressed interest to co-operate with India in the field of oil                    
 exploration and processing.                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 Yugoslavia                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 Yugoslavia extended consistent support to India's efforts aimed at achieving                      
 durable peace in the sub-continent. Yugoslavia also welcomed the                                  
 Indo-Bangladesh Joint Declaration of 17 April 1973 and the Indo-Pakistan                          
 Agreement of 28 August 1973.                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 At the Algiers Summit of non-aligned countries, Yugoslavia and India maintained                   
 close contact with other participating coun- tries on major items which came up                   
 during discussions.                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 President Tito's visit to India from 24 to 29 January 1974, to, personally                        
 receive the Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding was an                         
 expression of the strong links which exist between India and Yugoslavia. The                      
 Award itself was a token of the great admiration in which President Tito is                       
 held in India and of his outstanding contribution to the cause of the Non-                        
 alignment Movement and to world peace and international co- operation.                            
 President Tito and Madame Jovanda Broz were honoured guests during the Republic                   
 Day celebrations.                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 The talks between the Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi, and President                       
 Tito revealed a close identity of views on all bilateral questions as well as                     
 the international problems discussed In the bilateral field, India and                            
 Yugoslavia have agreed to further expand and intensify the economic                               
 co-operation and to explore the possibilities of setting up joint ventures in                     
 the two countries as well as in third countries.                                                  
                                                                                                   
 In the international field, India and Yugoslavia, as founder members of the                       
 Non-aligned Movement, subscribe to similar policies. Both sides called for a                      
 meeting of Non-aligned countries at an appropriate level, for the concrete                        
 implementation of the                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 pg69>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 decisions taken at the Non-aligned Summit in Algiers in Sep- tember 1973. In                      
 the prevailing complex international situation and the economic crisis which                      
 faces the world community, it was considered all the more necessary for the                       
 Non-aligned Developing countries to strengthen their economic co-operation and                    
 to help each other in achieving economic emancipation.                                            
                                                                                                   
 Indo-Yugoslav relations continued to be cordial and friendly and the following                    
 high level exchange of visits took place during the year :                                        
                                                                                                   
 (i) The Yugoslav Prime Minister Mr. Dzemal Bijedic paid an official visit to                      
 India from 5 to 9 March 1973.                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 (ii) Prime Minister Shrimati Indira Gandhi visited Yugoslavia from 15 to 17                       
 June 1973, at the invitation of President Tito and Prime Minister, Mr. Dzemal                     
 Bijedic. She was accorded a warm and friendly welcome by the Govern- ment and                     
 people of Yugoslavia.                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 (iii) Mr. Veljko Milatovic, President of the Socialist Alliance of Yugoslavia                     
 visited India in December 73.                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 (iv) Bilateral talks were held between the representatives of the Foreign                         
 Offices of the two countries from 17 to 20 December 1973. The Indian delegation                   
 was led by Foreign Secretary, Shri Kewal Singh and the Yugoslav delegation by                     
 their Deputy Federal Secretary.                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 An Indian Trade and Economic Delegation led by Shri A. C. George, Deputy                          
 Minister of Commerce visited Yugoslavia in April 1973. Discussions were held                      
 during this visit with the aim to ensure that there was no decrease in the                        
 volume of the trade between the two countries as a result of the changeover to                    
 a convertible currency payments system in bilateral trade.                                        
                                                                                                   
 pg70>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Bulgaria                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 There was a continuous strengthening of relations with Bulgaria in all                            
 fields-political, economic and cultural. Bulgaria showed full understanding and                   
 appreciation of India's position on various international issues, particularly                    
 those pertaining to the sub-continent. Accordingly, Bulgaria welcomed the                         
 Indo-Bangla- desh Joint Declaration of 17 April 1973 and the Indo-Pakistan                        
 Agreement of 28 August 1973.                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 India participated this year also in the 29th International Trade Fair in                         
 Plovdiv. Orders were placed by Bulgarian firms for a number of non-traditional                    
 items from India. Furthermore, as a result of the visit of Minister Shri C.                       
 Subramaniam, to Bulgaria in June 1973, a useful beginning has been made in                        
 industrial and scientific co-operation between the two countries. In pursuance                    
 of the understanding reached at that time, a delegation of 5 Indian experts of                    
 the Directorate-General of Technical Development visited Bulgaria from 5 to 14                    
 September to examine possible new fields of Indo-Bulgarian industrial and                         
 technical co-operation.                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 Hungary                                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 Indo-Hungarian relations continued to be very friendly in all fields. An Indian                   
 Parliamentary Delegation led by Shri G. S. Dhillon, Speaker of the Lok Sabha                      
 and including Shri Om Mehta, Minister for Works and Housing and Parliamentary                     
 Affairs visited Hungary from 30 May to 5 June 1973. The Minister of Com- merce                    
 Prof. D. P. Chattopadhyaya visited Hungary from 14 to 19 June 1973, to preside                    
 over a conference of the Indian Commer- cial Representatives in East Europe.                      
 Prof. Chattopadhyaya availed of that opportunity to discuss matters of mutual                     
 interest with his Hungarian counterpart.                                                          
                                                                                                   
 Prof. Nurul Hasan, Minister of Education, visited Budapest from 8 to 12 October                   
 1973.                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 A Hungarian Trade Delegation led by Dr. Bala Szalai, Deputy Minister of Foreign                   
 Trade visited India from 8 to 14                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 pg71>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 December 1973, and concluded a Trade Protocol for 1974, envi- saging a total                      
 trade turn-over of Rs. 775 million. There has been a steady progress in India's                   
 trade with Hungary.                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 On the cultural side there has been exchange of scholars and delegations                          
 between the two countries. A new cultural agreement providing for further                         
 expansion in cultural exchanges was signed in October 1973 in Budapest.                           
                                                                                                   
 Agreement was reached, through exchange of letters in Budapest on 19 December                     
 1973, for the setting up of the Indo- Hungarian Joint Commission for Scientific                   
 and Technical Co- operation.                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 pg72>                                                                                             
 The Americas                                                                                      
                                                                             Top                   
 CHAPTER VII                                                                                       
 THE AMERICAS                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 The United States of America                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 The relations between India and the United States of America showed a steady                      
 improvement. Apart from public reaffirmation of the desire for good relations,                    
 both countries made conscious efforts to improve them. In October 1973, the                       
 Minister of External Affairs met the Secretary of State, Dr. Henry Kissinger in                   
 Washington and held wide-ranging discussions on matters of mutual interest. The                   
 Foreign Secretary, Shri Kewal Singh, also visited Washington in November and                      
 exchanged views with U.S. officials. In April 1973, U.S. Deputy Secretary of                      
 State Mr. Kenneth Rush and Assistant Secretary of State Mr. Joseph Sisco                          
 visited New Delhi and met the Prime Minister, Minister of Exter- nal Affairs                      
 and Finance Minister. Earlier in the year, the United States Government                           
 appointed a distinguished American and an eminent scholar Mr. Daniel P.                           
 Moynihan as their Ambassador in New Delhi. The former Foreign Secretary, Shri                     
 T. N. Kaul, took over as India's Ambassador in Washington in May 1973.                            
 Throughout this period the two Governments also maintained a regular dialogue                     
 on important issues. As the Minister of External Affairs recently stated in                       
 Parliament, Indo-U.S. relations have now                                                          
                                                                                                   
 pg73>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 entered a phase where a constructive, co-operative and mature relationship can                    
 be built up between the two countries.                                                            
                                                                                                   
 A positive sign of the improvement of Indo-U.S. relations was the decision of                     
 the two Governments to enter into discussions to resolve the outstanding                          
 problem of United States-owned rupees in India. These negotiations were                           
 successfully concluded and an agreement initialled in New Delhi on Dec 13,                        
 1973. The Government of India expressed satisfaction on this development. A                       
 formal agreement between India and the United States on the question of PL-480                    
 rupees was signed in New Delhi on 18 Feb- ruary 1974.                                             
                                                                                                   
 In the economic field, there were some readjustments in Indo- U.S. relations.                     
 After mutual consultations it was decided to wind up the U.S. Technical                           
 assistance programme in India with effect from 30 June 1973. In line with the                     
 Government's decision not to avail of concessional food imports under P.L. 480,                   
 India made cash payment for substantial quantities of foodgrains pur- chased in                   
 the United States in 1972. It was recognised that the past pattern of                             
 donor-recipient relationship must be replaced by a more mature economic                           
 relation involving greater trade and commercial exchanges. There should be                        
 easier accessibility for Indian exports to the American market. At the same                       
 time, the Government of India welcomed economic co-operation with the United                      
 States on the basis of mutual respect and mutual benefit.                                         
                                                                                                   
 Cultural contacts between India and the United States which have never been                       
 affected by political differences between the two countries remained at a                         
 normal level. A large number of Indian and American students, scholars,                           
 scientists, journalists and others visited the United States and India                            
 respectively. Among the several distinguished American visitors to India were                     
 Senators William Saxbe, Charles Percy, former Senator John Sherman Cooper and                     
 Governor John West of South Carolina. In January 1974, an academic summit of                      
 Indian and American scholars jointly sponsored by the University Grants                           
 Commission and the American Board of Foreign Scholarships was held in New Delhi                   
                                                                                                   
 pg74>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 to exchange ideas in the major fields of knowledge and to seek new areas for                      
 possible collaboration. A "Pugwash Conference" of Indian and American                             
 scientists and engineers took place in Hyderabad from 9 to 12 January 1974,                       
 under the Chairmanship of Prof. M. G. K. Menon, Secretary, Department of                          
 Electronics.                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 Although there is no conflict of interest between India and the United States,                    
 the relations between the two countries had some times been affected by                           
 differences over attitudes towards third countries. There was, however, some                      
 indication of a change in the U.S. approach towards the sub-continent. The                        
 United States recognised that the problems of the region must be resolved                         
 through peaceful bilateral discussions by the countries concerned and that no                     
 outside power can provide the solution required. It was also appreciated that                     
 there can be no arms parity between India and Pakistan as the strategic and                       
 security problems of the two countries were different and not comparable. The                     
 Govern- ment of India have noted that Secretary of State Kissinger, in his                        
 testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in September 1973,                        
 recognised India's role as of special importance in the developing world whose                    
 growth and stability was essential for peace and stability in South Asia.                         
                                                                                                   
 India has consistently emphasised that supply of U.S. arms to Pakistan, whether                   
 directly or indirectly, will impede the process of normalisation in the                           
 sub-continent and will endanger the establishment of durable peace in this                        
 region. It is hoped that keeping in view the improvement of the situation in                      
 the sub- continent the U.S. Government will not take any steps which may                          
 adversely affect this-process or endanger stability in the region.                                
                                                                                                   
 Canada                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 Indo-Canadian relations were further strengthened with the visit of the Prime                     
 Minister to Canada in June 1973. The Prime Minister was given a Warm and                          
 cordial welcome by the Canadian Govern- ment and people. The visit had some                       
 important results. The                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 pg75>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 goodwill trip took her to several cities of Canada from east to west. It served                   
 to renew contacts with Canadian leaders at diffe- rent levels and of different                    
 shades of opinion. This aspect was highlighted by such public events as the                       
 Prime Minister's address to the joint session of the Canadian Parliament,                         
 speech before the Empire Club of Canada at Toronto, meetings with leading                         
 intel- lectuals in Ottawa and Montreal and discussions with Canadian business                     
 leaders in Vancouver. The visit also provided an oppor- tunity for the two                        
 countries to discuss their bilateral relations at the highest level. It was                       
 decided that officials of the two sides would meet in New Delhi to review                         
 relations in economic, cul- tural, scientific, technical and commercial                           
 spheres.                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 In pursuance of the decision of the two Prime Ministers, senior officials of                      
 the two governments had detailed and fruitful consultations from 5 to 9                           
 November 1973. The Canadian Delega- tion was led by Mr. R. E. Collins,                            
 Assistant Under Secretary of State, Department of External Affairs, and the                       
 Indian Delegation was headed by Shri B. K. Sanyal, Additional Secretary (ED),                     
 Ministry of External Affairs. The detailed talks covered such ques- tions as                      
 Canadian development assistance to India, trade between the two countries,                        
 joint ventures in India, Canada and third countries, food, civil aviation and                     
 tourism, cultural relations and co-operation in the fields of science,                            
 technology and environment.                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 The leader of the Canadian Delegation assured the Indian side that Canada would                   
 continue to offer assistance to India in her strides towards development of her                   
 domestic capabilities and alleviation of poverty. Both sides underlined the                       
 importance of increasing trade between the two countries and expressed the hope                   
 that trade will continue to grow and will ultimately replace aid.                                 
                                                                                                   
 South America                                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 A major event took place in Latin America where the demo- cratically-elected                      
 socialist Government of President Salvador Allende was overthrown by the                          
 Chilean armed forces on 11 September 1973. Speaking in the U.N. General                           
 Assembly on 2                                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 pg76>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 October 1973, the Minister of External Affairs expressed the views of the                         
 Government of India in the following terms:                                                       
                                                                                                   
 "We deeply mourn the death of Dr. Allende in such violent and tragic                              
 circumstances. I do not intend commenting on the developments in a sovereign                      
 State. In the wider context. however, I must express profound regret and                          
 concern over the setback that the democratic tradition of the people of Chile                     
 has suffered as a result of his overthrow, and over the violence, bloodshed and                   
 depri- vation of human rights and infringement of diplomatic obligations which                    
 have recently been reported from that country. We earnestly hope that peace and                   
 harmony will be restored soon so that the people of Chile can resume their work                   
 of national reconstruction and recon- ciliation without any outside                               
 intervention and without further violence."                                                       
                                                                                                   
 India's relations with countries in South America are develop- ing                                
 satisfactorily. In pursuance of a policy to widen contacts with this region,                      
 two more Missions, namely those in Peru and Cuba, were upgraded to the level of                   
 resident Ambassadors.                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 High level contacts between India and Latin American countries were maintained.                   
 In October 1973, the Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Dr. G. S., Dhillon, represented                    
 the Government of India at the installation of President Juan D. Peron of                         
 Argentina. He also, visited several other capitals in Latin America and met                       
 important leaders in the government and public life.                                              
                                                                                                   
 pg77>                                                                                             
 United Nations And International Conferences                                                      
                                                                             Top                   
 CHAPTER VIII                                                                                      
 UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES                                                      
                                                                                                   
 A significant landmark in the series of recent International Conferences was                      
 the Fourth Non-aligned Summit Conference in Algiers in September 1973. At the                     
 28th United Nations General Assembly which followed the Summit Conference, an                     
 event of great significance was the admission of the Federal Republic of                          
 Germany and the German Democratic Republic as members. One of the new items of                    
 interest on the agenda of the U.N. General Assembly was the proposal for the                      
 reduction of the military budgets of States Permanent Members of the Security                     
 Council by 10 per cent. Among the important decisions adopted by the Assembly                     
 were one to hold a special World Food Conference in 1974 at Rome and a special                    
 session of the General Assembly in 1975, to consider problems relating to                         
 development.                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 The explosive situation in West Asia erupted into open hostili- ties in October                   
 and was a matter of grave pre-occupation and concern in the Security Council.                     
 The 28th Session of the General Assembly has recessed, instead of adjourning,                     
 thus permitting its reconvening, if necessary, to consider the West Asia                          
 problem on its agenda. As before, non-aligned countries co-operated closely and                   
 consulted frequently on various important issues, both tradi- tional and new,                     
 at the U.N. in general and in the Security Council and the General Assembly in                    
 particular.                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 pg78>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 The Fourth Summit Conference of Non-aligned countries was held at Algiers from                    
 Sep 05, 1973 to 9 September 1973. This was in accor- dance with a decision                        
 taken at the Conference of Foreign Minis- ters of Non-aligned Countries in                        
 Georgetown (Guyana) in August 1972, to hold the Fourth Summit Conference just                     
 before the 28th U.N. General Assembly. The Summit was preceded by a Foreign                       
 Ministers' meeting from 2 to 4 September 1973, as well as meet- ings of the                       
 Preparatory Committee in Kabul and Algiers. In this, the biggest ever gathering                   
 of Heads of State or Government to- date, there were 75 full participants, in                     
 addition to 24 'observers' and 7 'guests'. Among the new members admitted were                    
 Bangla- desh, Bhutan, Oman and Qatar from Asia and Malta from Europe. Latin                       
 American representation was strengthened by full member- ship for Argentina and                   
 Peru and observer status for Panama. Three European countries-Austria, Finland                    
 and Sweden-were among those who attended as guests.                                               
                                                                                                   
 The Indian delegation to the Summit was led by the Prime Minister. Indian                         
 views, as in previous Non-aligned Conferences, received careful consideration.                    
 The unanimous election of the Minister of External Affairs of India, Sardar                       
 Swaran Singh, as, Chairman of the Political Committee of the Conference was                       
 received with satisfaction by all. This also enabled India to play even more                      
 effectively its customary role in the resolution of the many important issues                     
 before the Conference. Foreign Secretary., Shri Kewal Singh, was Chairman of                      
 the Drafting Committee.                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 The Fourth Summit Conference, as compared to such previous conferences, was                       
 characterised by a deeper realisation among the participants of the need for                      
 concerted action and of their own ability to make a contribution to the world                     
 political and economic scene. There was a greater feeling of confidence and the                   
 will to implement what was desired rather than merely to discuss and, consider                    
 issues. This was particularly so in respect of economic. issues.                                  
                                                                                                   
 Among the significant features of the Conference was a clear consensus on the                     
 evaluation of detente, and the validity of non- alignment in the present                          
 international context. There was a                                                                
                                                                                                   
 pg79>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 recognition of the need for non-aligned countries to safeguard their                              
 independence of action and their determination to ensure that international                       
 decisions affecting them are not made without their equal participation. There                    
 was also an emphasis on the urgent need for non-aligned countries to                              
 consolidate their economic independence and to work for collective                                
 self-reliance through mutual co-operation, in accordance with the specific                        
 objectives and lines of action which was spelt out in the Conference docu-                        
 ments.                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 The main documents adopted by the Conference were a general Political                             
 Declaration, an Economic Declaration and an Action Programme for Economic                         
 Co-operation. In addition, a number of resolutions on specific political and                      
 economic subjects were adopted. It was also decided that the next Summit                          
 Conference of Non-aligned Countries would be held in Colombo in 1976.                             
                                                                                                   
 During her second and final year of membership of the Security Council, India                     
 continued her active participation and made a useful contribution to the                          
 resolution of several important issues which were deliberated in the Council                      
 during the year.                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 When the complaint of Zambia against serious acts of aggres- sion by Southern                     
 Rhodesia was considered by the Security Council, the Indian representative drew                   
 attention to the presence of South African forces in Southern Rhodesia and                        
 demanded their remo- val. India co-sponsored Resolutions leading to the                           
 despatch of a Special Mission to Zambia with a view to assessing the needs of                     
 Zambia in maintaining alternative systems of road, rail, air and sea                              
 communication for the normal flow of traffic.                                                     
                                                                                                   
 At the Special Session of the Security Council held in Panama City for                            
 "consideration of measures for the maintenance and strengthening of                               
 international peace in Latin America in confor- mity with the provisions and                      
 principles of the Charter" India supported a resolution which was adopted,                        
 expressing concern at the existence and use of coercive measures which affected                   
 the free exercise by Latin American countries of permanent sovereignty over                       
 their natural resources.                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 pg80>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 In June 1973, in a comprehensive review of, the situation in West Asia, the                       
 Security Council considered a report by the Secretary-General, detailing the                      
 efforts made by the United Nations to solve the Middle-East crisis. Speaking in                   
 the Security Council on 14 June 1973, the Indian Permanent Representative                         
 termed the report of the Secretary-General as excellent, clear and astute and                     
 praised the efforts of Ambassador Jarring. He added, however, that Israel's                       
 refusal to implement resolution 242(1967) made the call for negotiations to the                   
 Arabs a call for surrender.                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 Later in the year, with the outbreak of war in West Asia, the Security Council                    
 met 10 times between 8 and 27 October 1973, to consider the situation. Four                       
 resolutions were adopted, in each case by 14 votes in favour to none against                      
 and China not parti- cipating in the vote. The non-aligned countries members of                   
 the Security Council, including India, played a vital role in the various                         
 decisions adopted by the Council on the question.                                                 
                                                                                                   
 On 22 October 1973, the Security Council adopted Resolution 338, co-sponsored                     
 by the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R., calling for an immediate cease-fire in the                        
 positions occupied by the parties concerned at the time of the adoption of the                    
 Resolution. It also called upon the parties concerned to start, immediately                       
 after the cease-fire, the implementation of Security Council Resolution 242                       
 (1967) in all its parts. It further decided that, immediately and concurrently                    
 with the cease-fire, negotiations should start between the parties concerned                      
 under proper auspices aimed at establishing a just and durable peace in the                       
 Middle East.                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 On 23 October 1973, the Security Council adopted Resolution 339, also sponsored                   
 by the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R., reiterating its previous Resolution, and                          
 requesting the Secretary-General to immediately despatch U.N. observers to                        
 supervise the cease-fire.                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 The fighting continued, and on 25 October 1973, the Security Council adopted                      
 Resolution 340, sponsored by non-aligned countries members of the Council                         
 (Guinea, India, Indonesia, Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan and Yugoslavia). This                       
 Resolution                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 pg81>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 demanded an observance of immediate and complete cease-fire and withdrawal to                     
 positions occupied on 22 October 1973. It also decided to set up immediately                      
 under its authority a U.N. Emer- gency Force, to be composed of personnel drawn                   
 from U.N. Member States except the Permanent Members of the Security Council.                     
                                                                                                   
 The UNEF is to have a total strength of 7,000, composed of contingents from                       
 countries selected in consultation with the Security Council and the parties                      
 concerned, bearing in mind the accepted principles of equitable geographical                      
 representation. It has been established for an initial period of six months.                      
 Austria, Finland, Ireland, Peru, Sweden, Ghana, Panama, Indonesia, Nepal, Kenya                   
 and Senegal are to provide contingents. In addition, Canada and Poland are                        
 providing personnel for logistic support. The cost of the UNEF will be shared                     
 among the members of the U.N., including India.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 A Peace Conference on the Middle East was convened in Geneva on 21 December                       
 1973. Resolution 344 adopted by the Security Council on 15 December 1973, noted                   
 that the Peace Conference was to begin under the auspices of the United                           
 Nations, and expressed its confidence that the Secretary-General would play a                     
 full and effective role and preside over its proceedings, if the parties so                       
 desire. It requested the Secretary-General to keep the Council suitably                           
 informed of the developments at the Peace Con- ference to enable it to review                     
 the problems on a continuing basis. China did not participate in the vote on                      
 the resolution, and the remaining Permanent Members abstained.                                    
                                                                                                   
 As in the Security Council, the non-aligned countries also held continuing                        
 consultations among themselves during the 28th U.N. General Assembly with a                       
 view to co-operation and co-ordination on important agenda items. The decisions                   
 taken at Algiers pro- vided direction and impetus to a number of decisions                        
 adopted by the U.N. General Assembly.                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Among the important items considered by the General Assembly was the                              
 Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace. At                                            
                                                                                                   
 pg82>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 its last session in 1972, an ad hoc committee had been appointed to study the                     
 implications of the proposal with special reference to the practical measures                     
 that may be taken in furtherance of the objective. The General Assembly had                       
 before it the report of the 15-member ad hoc committee, which includes India.                     
 The resolu- tion adopted by the 28th U.N. General Assembly urged all States and                   
 especially the major powers to extend their co-operation to the ad hoc                            
 committee in the discharge of its functions. It also requested the                                
 Secretary-General to prepare a factual statement of the military presence of                      
 the Great Powers in the Indian Ocean with special reference to their naval                        
 deployments conceived in the context of Great Powers rivalry. As on earlier                       
 occasions, the resolution was co-sponsored by a number of countries including                     
 India. While it was adopted by a large number of affirmative votes with none                      
 against, 4 of the permanent members of the Secu- rity Council-France, the U.K.,                   
 the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R.- continued their abstention on the resolution.                        
                                                                                                   
 A useful debate was held in the Political Committee of the U.N. General                           
 Assembly on the implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of                         
 International Security, culminating in a resolution which was co-sponsored by a                   
 number of non-aligned countries including India. The resolution reaffirmed,                       
 inter alia that all States have the right to participate on the basis of                          
 equality in the settlement of major international problems. It also appealed to                   
 all militarily significant States to exert efforts in order to extend the                         
 political detente so far achieved to military detente with a view to making                       
 available additional resources for economic and social development,                               
 particularly to the developing countries. The General Assembly also decided to                    
 include the item on Inter- national Security in the provisional agenda of its                     
 29th Session.                                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 The discussion in the Political Committee of the General Assembly in regard to                    
 Korea was concluded by a statement from the Chair. The statement noted with                       
 satisfaction the Joint Com- munique issued by North and South Korea in July                       
 1972 and expressed the hope that North and South Korea would continue the                         
 dialogue so as to expedite independent, peaceful re-unification.                                  
                                                                                                   
 pg83> A decision for the dissolution of the United Nations Commission for the                     
 Unification and, Rehabilitation of Korea was also an- nounced.                                    
                                                                                                   
 The debate in the U.N. General Assembly on the "restoration of the lawful                         
 rights of the Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia in the United                        
 Nations" ended with a decision to postpone discussion of the question. India                      
 abstained on this procedural motion. Later in the session, India voted in                         
 favour of a proposal not to accept the credentials of the Khmer delegation.                       
 This proposal was however not approved by the Assembly.                                           
                                                                                                   
 The Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic were                           
 admitted as members during the session. Bahamas which gained independence                         
 during the year, also became a mem- ber.                                                          
                                                                                                   
 As before, India participated actively in the deliberations of the U.N. General                   
 Assembly on items pertaining to colonialism and apartheid, in accordance with                     
 its well-known stand in such matters. India continued to be a member of the                       
 U.N. Special Committee on Decolonization (Committee of 24), the Special                           
 Committee on Apartheid (the Indian representative is the rap- porteur of this                     
 Committee), and the Council for Namibia and was actively associated with the                      
 various decisions taken on these matters by the 28th U.N. General Assembly.                       
                                                                                                   
 The General Assembly debated a new item during its 28th session entitled:                         
 "Illegal occupation by Portuguese military forces of certain sectors of the                       
 Republic of Guinea-Bissau and acts of aggression committed by them against the                    
 people of the Republic." India, which had earlier accorded recognition to the                     
 new Republic, co-sponsored and voted in favour of the resolution adopted by the                   
 General Assembly on the item. The resolution strongly condemned the policies of                   
 the Government of Portugal in per- petuating its illegal occupation of certain                    
 sectors of the Republic, and drew the attention of the Security Council to the                    
 critical situation resulting. from the illegal presence of the Portuguese in                      
 Guinea-Bissau.                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 pg84>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 in a related but separate move the General Assembly, while approving the                          
 credentials of the representatives of Portugal, made it clear that "they                          
 represent Portugal as it exists within its frontiers in Europe and that they do                   
 not represent the Portuguese dominated, territories of Angola and Mozambique                      
 nor could represent Guinea-Bissau, which is an independent State." As in                          
 previous years, General Assembly also decided to reject the credentials of the                    
 representative of South Africa. The President of the Assembly said that this                      
 was tantamount to a vehement condemna- tion of the policy of the Government of                    
 South Africa, but it did not affect the rights and privileges of South Africa                     
 as a member of the U.N.                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 India was elected to the membership of the Economic and Social Council, which                     
 now stands enlarged from 27 to 54, with effect from 1 January 1974. India's                       
 two-year term as a non- permanent member of the Security Council came to a                        
 close on 31 December 1973.                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 The General Assembly Session in 1973 proved particularly fruitful in regard to                    
 economic matters. In addition to its normal agenda, the Economic Committee of                     
 the U.N. General Assembly was also engaged in the first biennial review and                       
 appraisal of the International Development Strategy. India played an important                    
 role in the deliberations on this important item, and she chaired the working                     
 party appointed for the purpose.                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 Besides discussion on traditional items in the economic field, a significant                      
 development was the General Assembly's decision to hold a World Food Conference                   
 in 1974. The Non-aligned Summit had called for such a meeting and the United                      
 States had also- made a similar proposal. Other decisions taken included the                      
 holding of a special session of the General Assembly in 1975, to be devoted to                    
 development problems. (This had been recommend- ed by the Algiers Summit). The                    
 resolution on Economic Co-opera- tion amongst Developing Countries adopted at                     
 the session, constitutes an endorsement by the U.N. General Assembly of the                       
                                                                                                   
 pg85>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Action Programme for Economic Co-operation adopted at the Non-aligned Summit                      
 Conference in Algiers. Among other impor- tant decisions were the one to                          
 establish an International Univer- sity, and the setting up of a revolving fund                   
 for Natural Resources Exploration. All these decisions were strongly supported                    
 by India.                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 Earlier in the year, the 3rd Session of the U.N. Committee on Natural Resources                   
 was held in New Delhi in February 1973, and was hosted by the Government of                       
 India. The Session was addressed by among others, the Minister of External                        
 Affairs, Sardar Swaran Singh, and the U.N. Secretary-General, Dr. Kurt                            
 Waldheim. The leader of the Indian delegation, the then Minister of Irrigation                    
 & Power, Dr. K. L. Rao, was elected Chairman of the Session. The meeting                          
 considered impor- tant issues in the field of Natural Resources exploration and                   
 exploitation such as projection in natural resources reserves, supply and                         
 future demand, a U.N. Revolving Fund for Natural Resources Exploration, the                       
 proposed U.N. Water Conference in Argentina in 1977, the principle of permanent                   
 sovereignty of countries over their natural resources, technical and economic                     
 aspects of international river-basin development, new technolo- gies in energy                    
 etc.                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 The United Nations Committee on Science and Technology for development, a                         
 Standing Committee of the U.N. Econo- mic and Social Council, held its first                      
 session in New York in March 1973. The Government of India attach particular                      
 importance to the work of this Committee. Important decisions were taken by the                   
 Committee on a variety of subjects such as a World Plan of Action for the                         
 Application of Science and Technology to Development, protein malnutrition and                    
 the application of computer technology.                                                           
                                                                                                   
 India participated in the 1st Session of the Governing Council of the U.N.                        
 Environment Programme held in Geneva in June 1973. This Session, among other                      
 things, discussed and                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 pg86>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 evolved a list of priority areas for action in the environment field by the                       
 UNEP. Following the important role she had played at the Stockholm Conference                     
 in 1972, India participated actively at this session.                                             
                                                                                                   
 In pursuance of the resolution adopted by ECOSOC a Group of 20 eminent persons                    
 was appointed by the Secretary- General to study the role of multinational                        
 corporations and their impact on development, specially on developing                             
 countries, and to submit recommendations for appropriate international action.                    
 Shri L. K. Jha of India has been elected Chairman of the group which has held                     
 meetings in New York and Geneva and is expected to finalise its work before the                   
 middle of 1974.                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 Shri C. P. Srivastava, Chairman and Managing Director of the Shipping                             
 Corporation of India, was elected Secretary- General of the Inter-Governmental                    
 Maritime Consultative Organisation (a Specialised Agency of the U.N.). In the                     
 elections held during the 54th Session of the U.N. Economic and Social Council,                   
 India was elected to the U.N. Population Commission, the Human Rights                             
 Commission and the International Narcotics Control Board.                                         
                                                                                                   
 The Conference of the Committee on Disarmament (CCD) held two sessions in                         
 Geneva, the first from 20 February to 26 April 1973, and the second from 12                       
 June to 30 August 1973. During this period the CCD held 42 plenary meetings and                   
 4 informal meetings.                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 Although several measures in the field of disarmament were suggested by                           
 members, the CCD's attention was mainly focussed on the questions of a                            
 comprehensive nuclear test ban and the prohibition of chemical weapons.                           
                                                                                                   
 On the question of a comprehensive nuclear test ban, the positions of the two                     
 major nuclear testing powers remained divergent and unchanged. The Soviet Union                   
 maintained that                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 pg87>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 the aim should be the cessation of all nuclear weapon tests, everywhere and by                    
 everyone, and that, for control over the cessation of underground tests,                          
 national means of detection and identification were sufficient. The United                        
 States, on the other hand reaffirmed its view that national means of                              
 verification should be supplemented by some on-site inspections in order to,                      
 secure an adequately verified ban on underground tests. India reiterated its                      
 position based on (i) support to the Partial Test Ban Treaty, (ii) an immediate                   
 suspension of all nuclear weapon tests and (iii) the need for adherence of all                    
 nuclear-weapon States to a comprehensive test ban.                                                
                                                                                                   
 In regard to the question of prohibition of chemical weapons, the Soviet Union                    
 and the other Socialist States emphasized that, while proposing their draft                       
 convention on chemical weapons (which is almost identical to the already                          
 concluded convention on biological weapons) as a basis for negotiations, they                     
 were prepared to consider any other concrete formulations of a future                             
 agreement. The United States and the other Western Powers did not consider the                    
 Soviet draft as a suitable basis for negotia- tions, as they had all along                        
 taken the position that the problem of chemical weapons was of a very different                   
 nature from that of biological weapons. The United States stated that it was                      
 continuing its search for workable methods of possible limita- tions or                           
 restrictions on chemical weapons, but had been unable so far to develop any                       
 concrete proposal or formula for negotia- ting a treaty on chemical weapons.                      
 India reiterated its support for the concept of a comprehensive prohibition of                    
 all chemical weapons without exception, and, in common with the majority of                       
 States, stressed that the system of verification of an agreement on chemical                      
 weapons should be based on a combination of national and international                            
 measures.                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 A new item this year in the U.N. General Assembly was the Soviet proposal for                     
 the reduction of military budgets of States Permanent Members of the Security                     
 Council by 10 per cent                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 pg88>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 and the utilisation of part of the funds thus saved to provide assistance to                      
 developing countries. The General Assembly adopted two resolutions on this item                   
 One, sponsored by Mexico, called upon the Secretary-General to prepare a report                   
 on the subject, with the assistance of qualified experts, to provide a basis                      
 for further consideration. Another resolution, sponsored by the Soviet Union,                     
 recommended that during the next financial year all States Permanent Members of                   
 the Security Council should reduce their military budgets by 10 per cent from                     
 the 1973 levels and allot 10 per cent of the funds thus released for assistance                   
 to developing countries. China opposed the proposal and the other three                           
 permanent members of the security Council, namely the United States, the United                   
 Kingdom and France abstained. India reaffirmed its view that a substantial                        
 amount of funds released through measures of disarmament should be made                           
 available as additional resources for purposes of development assistance,                         
 without prejudice to the fulfilment of accepted assistance targets as well as                     
 other existing or already agreed contributions from multilateral and bilateral                    
 programmes.                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 On the question of convening a world disarmament confer- ence-following the                       
 impasse which had been reached in regard to the functioning of the Special                        
 Committee appointed by the President of the 27th General Assembly-the General                     
 Assembly decided to establish an ad hoc Committee consisting of 40 non-                           
 nuclear-weapon States (including India) to examine all the views and                              
 suggestions expressed by Governments on the convening of a world disarmament                      
 conference and related pro- blems, including conditions for the realization of                    
 such a confer- ence, and to present, on the basis of consensus, a report to the                   
 General Assembly at its 29th session.                                                             
                                                                                                   
 The General Assembly, in separate resolutions, asked the CCD to continue its                      
 deliberations, as matters of "highest" and "high" priority respectively, on the                   
 questions of a comprehensive nuclear test ban and the prohibition of chemical                     
 weapons.                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 pg89>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 The General Assembly also invited the Diplomatic Conference on the                                
 Reaffirmation and Development of International Humani- tarian Law Applicable in                   
 Armed Conflicts---which is scheduled to be held in Geneva in 1974-to consider                     
 the question of the use of napalm and other incendiary weapons, as well as                        
 other specific conventional weapons, which may be deemed to cause unnecessary                     
 suffering or to have indiscriminate effects, and to seek agreement on rules                       
 prohibiting or restricting the use of such weapons.                                               
                                                                                                   
 The Ministry continued to assist the Department of Atomic Energy and the                          
 Department of Space in respect of the inter- national aspects of their                            
 activities. The Indian Ambassador in Vienna continues to be a Governor on the                     
 Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).                              
                                                                                                   
 An extraordinary session of the International Civil Aviation Organisation, and                    
 a Conference of Plenipotentiaries, were held in Rome from 20 August to 20                         
 September 1973, to deal with the question of air security against "hijacking"                     
 which has attracted considerable attention of the international community                         
 during the past few years. India participated in the meetings of both these                       
 bodies. Over a hundred States who are parties to the Chicago Conference, were                     
 represented at the extraordinary session of the Assembly. At the outset the                       
 Assembly adopted a resolution concerning unlawful seizure of a Lebanese civil                     
 aircraft by Israeli military aircraft, strongly condemning Israel for violating                   
 Lebanese sovereignty, calling upon it to desist from committing acts of                           
 unlawful interference with International civil air trans- port, and warning it                    
 that if it continued committing such acts, the Assembly will take measures,                       
 against Israel to protect inter- national civil aviation.                                         
                                                                                                   
 For its substantive work, the Assembly also had before it a number of proposals                   
 for the amendment of the Chicago Civil Aviation Convention of 1944, to deal                       
 with unlawful interference and other offences against international civil                         
 aviation. After                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 pg90>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 protracted discussions, the Assembly rejected all the proposals; but it adopted                   
 a somewhat mild resolution on the subject of air security. This resolution                        
 inter alia, reaffirmed its condemna- tion of all unlawful acts of interference                    
 with civil aviation and of any failure by the contracting States to fulfil its                    
 obligation to return a hijacked aircraft or to extradite or prosecute a                           
 hijacker.                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 The Plenipotentiary Conference was attended by representa- tives of 102                           
 countries. The proposals before the Conference were divided into two groups                       
 which envisaged: (i) adoption of a Convention, and (ii) adoption of protocols                     
 to The Hague and the Montreal Conventions. None of these proposals could get                      
 the requisite majority in the plenary of the Conference and consequently it                       
 failed to adopt any protocol or Convention concerning unlawful interference and                   
 other offences against international civil aviation.                                              
                                                                                                   
 India continued to play an active part in the work of the United Nations                          
 Committees and Conferences concerned with the pro- gressive development of                        
 international law. Further substantive work was carried out during the year by                    
 U.N. Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) and its working groups on                   
 unification and harmonization of international trade law on various topics                        
 including international sale of goods, international payments and international                   
 shipping legislation. In addition, the Commission at its Sixth Session                            
 considered the subject of multinational corporations. The Secretariat was asked                   
 to prepare a report on the basis of replies received from various Govern- ments                   
 and international organizations inter alia on the question whether any problems                   
 arose in international trade due to ope- ration of multinational enterprises                      
 which were susceptible to solution by means of uniform legal rules. It was also                   
 decided to organize an international symposium in 1975, to coincide with the                      
 Eighth Session of the Commission on the role of universities and research                         
 centres in the teaching and dissemination of international trade law.                             
                                                                                                   
 pg91> India was represented at the Second Session of the UNCITRAL Working Group                   
 on International Negotiable Instruments held in New York from 7 to 18 January                     
 1974. The Indian delegation brought to the attention of the Working Group some                    
 of the ele- ments in respect of which the Indian law on the negotiable instru-                    
 ments differed with the civil and common law systems. The Working Group was                       
 also apprised of the provisions in the Indian law relating to "protest for                        
 better security" which offer a compro- mise solution on the question of the                       
 recourse open to the holder when the acceptor of a bill has become insolvent.                     
 The Working Group agreed to further examine this and some other Indian                            
 suggestions.                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 In accordance with decision of the Asian-African Legal Con- sultative Committee                   
 taken at its 14th session held in New Delhi, in January 1973, an                                  
 inter-sessional meeting of the Sub-Committee on the Law of the Sea was held in                    
 Geneva from 28 to 30 June 1973. The Sub-Committee was composed of the entire                      
 membership of the Committee. India participated in the work of this                               
 Sub-Committee.                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 The Asian African Legal Consultative Committee held its 15th Annual Session in                    
 Tokyo from 7 to 14 January 1974. India parti- cipated in this session. The main                   
 subjects discussed were the Law of the Sea, international shipping legislation,                   
 and commercial arbitration. As to the Law of the Sea, the subjects discussed                      
 were rights and interests of landlocked States, status of international                           
 straits, and the question of archipelagos. India was Rapporteur of the Working                    
 Group on this subject.                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 The question of peaceful uses of the seabed beyond, the limits of national                        
 jurisdiction has been under consideration of the U.N. General Assembly since                      
 1967. The U.N. Seabed Com- mittee, whose membership was enlarged to 91 in 1971,                   
 held its last two sessions in March-April 1973 and July-August 1973, in New                       
 York and Geneva respectively. The U.N. Seabed Committee has completed its work                    
 on the seabed and its resour- ces. Its work on the Law of the Sea questions                       
 e.g. territorial                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 pg92> waters, fisheries, marine pollution, etc., has not, however, been                           
 completed. At the Geneva session of the Committee in July. August 1973, a set                     
 of draft articles on fisheries was introduced at the initiative of India. The                     
 proposal was also cosponsored by Canada, Kenya, Madagascar, Senegal and Sri                       
 Lanka. Under the proposal a coastal State is empowered to establish an exclu-                     
 sive fishery zone beyond its territorial sea. The outer limit of this zone has                    
 been left open for further negotiation and settle- ment.                                          
                                                                                                   
 Pursuant to the decision taken at the 28th U.N. General Assembly, the first                       
 session of the 3rd United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea was held in                    
 New York from 3 to 14 December 1973. This session was devoted to organisational                   
 questions. It was also decided to hold the substantive session of the                             
 Conference in Caracas (Venezuela) in June 1974, for a period of ten weeks. At                     
 the organisational session in New York, India was a member of the Drafting                        
 Committee for the Conference.                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 The following items were discussed at the. 12th session of the Legal                              
 Sub-Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space held in New York between 25                     
 March and 20 April 1973.                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 1. Draft treaty relating to the moon.                                                             
                                                                                                   
 2. Draft convention on registration of objects launched into space for the                        
 exploration or use of outerspace.                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 3. Matters relating to the definition and/or delimitation of outerspace and                       
 outerspace activities.                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 4. The various implications of space communications; report of the Working                        
 Group on Direct Broadcast Satellites.                                                             
                                                                                                   
 5. Matters relating to the activities carried out through remote sensing                          
 satellite surveys of earth resources.                                                             
                                                                                                   
 pg93                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 The Draft Moon Treaty and the Draft Registration Treaty were discussed in                         
 detail as a matter of priority. India took an active part in the drafting of                      
 the Moon Treaty and has sub- mitted proposals on various issues including the                     
 question of the legal regime the natural resources of the Moon. Many of the                       
 provisions of these two treaties have been finalised though there are still                       
 some issues to be resolved in their formulation.                                                  
                                                                                                   
 The 16th session of the Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outerspace was held in                      
 New York in 1973. There was no agreement in the Committee and the General                         
 Assembly was recommended to refer the outstanding issues to the 13th session of                   
 the Legal Sub-Committee which will be held during 1974.                                           
                                                                                                   
 During 1973, India concluded 102 treaties and agreements, a list of which is                      
 given in Appendix III.                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 A meeting of the Commonwealth Heads of Government was: held in Ottawa from 2 to                   
 10 August 1973. The Indian delegation was led by the Minister of External                         
 Affairs, Representatives from 32 countries participated including Bangladesh                      
 and the Bahamas, the two most recent additions to the Commonwealth. The main                      
 focus of attention at the Conference was on mapping the future course of                          
 Commonwealth co-operation particularly in the economic field. Britain's                           
 accession to the EEC was the most significant development of the year for the                     
 developing members of the Commonwealth. Initiating a discussion on the subject,                   
 the Minister of External Affairs suggested certain measures to im- prove the                      
 trading opportunities of the developing Commonwealth countries. There was also                    
 general support for retention of exist- ing Commonwealth preferences in                           
 countries other than Britain as a means of promoting intra-Commonwealth trade                     
 as well as for the retention of the existing preferences in the British market                    
 until suitable arrangements could be worked out with the EEC.                                     
                                                                                                   
 pg94>                                                                                             
 Technical And Economic Co-operation                                                               
                                                                             Top                   
 CHAPTER IX                                                                                        
 TECHNICAL AND ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION                                                               
                                                                                                   
 The Economic Division of this Ministry continued to project India's technical                     
 and economic advance and promote her econo- mic interests abroad, in                              
 co-ordination with the various economic- Ministries of the Government of India                    
 and the Indian Missions abroad.                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 There was an increasing demand on the part of the developing countries,                           
 particularly in Africa and Asia, and even in Latin America for Indian                             
 participation in the form of expertise, training facilities and equipment in                      
 their developmental activities. These developments added a new dimension to the                   
 functions of the Economic Division.                                                               
                                                                                                   
 Broadly speaking, the Division during this year was concerned as usual with the                   
 following subjects:                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 I. Promotion of closer external economic and commercial relations : bilateral                     
 agreements, co-ordination of action and in particular the inter-governmental                      
 Joint Commis- sions;                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 II. Working of the technical assistance programme (ITEC) which is geared to the                   
 possibilities of utilising to the                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 pg95                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 maximum the state of India's technical advancement within her somewhat                            
 restricted resources;                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 III. Support for economic co-operation at the regional and international level.                   
                                                                                                   
 Starting with the Indo-Czech Joint Committee set up in 1966, India has now                        
 established high level Joint Commissions with Afghanistan, Bulgaria, Hungary,                     
 Iran, Iraq, Poland, Sri Lanka, Sudan and the USSR. A Joint Commission with                        
 Rumania was set up in January 1974 and some others are contemplated. These                        
 commissions serve a useful purpose by allowing isolated bilateral economic                        
 agreements and aspects of economic relations with a country to be reviewed by                     
 an overseer body which assesses periodically the totality of economic relations                   
 with the country concerned and indicate guidelines for future strengthening and                   
 amplification of these relations. This also enables the accelera- tion and                        
 co-ordination of activities in various economic, commer- cial, industrial,                        
 scientific and technological spheres and ensures that additional fields of                        
 co-operation are in keeping with the changing needs of industrial and                             
 commercial development. Joint Commissions generally meet annually, delegations                    
 being led at ministerial level. Experts on the delegation constitute themselves                   
 into Working Groups to consider concrete measures to develop bilateral                            
 relations indifferent sectors.                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 The decisions of the first and second meetings of the Indo- Afghan Joint                          
 Commission, held in March 1970 and April 1972, respectively, were reviewed                        
 during a visit by a four-member Afghan delegation led by Mr. Abdul Karim Amin,                    
 President Finance, Ministry of Planning, Government of Afghanistan during March                   
 1973. A further review was carried out during the visit of the Indian Minister                    
 of External Affairs to Kabul in October 1973.                                                     
                                                                                                   
 The Indo-Bulgarian Joint Commission was set up on Nov 29, 1973 through an                         
 exchange of letters in Sofia between the Indian Ambassador and the Bulgarian                      
 Deputy Minister for                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 pg96>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Foreign Relations. The first session of the Commission is expect- ed to take                      
 place in Delhi towards the end of 1974. In January 1974, an eleven-member                         
 delegation of experts from Bulgaria visited India at the invitation of the                        
 Ministry of External Affairs. Areas of mutual beneficial collaboration are                        
 being identified through exchange of such delegations.                                            
                                                                                                   
 The 4th meeting of the Indo-Czechoslovak Joint Committee was held in Prague                       
 from 14 to 22 June 1973. The Indian delegation was led by Professor D. P.                         
 Chattopadhyaya, Minister of Com- merce, and the Czechoslovak delegation by Mr.                    
 A. Barcak, Minister of Foreign Trade. Working Groups were set up which made                       
 recommendations for future co-operation in the fields of industry, trade                          
 exchange and science and technology. Further progress was made during the visit                   
 of Dr. Gustav Husak, Secretary-General of the Central Committee of the                            
 Czechoslovak Communist Party, to India in December 1973, on which occasion a                      
 protocol for economic, technical and scientific co-operation between the two                      
 countries was signed.                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 The Indo-Hungarian Joint Commission was set up on 19 December 1973, through an                    
 exchange of letters in Budapest between the Indian Ambassador and the Hungarian                   
 Foreign Minister. The venue and time for the first session will be decided by                     
 mutual consultations.                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 The 4th meeting of the Indo-Iranian Joint Commission for economic, trade and                      
 technical co-operation, set up in January 1969, was held in mid-January 1974,                     
 preceded by meetings of committees on trade, technical co-operation,                              
 transportation, in- dustries and petroleum. The Indian delegation was led by                      
 the Minister of External Affairs and the Iran delegation by their Minister of                     
 Economy. A second round of talks was held in Tehran on 20 and 21, February 1974                   
 during the visit of the, Minister of External Affairs.                                            
                                                                                                   
 The Indo-Iraq Joint Commission for economic, trade and techni- cal co-operation                   
 was set up by exchange of letters between the                                                     
                                                                                                   
 pg97>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 two Governments on 6 April 1973. The first meeting of the Corn- mission is                        
 likely to be held in 1974.                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 The first meeting of the Indo-Polish Joint Commission, estab- lished in January                   
 1972, was held from 2 to 8 November 1973, in Warsaw. The Indian delegation was                    
 led by Shri T.A. Pai, Minis- ter of Heavy Industry, Steel and Mines and the                       
 Polish delegation by Mr. Jan Mitrega, Vice-Chairman of the Council of Ministers                   
 and Minister of Mining and Power. A protocol was signed by the two sides                          
 setting out co-operation in the field of mining and heavy industry, shipping,                     
 trade exchange and science and techno- logy. Both sides agreed on. long term                      
 agreements which would safeguard essential supplies to both countries.                            
 Co-operation in the field of mining, where Indo-Polish collaboration is very                      
 close, was reviewed and extended.                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 The Indo-Rumanian Joint Commission was set up on 14 January 1974, through an                      
 exchange of letters in New Delhi between the Deputy Chairman of the Council of                    
 Ministers of Rumania and the Indian Minister of External Affairs. The time and                    
 venue for the first session will be decided upon by mutual consultation.                          
                                                                                                   
 Under the aegis of the Indo-Sri Lanka Joint Committee on economic co-operation,                   
 established in June 1968, a Sub-Committee at official level had been set up in                    
 November 1971. The Sub- Committee held its third meeting in New Delhi in August                   
 1973 and January 1974. A review of the economic, commercial, technical and                        
 scientific co-operation between the two countries was made and satisfaction was                   
 expressed over substantial imple- mentation of the proposals in this regard.                      
                                                                                                   
 The Indo-Soviet Joint Commission set up in September 1972, held its first                         
 meeting in February 1973, when a protocol was signed. Thereafter meetings were                    
 held periodically with Soviet officials to review progress on areas of                            
 co-operation agreed upon in the                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 pg98>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 protocol. During the visit of Mr. Leonid Brezhnev, Secretary- General of the                      
 Communist party of the USSR, to India in Novem- ber 1973, far-reaching economic                   
 agreements were signed between India and the USSR.                                                
                                                                                                   
 India has established joint committees/groups for commercial and economic                         
 co-operation with several member-States of the European Economic Community,                       
 i.e. France, Belgium, Nether- lands and the U.K. These are mostly in the nature                   
 of trade com- mittees. Certain other member-States like the Federal Republic of                   
 Germany, Belgium, Italy and Denmark have also agreed to set up or are already                     
 operating commercial programmes with India. India's economic relations with the                   
 countries of the EEC received a further fillip from the visits of Dr. Erhard                      
 Eppler, Minister for Economic Co-operation, Government of the Federal Republic                    
 of Germany and Mr. Giscard d'Estaing, Finance Minister of the Republic of                         
 France in November 1973.                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 The Commercial Co-operation Agreement recently signed with the EEC, considered                    
 in the context of India's severe adverse balance of trade with the                                
 member-States of the Economic Com- munity, can be viewed as an instrument for                     
 the establishment of viable trading relationship with the Community. The main                     
 objective is to develop trade relations on the basis of comple- mentarity of                      
 the endowment factors and mutual benefit. Another complicating factor raising                     
 problems in a number of areas of Indian trade has been the U.K.'s entry into                      
 the EEC on 1 Jan- uary 1973. So far, Indian goods had been receiving                              
 preferential and duty-free entry into the U.K. market. From 1 January 1974,                       
 however, the import regime in the U.K. will change with the introduction,                         
 progressively; of the Common Customs Tariff of the Community. India is at the                     
 moment, seeking safeguard measures to protect her export-products. The Indian                     
 Government has initialled an Agreement on Jute with the Community under which                     
 the CCT of the Community would be reduced by a 40% level on 1 January 1974 and                    
 by a 60% level on 1 January 1975.                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 pg99>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 At the same time, the EEC has found it possible to continue duty-free entry of                    
 Jute into the U.K. market for 1974 also.                                                          
                                                                                                   
 A visit by a delegation of industrialists to Malta was arranged in December                       
 1973, to explore possibilities of establishing Indo- Maltese joint ventures.                      
 The delegation was sent at the suggestion of the Government of Malta. The                         
 delegation has since returned and would be submitting a report of their                           
 findings shortly.                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 Under the Programme of Indian Technical and Economic Co- operation (ITEC) India                   
 has been providing technical and economic assistance to the developing                            
 countries particularly in Asia and Africa and also in Latin America. The ITEC                     
 is con- ditioned by the fact that, although our resources are modest, we have                     
 skilled manpower and fairly advanced training facilities sufficient to                            
 undertake a sustained programme of technical and economic co-operation. The                       
 concept of ITEC is to share our technological progress and skills with other                      
 developing nations.                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 The Programme envisages the following forms of economic and technical                             
 assistance:                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 1. Provision of training facilities in India to foreign na- tionals;                              
                                                                                                   
 2. Long and short-term deputation of experts abroad.                                              
                                                                                                   
 3. Gifts of capital goods; equipment, drugs, medicines, etc;                                      
                                                                                                   
 4. Financial assistance for conducting feasibility studies and techno-economic                    
 surveys; and                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 5. Undertaking specific projects in certain countries. The programme, which was                   
 conceived and inaugurated in September 1964, has made tremendous strides, as                      
 exemplified                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 pg100>                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 by the steady increase in the quantum of expenditure incurred thereunder, as                      
 shown below: Years Rs. (in lakhs) 1964-65 4.46 1965-66 7.45 1966-67 24.66                         
 1967-68 30.00 1968-69 27.57 1969-70 38.40 1970-71 44.86 1971-72 64.87 1972-73                     
 87.59 1973-74 (Estimated) 134.72                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 A provision of Rs. 3.63 crores has been made in next year's budget for the                        
 Programme to cope with increasing demands for assistance from the developing                      
 countries. This needs to be aug- mented, from year to year. In order to avoid                     
 its limited resources being thinly spread over a large number of countries, we                    
 have attempted to render the ITEC more effective by resorting to them principle                   
 of selectivity at all levels, in the choice of projects and in the nature of                      
 development. The ITEC has been particularly designed to ensure that its                           
 coverage in the neighbouring count- ries is effective and that basic economic                     
 and commercial inter- dependence is maintained at a steady level. At the same                     
 time, it places emphasis on countries with which we have either develop- ed                       
 significant relations or which have considerable development potential. Thirty                    
 four countries are covered by the ITEC pro- gramme out of which substantial                       
 co-operation has developed with Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Fiji, Malaysia,                            
 Mauritius, Oman, People's Democratic Republic of Yemen, Qatar, Somalia, Sri                       
 Lanka, Tanzania and United Arab Emirates. It is of interest to note that ITEC                     
 programme has been extended to some new countries viz., Burma, Cuba, Ecuador,                     
 Malta, Mexico and Peru.                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 pg101>                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 The provision of training facilities in our diverse vocational and technical                      
 training institutions and establishments, is one of the cardinal aspects of the                   
 ITEC Programme. We have at pre- sent about 280 trainees under ITEC during the                     
 current year, from countries as far apart as Cuba to North Vietnam in diverse                     
 fields such as medicine, nursing, handicrafts, teaching, home science,                            
 pharmacy, vocational training, agriculture, civil avi- ation, small scale                         
 industries, forestry, leather technology, sugar and food technology,                              
 cinematography, journalism, architecture and structural designing, wireless                       
 communication, irrigation, power generation, etc., etc. There are besides                         
 several hundred trainees on self financing basis whose places have been                           
 arranged by this Ministry. In addition, we have trainees from countries like                      
 Nigeria, Zambia, Libya etc. where the sending States have themselves agreed to                    
 meet the costs involved.                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 Appendix IV gives details of proposals for acceptance of trainees, some of                        
 which may be self-financed.                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 An equally important aspect of the ITEC Programme is the deputation of Indian                     
 technicians and experts drawn from a variety of disciplines to developing                         
 countries to assist in their development programmes. Approximately 235 experts                    
 (see Ap- pendix IV) have been deputed abroad so far during the current year,                      
 covering the following fields:                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 Agriculture, engineering, irrigation and power, medicine, edu- cation,                            
 financial administration, public administration, handloom technology,                             
 handicrafts, weights and measures, co-operative de- velopment, entomology,                        
 agronomy, transportation, small scale industries, coconut cultivation,                            
 railways, fisheries, forestry, voca- tional instruction, tourism, civil                           
 aviation and nautical engineer- ing, architecture, tea management, cashewnut                      
 culture, steno- graphy, geology, animal husbandry, horticulture, telecommunica-                   
 tions, etc., etc.                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 Appendix IV gives details of proposals for deputation of Indian experts                           
 presently under consideration.                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 pg102>                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 As years roll by, knowledge of the various categories of man- power, experts                      
 and technicians available in India has come to be fairly widespread among the                     
 developing countires. As such many of them have evinced great interest in                         
 recruiting various kinds of experts and personnel they require for executing                      
 their diverse development programmes. Recruiting teams from Ethiopia, Fiji,                       
 Libya. Tanzania, Kenya, Nigeria, Iran, Iraq and Zambia have visited India                         
 during the year for recruiting teachers, doctors, civil, electrical and                           
 mechanical engineers and surveyors. accountancy instructors etc.                                  
                                                                                                   
 In addition there are a number of requests for recruitment of personnel on                        
 direct contract basis, from various developing count- ries under consideration.                   
 There are several hundreds of Indian experts serving abroad recruited by                          
 foreign Governments. Com- mencing from early 1973, all requests even for direct                   
 recruitment, by foreign Governments, are channelized through the Ministry of                      
 External Affairs. The selecting teams are assisted in the presentation of                         
 panels of names for interview and in the selection process. About 400 Teachers,                   
 Doctors, Engineers, Surveyors, etc., have been selected by the Recruiting Teams                   
 for employment on direct personal contract basis this year.                                       
                                                                                                   
 Under the ITEC Programme, the Government of India has also gifted/donated                         
 capital goods, equipment and machinery besides medical stores, books and                          
 publications, etc. Examples of such donation gifts are given in Appendix IV.                      
                                                                                                   
 A number of feasiblity studies were undertaken and techno- economic surveys                       
 carried out in various countries during the year. A feasibility-cum-cost study                    
 of the Baghdad-Hasaibah- Aqasha railway line in Iraq was conducted and the                        
 report is ex- pected to be ready soon, Besides, a delegation of officials from                    
 the C.P.W.D. visited Iraq to study the possibilities of Indo-Iraqi                                
 collaboration in the field of construction.                                                       
                                                                                                   
 A feasibility study has been carried out in Mauritius, in August 1973, for                        
 setting up of an Industrial Estate and its report is under consideration.                         
                                                                                                   
 pg103>                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 Feasibility studies have been conducted in Zanzibar, in small scale industries,                   
 modernization of dock and harbour facilities, T.V. & Broadcasting, low cost                       
 housing and manufacture of Mangalore tiles, and re-organisation of retail                         
 stores.                                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 In Malaysia, in the State of Negri Sembilan, feasibility studies have been                        
 conducted for the establishment of a Technical Train- ing Institute and                           
 separately a techno-economic survey has been carried out.                                         
                                                                                                   
 A Techno-economic survey of the Gulf States has been con- ducted by teams of                      
 officials.                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 Teams of experts from the Engineering Projects (India) Ltd., conducted studies                    
 in connection with the setting up of rubber- based industries in Sri Lanka.                       
                                                                                                   
 A techno-economic survey of Sudan by the Engineering Pro- jects (India) Ltd.,                     
 was proposed to be conducted in December 1973, in the fields of cement, sugar,                    
 textile, fruit and vegetable canning, caustic soda, sulphuric acid and for the                    
 establishment of an industrial estate.                                                            
                                                                                                   
 Small scale industries survey of Tanzania has been carried out.                                   
                                                                                                   
 A two-man team was deputed to Qatar for conducting studies in underground water                   
 resources.                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 A four-member Planning Advisory Delegation which visited Kabul in November                        
 1973, has advised the Government of Afghanistan about the manner whereby                          
 existing arrangements in the field of plan formulation, co-ordination,                            
 implementation, monitoring and evaluation can be strengthened and develop- ment                   
 strategy reoriented to meet national objectives.                                                  
                                                                                                   
 Feasibility studies are proposed to be undertaken next year for the                               
 establishment of a cotton spinning mill in Laos and for setting up an Indian                      
 Telephone Industry unit in Mauritius.                                                             
                                                                                                   
 pg104>                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 Apart from the above activities, 38 scholarships have been provided for the                       
 current year, under the ITEC Programme for Afro-Asian and Latin American                          
 countries in specific interna- tional courses conducted by the Indian Institute                   
 of Foreign Trade, National Building Organization, Indian Standards Institution,                   
 Institute of Parliamentary Studies, Small Industries Extension Training                           
 Institute, the Water Resources Training Centre, Univer- sity of Roorkee, and                      
 the Institute of Secretariat Management and Training. We have offered an equal                    
 number of scholarships in these courses, for the next year as well.                               
                                                                                                   
 The idea of more effective regional co-operation within the Asian region has                      
 been gaining ground and various committees and sub-committees of the ECAFE                        
 showed activity in the fields of metals and engineering and statistics                            
 (meetings held in New Delhi), economic development and planning, tourism,                         
 export promotion, meteorological surveys, problems of land-locked countries,                      
 water resources, rural housing, the Mekong Project, programming techniques,                       
 transfer of technology, water transport, the Asian Highway, etc. Some progress                    
 has also been made in the trade negotiations group in discussing mutual tariff                    
 conces- sions in specified commodities.                                                           
                                                                                                   
 The 29th session of the ECAFE was held in Tokyo in April 1973. The new                            
 Executive Secretary of the ECAFE, Mr. J. B. P. Maramis paid a visit to India in                   
 December 1973. A review of the ECAFE structure is under way. India continues to                   
 take keen interest in all projects of regional co-operation under the ECAFE.                      
 India became an original signatory member of the Asian Rice Trade Fund and                        
 subscribed to the Asian Clearing Union set up in 1973.                                            
                                                                                                   
 pg105>                                                                                            
 External Publicity                                                                                
                                                                             Top                   
 Jan 01, 1973                                                                                      
 CHAPTER X                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 EXTERNAL PUBLICITY                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 The External Publicity Division worked to promote under- standing, sympathy and                   
 support for India's foreign policy and project a balanced and objective image                     
 of the country abroad. This involved maintaining close contact with the Indian                    
 and foreign press, informing Indian Missions of developments at home, supplying                   
 films and other audio-visual material to the Missions, and sending out to them                    
 photographs, articles, pam- phlets, books and exhibition material.                                
                                                                                                   
 During this year there was interest in the international media on issues and                      
 developments in the South Asian sub-continent, as also in the economic                            
 situation in India consequent on the drought. Our external publicity emphasised                   
 India's earnestness to resolve the problems left over from the December 1971                      
 war, and her contribution to the successful outcome of the Indo- Pakistan talks                   
 in August 1973. Measures were also taken to fight adverse and mischievous                         
 propaganda on developments in India. Several of these measures on both these                      
 subjects were successful in obtaining better understanding and publicity.                         
                                                                                                   
 The year also saw the termination of the 25th Independence Anniversary                            
 celebrations. Indian Missions worked in co-ordina-                                                
                                                                                                   
 pg106>                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 tion with local citizens, the press, academic bodies and Govern- ments, and                       
 with the Indian communities abroad to arrange celebrations in more than 120                       
 centres and capitals all over the world. In scores of capitals and other large                    
 and industrial, centres, a photographic exhibition depicting India's progress                     
 over the last 25 years, was put up. Several Missions supplemented the                             
 photographs with a display of Indian books; art and handicrafts. Twenty                           
 cultural troupes featuring prominent artistes visited 34 capitals including                       
 Kabul, Canberra, Dacca, Brussels, Thimpu, Havana, Berlin, The Hague, Hong Kong,                   
 Budapest, Sofia, Tokyo, Kuala Lumpur, Mexico City, Kathmandu, Manila,                             
 Singapore, Madrid, Bangkok, Rangoon, Prague, Suva, Paris, Port Louis, Warsaw,                     
 Bucharest, Port-of-Spain, Tunis, Moscow, Caracas, Belgrade. Tripoli, Tehran and                   
 Valetta. Judging from press reviews, they obviously created an impact wherever                    
 they went. particularly in places where people had not been exposed to Indian                     
 music and dance before. The Division also arranged for an exhibition of the                       
 best modern Indian art to tour the United States (Washington DC and San                           
 Francisco) and Canada (Toronto). In addition, an exhibition of modern Indian                      
 art visited Brazil and Venezuela. The National Museum arranged for an                             
 exhibition of miniatures in Hong Kong and Tokyo. Sixty-eight newspapers all                       
 over the world put out special supplements in honour of India besides the                         
 coverage major newspapers gave the celebra- tions, more than 161 of these with                    
 feature articles and editorials on India. In addition, the Division invited 57                    
 press, radio and television delegations from abroad to cover the Indian scene                     
 to- day. Coverage which resulted from these visits was, on the whole, balanced.                   
                                                                                                   
 Other special activities of the year included the following:                                      
                                                                                                   
 (1) The supply to the Missions concerned of 5 publicity films on the visits of                    
 foreign dignitaries to India (the visits of the Prime Ministers of Poland,                        
 Mongolia and Yugoslavia, the First Vice-President of Tanzania and Madame                          
 Farideh Diba of Iran). The film on. the visit of the King of Nepal is under                       
 production.                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 (2) Supply of special documentary and some feature films to the                                   
                                                                                                   
 pg107>                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 concerned Missions for advance publicity on the eve of State visits of the                        
 President, Vice-President and Prime Minister of India. A special documentary                      
 film "A Tradition of Goodwill" with reference to Indo-Sri Lanka relations, went                   
 to the Indian High Commission in Colombo for screening on the eve of the Prime                    
 Minister's visit there. Another T. V. Film was produced and sent to the High                      
 Commission in Ottawa in connection with the Prime Minister's visit to Canada.                     
 For the Non-aligned Summit at Algiers, a special documentary, "Non-alignment                      
 for Peace and Prosperity" was produced and supplied for screening during the                      
 Conference. Several other films were also supplied for the purpose. (3) The                       
 tour of the "Nehru and New India" Exhibition in South America. The exhibition                     
 was a great success in Santiago, Bogota, Port of Spain and Georgetown, and                        
 resulted in a considerable amount of favourable publicity and press interest in                   
 India.                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 The Ministry's regular publicity work continued throughout the year under                         
 review, under the following heads:                                                                
                                                                                                   
 Press work--Indian and foreign pressmen were regularly briefed when Parliament                    
 was not in session. The Head of the XP Division is the ex-officio Spokesman of                    
 the Ministry. Even when Parliament is in session, as before, the Official                         
 Spokesman is available to journalists for background information, on request.                     
 Eighty two journalists were invited to cover India's develop- ment effort. This                   
 was over and above the 53 foreign pressmen invited in connection with the 25th                    
 Independence Anniversary celebrations. One hundred and twenty eight visiting                      
 members of radio and TV teams from abroad were provided with logistic                             
 facilities. One hundred and ten Indian journalists were also provided                             
 facilities to visit foreign countries. Some of these visits took place under                      
 the cultural exchange programmes between India and other countries. Two hundred                   
 and thirty four foreign journalists were also given facilities to visit India.                    
 A teleprinter link was maintained with 64 Missions for quick transmission of                      
 developments at home in all fields. The Missions received                                         
                                                                                                   
 pg108>                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 two transmissions a day. Other Missions received important news items by press                    
 cables or by diplomatic bag. These newscasts provided Indian Missions abroad                      
 with timely and indispensable materials for their daily or periodic publicity                     
 bulletins. The Government of India issued 374 press releases based on material                    
 received from the Missions abroad and from the Territorial Divisions of the                       
 Ministry. Journalists and other media represen- tatives, both Indian and                          
 foreign, and the Transmission Unit of this Division used this material. The                       
 World Press Review was published daily. The Review was based on cables and                        
 despatches received from our Missions and contained news, comments and                            
 editorials from the foreign press of interest to India.                                           
                                                                                                   
 Audio-visual publicity--The Government of India approved 56 documentary films                     
 for external publicity. Seven hundred and thirty three prints of films were                       
 supplied to the Missions. Four hundred and fifty prints of 9 selected colour                      
 documentaries pro- cessed in the U.K. are ready for despatch. The Government is                   
 arranging the purchase of 10 prints each of 10 selected award- winning feature                    
 films in different regional languages. The prints will be sub-titled in                           
 different foreign languages and sent cut to our Missions. The Ministry supplied                   
 four 16 mm films projectors to the Missions in Doha, Somalia, Sofia and Amman,                    
 and a tape- recorder, record player and public address system to the High                         
 Commission in Lagos. Forty gramophone records of Indian Instru- mental and                        
 vocal music were also supplied to various Missions abroad.                                        
                                                                                                   
 Exhibitions and Cultural Work--Assistance was given to Mis- sions in putting up                   
 exhibitions in Argentina, Canada, France, Hong Kong, Laos, Lebanon, Mexico,                       
 Panama, Poland, Thailand, Turkey, Syria, the U.K. and Zambia. For this purpose                    
 the Divi- sion supplied 667 books, 243 photographs, 428 paintings, 76 posters.                    
 8 postal stamps, 4 film strips and 12 dolls. Some of these exhibitions were of                    
 a general nature and highlighted development work in the country. Other                           
 exhibitions had specialised themes like children's paintings, children's books,                   
 agriculture and so on, and appropriate material was sent. The Missions abroad                     
 were                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 pg109>                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 also assisted in organising Children's day painting competitions. Articles for                    
 presentation and prizes for the purpose were sent to the Missions in Buenos                       
 Aires, Mexico City, Moscow, Panama, Port Louis, San Francisco, Suva, Tokyo and                    
 Algiers.                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 Print Publicity--A regular supply of material to the Missions was kept up                         
 through the Production Unit. The Ministry pub- lished the fortnightlies "Indian                   
 & Foreign Review" in English and "Courrier de l'Inde" in French, and the                          
 monthly "Foreign Affairs Record", incorporating agreements, treaties and other                    
 formal documents signed by India. Twenty one pamphlets were produced on various                   
 aspects of India today for distribution through Indian Missions. Articles and                     
 photographs were sup- plied to the Missions abroad which together brought out                     
 21 periodicals in local languages and a short biography of the Prime Minister                     
 in French, Swahili, Arabic and Spanish. Some of these articles were also                          
 reproduced in the local press. Fifteen feature articles on various subjects for                   
 publication on Indepen- dence Day, Republic Day and other occasions were                          
 commission- ed. Individual requests from Missions abroad for articles and                         
 photographs on subjects of specialised interest were met in addi- tion to all                     
 other material sent out.                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 In addition, Missions were supplied 120 different Indian news- papers and                         
 journals for distribution. The Division also sent out a selection of Indian                       
 books for use in the Mission's libraries and for local presentation.                              
                                                                                                   
 The External Publicity Division worked in close co-ordination with other                          
 concerned Ministries and Departments of the Govern- ment of India. These                          
 included the Commercial Publicity Wing of the Ministry of Commerce, the                           
 Department of Culture, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Information                     
 and Broad- casting and its various media units, i.e. All India Radio, special-                    
 ly its External Services Division, the Press Information Bureau, the Photo                        
 Division, the Films Division, the Directorate of Publi- cations Division. and                     
 the Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity.                                              
                                                                                                   
 pg110>                                                                                            
 Cultural Relations                                                                                
                                                                             Top                   
 CHAPTER XI                                                                                        
 CULTURAL RELATIONS                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 The Indian Council for Cultural Relations took concrete steps to strengthen                       
 India's cultural relations with other countries.                                                  
                                                                                                   
 Among the large number of distinguished scholars, writers and artists from                        
 foreign countries who visited India on the invi- tation of ICCR or were looked                    
 after by the Council during their visit were: Miss Lucrecia Kasilag, Director                     
 of Performing Arts, Cultural Centre of the Philippines; Professors Abdul Razzak                   
 and Jainul Abedin, Bangladesh; Mr. Ronnie de Mel, M.P., Sri Lanka; a                              
 three-member delegation of Rabita al-Islami from Saudi Arabia; Mrs. Mariyam                       
 Harris of the United King- dom; a thirtysix-member French students delegation                     
 from 1' Association des Hautes Etudes Internationales, Paris; Professor Juan R.                   
 Francisco, Professor of Indian Studies, University of the Philippines, and Dr.                    
 Nagasura T. Madale, Institute of Asian Studies, Mindanao State University, the                    
 Philippines; a four- member writers delegation from the Soviet Union; and Mr.                     
 Gennady Pechnikov, Director and Actor of Children's Theatre, Moscow.                              
                                                                                                   
 Indian scholars, writers and artists were sent abroad on good- will-cum-lecture                   
 tours. These included Professors Sisir Kumar                                                      
                                                                                                   
 pg111>                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 Ghosh of Santiniketan, to Japan and Thailand; Dr. Vishal Singh of Jawaharlal                      
 Nehru University, to Indonesia and Malaysia; Shri Sadashiv Sathe, sculptor, to                    
 Britain; Dr. Malati Jadhav of the Christian Medical College, Vellore, to Sri                      
 Lanka; Dr. Maqbool Ahmed of Aligarh Muslim University, to Afghanistan; Shri                       
 Habib Tanvir M.P., to Iran and Turkey; Shri S. Balachandar, Veena player, to                      
 Japan; Professor V. P. Dutt, Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Delhi,                            
 Professor S. C. Dube, Indian Institute of Advance Studies, and Dr. A. M.                          
 Khusro, Institute of Economic Growth to Bonn, Federal Republic of Germany, for                    
 participation in a Seminar on India and Indo-German Relations; Professor C. D.                    
 Narasimhaiah, University of Mysore, to Indo- nesia, Singapore, Malaysia,                          
 Thailand and Japan; and Shri Shanti P. Chowdhury, Documentary film-maker, to                      
 Britain.                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 Delegations of performing artistes were sent to neighbouring countries                            
 including Bhutan and Nepal. Cultural delegations were also sent to Afghanistan                    
 and Mauritius to give performances.                                                               
                                                                                                   
 Exhibitions of Indian Art and Handicrafts were sent abroad for display. Among                     
 these were Shri Biren De's painting June 1973 for the Biennale in Sydney                          
 (Australia), an exhibition of replicas of bronzes and reproductions of Indian                     
 paintings, masks, puppets and folk paintings to Hungary and an exhibition of                      
 contemporary Indian paintings to Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, Belgium and Poland.                        
                                                                                                   
 Indian books and art objects were presented through the Indian missions abroad                    
 to libraries and educational institutions in 46 countries.                                        
                                                                                                   
 The ICCR continued to bring out its journals as part of the programme of                          
 publication of books and periodicals. These are Rencontre avec l'Inde (French                     
 quarterly), Indian Horizons (English quarterly), Peoples de la India (Spanish                     
 quarterly), Thaqafat-ul-Hind (Arabic quarterly) and Cultural News from India                      
 (English bi-monthly).                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 pg112>                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 In connection with the Essay Competitions organised by two Indian Missions on                     
 subjects relating to India, ICCR sent Indian books and handicrafts for                            
 presentation to the winners of the competitions.                                                  
                                                                                                   
 The Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding is administered by                     
 ICCR. The Awards for the year 1971 and 1972 have been made by the Jury to                         
 President Tito of Yugoslavia and M. Andre Malraux of France respectively. At a                    
 special ceremony held on Jan 25, 1974 at Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi, the                            
 President Shri V. V. Giri, presented the Award to President Tito in the                           
 presence of a large and distinguished gathering which included the Prime                          
 Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi. The Citation was read by Vice-President Shri                    
 G. S. Pathak who is the Chairman of the Jury for the Award. Sardar Swaran                         
 Singh, Minister of External Affairs and President of the Council spoke on the                     
 occasion and President Tito replied.                                                              
                                                                                                   
 The welfare of foreign students in India continued to engage the attention of                     
 ICCR. Over 2,400 foreign students were helped in arrangements to visit places                     
 of historical and cultural interest in India. A total of 195 foreign students                     
 from 28 countries attended the four ICCR Summer Camps organised in Kashmir and                    
 in the South (Ooty, Mysore and Bangalore). A study tour to Dehra Dun and                          
 Mussoorie for foreign students in and around Delhi was arranged. Forty-nine                       
 students from 14 countries participated in a study tour of Rajasthan.                             
                                                                                                   
 Prizes were awarded to four winners of the ICCR Essay Competition on                              
 "Twentyfive years of Indian Independence". "Home hospitality" was arranged in                     
 Madras for a eightyseven- member Japanese youth good-will mission.                                
                                                                                                   
 A revised and enlarged edition of the handbook Studying in India was published                    
 and distributed to foreign students. About 1,000 students were met on first                       
 arrival in India and given assistance in regard to accommodation, travel etc.                     
 Orientation Courses were conducted in different parts of the country for                          
                                                                                                   
 pg113>                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 newly arrived foreign sutdents as well as for Indian students going abroad. The                   
 number of Foreign Students Advisers appointed by ICCR in collaboration with                       
 Universities and other institutes of higher learning totals 35.                                   
                                                                                                   
 Under the Orientation Programme for Indian and Foreign scholars, three                            
 orientation courses were conducted by ICCR, one for Indian scholars and                           
 technologists going abroad, another for medical doctors proceeding on a                           
 professional tour, and the third for I.F.S. probationers.                                         
                                                                                                   
 Presently ICCR has Chairs/Centres of Indian Studies in Afghanistan, Guyana,                       
 Indonesia, Iran, Lebanon, Mexico, Poland, Rumania, Senegal, Thailand, Trinidad                    
 and Yugoslavia. More Chairs are under consideration, ICCR Visiting Professors                     
 in Singapore and Laos have completed their assignments.                                           
                                                                                                   
 ICCR is actively engaged in co-operation with the Jawaharlal Nehru University                     
 and the National Council of Educational Research and Training in the Scheme for                   
 Improve- ment of Source Material, and the pilot project for producing suitable                    
 reading material on India in different foreign languages for school children                      
 and university students in other countries is under way.                                          
                                                                                                   
 The programme for opening Indian Cultural Centres abroad, designed to promote                     
 greater awareness and appreciation of our cultural heritage and of our                            
 achievements in social, economic, scientific and cultural fields since                            
 independence, was expanded. Apart from developing and strengthening the                           
 Cultural Centres already set up in Suva (Fiji), Georgetown (Guyana) and San                       
 Francisco (U.S.A.) proposals are under consideration to open more Centres in                      
 the near future.                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 ICCR played an effective role in the implementation of the various decisions of                   
 the Central Cultural Committee regarding cultural activities of foreign                           
 Missions/Organisations. Under the framework instituted by the Government. of                      
 India, ICCR was                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 pg114>                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 associated with the running of Cultural Centres of foreign diplomatic Missions                    
 in places where they have no diplomatic/ consular presence, and those of                          
 autonomous cultural organisations depending on foreign governments for                            
 financial assistance and support.                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 ICCR took over the management of the seven British Council Libraries in                           
 Bangalore, Bhopal, Lucknow, Patna, Poona, Ranchi and Trivandrum; the Thoreau                      
 Book Corner in Kanpur and the Robert Frost Book Corner in Shillong of the USIS                    
 and the House of Soviet Culture in Trivandrum. ICCR is also co-operating with                     
 the Max Muller Bhavans, Alliance Francaise and the Educational Resources Centre                   
 of the New York State University.                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 In association with the Department of Culture, ICCR was engaged in the                            
 organisation and presentation of exhibitions and performing arts groups from                      
 abroad. In collaboration with the Australian Government, ICCR sponsored two                       
 performances of the Australian Ballet in New Delhi. An exhibition of Industrial                   
 Design from the Federal Republic of Germany was arranged in Delhi, Bombay and                     
 Madras.                                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 An Academic Exchange Unit was established in the Council which will provide                       
 information to Universities and institutes of higher learning within India and                    
 abroad about terms of Indian scholars overseas and visits of Foreign scholars                     
 to India.                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 The nomination scheme under which the Ministry has been assisting, for the past                   
 several years, self-financing students from developing countries in Africa and                    
 Asia to secure admissions in Medical and Engineering colleges in India, was                       
 continued this year. Under this scheme, seats are reserved by the Ministries of                   
 Health and Education in Medical and Engineering Colleges all over India and are                   
 placed at the disposal of the Ministry of External Affairs. The categories of                     
 foreign students who are covered under the nomination scheme include students                     
 of Indian origin domiciled in foreign countries.                                                  
                                                                                                   
 pg115> During the year 1973, the Ministry arranged admissions of a total of 284                   
 foreign students as against 266 in 1972. 88 of these were admitted to Medical                     
 Colleges and 196 to Engineering Colleges. There were 37 students from Africa,                     
 78 from West Asia, 98 from South East Asia, 23 from Sri Lanka, 41 from Nepal                      
 and 7 from other countries. In view of the South African Government's decision                    
 not to recognise the Indian Medical degrees after 31 December 1978, it has been                   
 decided not to nominate any students from South Africa this year as they would                    
 not be able to practice the profession on return to South Africa.                                 
                                                                                                   
 pg116>                                                                                            
 Protocol Matters                                                                                  
                                                                             Top                   
 CHAPTER XII                                                                                       
 PROTOCOL MATTERS                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 The status of the Consulates of the German Democratic- Republic in Bombay,                        
 Calcutta and Madras was raised to that of Consulates-General with effect from                     
 Apr 10, 1973.                                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 The nomenclature of the Australian Deputy High Commissions at Bombay and                          
 Calcutta was changed to Consulates-General, with effect from 13 May 1973.                         
                                                                                                   
 On the arrival of Mr. Vincente Crespo Ordonez, as the first resident Charge                       
 d'Affaires, the Government of Ecuador opened their first resident Mission in                      
 New Delhi on 20 May 1973.                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 The Honorary Consulate of Peru in Bombay, which was closed down in May 1970,                      
 was re-established in November 1973.                                                              
                                                                                                   
 The Consulates-General of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the                       
 Republic of Korea became Embassies of the D.P.R.K. and the R.O.K. respectively                    
 with effect from 10 December 1973, in accordance with the decision reached by                     
 the Government of India and the two Korean Governments to establish diplomatic                    
 relations at Embassy level.                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 pg117>                                                                                            
 Passport, Visa And Consular Services                                                              
                                                                             Top                   
 CHAPTER XIII                                                                                      
 PASSPORT, VISA AND CONSULAR SERVICES                                                              
                                                                                                   
 Various suggestions from Passport Issuing Authorities, State Governments, and                     
 prominent members of the public, for improving the performance of the Passport                    
 Offices are continously being kept in view, and the Rules are being modified                      
 wherever necessary, so as to ensure progressively better service. A leaflet                       
 containing Notes for the General Guidance of Applicants for Passport was                          
 prepared and circulated to all District Authorities. Steps are under way for                      
 the printing of passport applications in Hindi along with English, for the                        
 convenience of the general public.                                                                
                                                                                                   
 As already slated in the previous year's Report, issue of India-Bangladesh                        
 Passports commenced from Sep 01, 1972. The total number of India-Bangladesh                       
 Passports issued during the period under report was 40,249.                                       
                                                                                                   
 The number of passport applications carried over from the previous year plus                      
 those received during the period covered by this report was 2,77,139. Against                     
 this, 2,01,308 passports were issued. Only 41 passport applications. were                         
 rejected. About 71,079 applications were awaiting disposal pending completion                     
 of certain prescribed formalities or enquiries.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 pg118>                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 3,104 official passports and 672 diplomatic-passports were issued. The number                     
 of other services rendered on such passports during the year were 1,769 and 562                   
 respectively. Official and diplomatic visas were issued to 2,847 foreigners.                      
                                                                                                   
 In pursuance of the Indian Emigration Act, 1922, the Protectors of Emigrants                      
 registered and offered assistance to 1,866 departing skilled workers including                    
 domestic servants. Emigration of unskilled workers continued to be disallowed.                    
                                                                                                   
 During the period under report, the Regional Passport Offices in India received                   
 Rs. 78,67,152 as fees for rendering passport services.                                            
                                                                                                   
 The Central Passport and Emigration Organisation, a subordinate establishment                     
 of the Ministry of External Affairs, comprising seven Regional Passport Offices                   
 at Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi, Madras, Lucknow, Ahmedabad and Chandigarh carried                     
 out the work of granting passports to Indian citizens, and identity                               
 certificates in appropriate cases. The offices at Madras, Bombay, Calcutta and                    
 Delhi also attended to emigration work and officers of appropriate rank in                        
 these offices function as Protectors of Emigrants for carrying out the duties                     
 assigned to them under the Indian Emigration Act, 1922. In addition, two                          
 emigration sub- offices, each under the charge of a Protector of Emigrants,                       
 func- tioned at Nagapattinam and Mandapam Camp in Tamil Nadu.                                     
                                                                                                   
 The total sanctioned strength of the Central Passport and Emigration                              
 Organisation is as follows:                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 Regional Passport Officers-7, Assistant Passport Officers -6, Public Relations                    
 Officers-9, Superintendents-18, Non-gazetted office staff-307, and class TV                       
 staff-112. In view of abnormal increase in the receipt of passport applications                   
 in the Regional Passport and Emigration Offices at Madras, Bombay, Ahmedabad                      
 and Calcutta, on-the-spot work studies were conducted by the Internal Staff                       
 Inspection Unit                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 pg119>                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 of this Ministry and its reports and recommendations for additional staff are                     
 being processed in consultation with the authorities concerned. A decision is                     
 expected shortly on the proposal to open a Regional Passport Office in Kerala                     
 State.                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 Government have decided to centralise the work relating to recognition of                         
 travel agencies in India by forming a Central Committee comprising                                
 representatives from the Ministry of External Affairs, Department of Tourism of                   
 the Ministry of Shipping. and Transport, and the Reserve Bank of India. This                      
 will replace the present system of separate recognition of travel agencies by                     
 different departments of the Government                                                           
                                                                                                   
 The Consular Section co-ordinates consular functions of Indian Missions abroad.                   
                                                                                                   
 During the period, 74 cases of repatriation and 78 cases of deportation were                      
 handled. Besides the past cases, seven fresh cases of extradition are being                       
 processed. 147 references connected with the registration as Indian citizens                      
 were processed in consultation with the Ministry of Home Affairs. Besides                         
 dealing with several cases relating to the deaths of Indian nationals abroad,                     
 41 cases of estates of deceased Indians are being looked into. Transmission of                    
 legal documents and service of summons on persons residing abroad have also                       
 been undertaken. Reciprocal arrangements for examination of witnesses are being                   
 worked out with the Federal Republic of Germany and Czechoslovakia. About 7,000                   
 judicial and commercial documents, required to be produced abroad, have been                      
 authenticated. The Consular Section also rendered assistance in resolving                         
 matrimonial disputes, tracing the whereabouts of Indians and foreigners, and                      
 verifying the authenticity of documents and certificates.                                         
                                                                                                   
 A Consular Convention was signed with the U.S.S.R. It generally embodies the                      
 arrangements already existing between the two countries and conforms to the                       
 international practice in the matter.                                                             
                                                                                                   
 pg120>                                                                                            
 Administration And Organisation                                                                   
                                                                             Top                   
 CHAPTER XIV                                                                                       
 ADMINISTRATION AND ORGANISATION                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 Sardar Swaran Singh was the Minister of External Affairs and Shri Surendra Pal                    
 Singh, the Minister of State, throughout the year.                                                
                                                                                                   
 There was no change at the level of Secretaries and Additional Secretaries.                       
 Shri Kewal Singh continued as Foreign Secretary. Shri V. C. Trivedi and Shri                      
 Avtar Singh continued as Secretary (East) and Secretary (West) respectively.                      
 S/Shri B. K. Sanyal and M. A. Rehman continued as Additional Secretaries.                         
                                                                                                   
 The IFS Committee (Pillai Committee) envisaged expansion of IFS cadre to about                    
 550 over a period of 10 years. Against this the present strength is 529. During                   
 1973-74, 12 Officers were on deputation to other Ministries/etc.-two in the                       
 Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance, three in the Ministry of                     
 Commerce, two in the Cabinet Secretariat, one in the Ministry of Education, one                   
 in the Planning Commission, one with the Indian Council for Cultural Relations,                   
 one on the Senior Ins- tructing Staff of the National Defence College and one                     
 among the Officer Trainees in the Jawaharlal Nehru University. It was not                         
 possible to depute more officers to work in other Ministries/                                     
                                                                                                   
 pg121>                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 Departments of the Government of India due to the shortages in the Cadre.                         
                                                                                                   
 The Ministry is now responsible for the administration of 117 Missions                            
 (including 4 special Missions in Bhutan, New York and Geneva, as well as                          
 Special Officer Sikkim) with a total staff strength of 561 Officers and 2612                      
 staff including local staff. A list of Indian Missions/Posts abroad opened- in                    
 1973-74 is given in Appendix VI.                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 Resident Ambassadors were posted to Muscat, Abu Dhabi, Bahrain, Sanaa, Lima and                   
 Caracas. Embassies have replaced Consulates General at Seoul and Pyongyang. The                   
 Vice-Consulate of India, Geneva, was upgraded to the level of Consulate, Deputy                   
 High Commission of India, Sydney was re-designated as Consu- late-General of                      
 India, Sydney. The I.C.S.C. in Vietnam adjourn- ed sine die. It has been                          
 decided to open another Assistant High Commission in Rajshahi, Bangladesh.                        
                                                                                                   
 The normal expenditure of the Ministry during 1973-74, is estimated to be of                      
 the order of Rs. 7544.82 lakhs, details of which are given below:- (Rs. in                        
 lakhs) Headquarters 283.12 Missions/Posts abroad. 1326.90 Other Items                             
 Contribution to the United Nations & Commonwealth Secretariat 210.68 Central                      
 Passport A Emigration Organisations 45.51 other Miscellaneous Items 1275.41                       
 Subsidies and Aid Subsidy to Sikkim 622.25 Subsidy to Bhutan 1337.50 Aid to                       
 Nepal 822.73 Aid to other developing countries in Asia and Africa.. 120.00 Aid                    
 to Bangladesh 1247.00                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 pg122                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Other Items External Affairs Hostel 2.20 ICM Directorate (Nepal) 11.75                            
 Grants-in-aid, contribution etc. 239.97 TOTAL 7544.82                                             
                                                                                                   
 Details of sub-head-wise expenditure on Headquarters, Mis- sions/Posts abroad                     
 and on External Publicity are given in Appendix V.                                                
                                                                                                   
 The expenditure of Rs. 13.27 crores on our Missions/Posts abroad is small                         
 compared to the total expenditure of about Rs. 279.44 crores incurred on                          
 Administration Services from the Central Revenues. It works out to 0.54 per                       
 cent of the Govern- ment's total disbursements from Revenue.                                      
                                                                                                   
 Our Missions have a minimum staff and run at low cost compared to Missions of                     
 most other countries. The staffing and expenditure patterns are kept under                        
 constant review to ensure utmost economy consistent with functional                               
 effectiveness. Eco- nomy measures instituted I earlier years in pursuance of                      
 the Prime Minister's directives to economise to the maximum extent possible in                    
 non-plan expenditure continued to be operative during the year. However,                          
 decisions to expand India's represen- tation have stretched the resources of                      
 the present experienced staff. The position has been more difficult because                       
 unlike those of some other foreign services, the Ministry's establishment does                    
 not include a suitable provision to provide flexibility to meet unexpected                        
 needs.                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 During the year, the Foreign Service Inspectors carried out inspection of our                     
 Missions in 11 stations viz. Kathmandu, Gangtok, Thimpu, Paris, London, New                       
 York, Washington, San Francisco, Ottawa, Mexico and Bangkok and made a number                     
 of recommendations regarding staffing patterns, rationalisation                                   
                                                                                                   
 pg123>                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 of work, foreign allowance etc. with accent on economy consistent with                            
 efficiency. Foreign Service Inspectors recom- mended a reduction of 124 posts                     
 in these stations, and the anticipated saving will be Rs. 40 lakhs                                
 approximately.                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 At present, Government own chanceries in 13 countries, resi- dences of Heads of                   
 Missions in 26 countries, and staff residences in 11 countries. Since property                    
 values and rentals at most overseas stations have been rising sharply, a                          
 programme was established early in the financial year to purchase or construct                    
 houses for officers and staff and chanceries at some posts but due to financial                   
 constraints, this did not materialize to the extent envisaged. Construction of                    
 offices and residences for our Repre- sentative and other members of Indian                       
 Missions in Thimpu is in progress. Construction of a few flats for our officers                   
 in Tokyo has also been approved. Besides, Government have agreed in princi- ple                   
 to purchase the Chancery building in The Hague and a resi- dence for our                          
 Permanent Representative in New York. Govern- ment have also approved the                         
 purchase of site for offices and residences in Lusaka and Bangkok.                                
                                                                                                   
 The Ministry had direct Teleprinter/Telex links with 43 Indian Missions/Posts                     
 abroad and similar links were established during the year with 8 more                             
 Missions/Post; abroad viz. Dar-es-Salaam, Ankara, Panama, Rome, Stockholm,                        
 Suva, Sydney and The Hague.                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 Routine work measurement studies of three Territorial Divi- sions, viz. Africa,                   
 Americas and Southern Divisions, were carried out in May 1973. On-the-spot work                   
 study of four of the seven Regional Passport Offices was also carried out by                      
 the Internal Work Study Unit during March-April 1973.                                             
                                                                                                   
 The Welfare Unit in the Ministry looks after the general welfare of all the                       
 officials serving at headquarters and in Missions abroad; but it has not been                     
 possible so far to tackle satisfactorily major difficulties such as children's                    
 education, accommodation etc., of the officials posted in India.                                  
                                                                                                   
 pg124>                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 Efforts to increase the progressive use of Hindi in the official work of the                      
 Ministry as well as in Indian Missions abroad and Regional Passport Offices                       
 were continued. Passport application forms printed in Hindi and English are                       
 being made available for the public by all the Regional Passport Offices and                      
 other authori- ties concerned. The Official Language Implementation Committee                     
 of the Ministry kept watch over the implementation of the instructions of the                     
 Ministry of Home Affairs on the use of Hindi and suggested various measures in                    
 this respect. Committees have also been set up in the Regional Passport Offices                   
 to. ensure the progressive use of Hindi. Necessary arrangements are being made                    
 to impart training in Hindi noting and drafting to the staff in the Hindi                         
 work-shop which will be set up shortly in the Ministry. A short-term training                     
 programme in Hindi for IFS(A) officers is also under consideration.                               
                                                                                                   
 During the year under review some more treaties and agree- ments were signed in                   
 Hindi. When the Soviet Delegation visited New Delhi in November 1973, all                         
 Agreements and the Consular Convention were prepared and signed in Hindi and                      
 English simultaneously. A printed booklet in diglot form containing the                           
 terminology used in the field of international treaties and agree- ments was                      
 brought out and distributed to all Ministries/Depart- ments of the Government                     
 of India. Arrangements are also being made for the vetting of treaties and                        
 agreements drafted in Hindi by other Ministries and Departments.                                  
                                                                                                   
 In pursuance of the decision of the Kendriya Hindi Samiti, a sub-committee of                     
 the Samiti was set up under the Chairmanship of the Foreign Minister and                          
 Vice-Chairmanship of the Minister of State for External Affairs to advise the                     
 Ministry on matters relating to the use of Hindi and its progress.                                
                                                                                                   
 The work of propagation of Hindi abroad continued to make progress during the                     
 year under the frame-work of the 'Scheme for propagation of Hindi abroad'                         
 through our Missions in the coun- tries included in the Scheme. Hindi books                       
 worth rupees one lakh                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 pg125>                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 approximately were sent to the Missions in these countries for setting up Hindi                   
 libraries there. Our Missions in Mauritius and Fiji have been doing very well                     
 in this direction with the help of Hindi Officers, and are providing necessary                    
 guidance and assis- tance to the local Hindi voluntary organisations in their                     
 pro- grammes for bringing out Hindi newspapers, preparing curriculam for Hindi                    
 teaching and conducting examinations on the completion of the courses and in                      
 organising other literary and cultural activities like Kavi Sammelans and                         
 staging Hindi dramas etc.                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 pg126> Jan 01, 1973                                                                               
 Appendix I International Conferences, Congresses, Seminars                                        
                                                                             Top                   
   APPENDIX I                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
        International Conferences, Congresses, Seminars etc., in which                             
                    India participated in 1973-74                                                  
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             A.ABROAD                                                              
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 Serial   Conferences etc. participated                 Nature of    Foreign ex-                   
                                                                                                   
 No.                                                    participa-   change com-                   
                                                                                                   
                                                        tion         ponent                        
 1                 2                                     3              4                          
                                                                                                   
 1   Colloquium on Advanced Methodologies for          Official                                    
     Agriculture Project and Policy, Washington.                                                   
     Jan 08, 1973 -9 February 1973.                                                                
 2   21st Session Under ECAFE Transport                   "          Rs. 1987.00                   
                                                                                                   
     Management Commission, Bangkok. 9-16                                                          
     January 1973.                                                                                 
 3   8th Session of the International Bureau of           "          Rs. 2071.79                   
                                                                                                   
     Education, Geneva. 16-19 Jan. 1973.                                                           
 4   9th Meeting of the Standing Technical Sub-           "          Rs. 640. 00                   
                                                                                                   
     Committee for South East Asia and Pacific                                                     
     Region, Bangkok. 17-19 January 1973.                                                          
 5   Meeting of UNCITRAL Working Group on                 "          Rs. 2038.20                   
                                                                                                   
     International sale of Goods, New York.                                                        
     22 January-2 Februry 1973.                                                                    
 6   Meeting of the Advisory Group of the Inter-          "          Rs. 5008.50                   
                                                                                                   
     natinal Sugar Organisation, London.                                                           
     22-26 January 1973.                                                                           
 7   25th Session of the UN Commission on                 "                                        
     Narcotic Drugs, Geneva. 22 January -9                                                         
     February 1973.                                                                                
 8   Meeting of the Technical Advisory Commit-            "                                        
     tee to the Consultative Group on Interna-                                                     
     tional Agricultural Research, Rome.                                                           
     30 January-2 February, 1973.                                                                  
 9   Annual Programme Review Meeting and                  "                                        
     Annual Meeting of the Board of Trustees at                                                    
     IRRI, Los Banos (Philippines). 31 January                                                     
     -2 February 1973.                                                                             
 10  Commonwealth Youth Ministers Conference,             "          Rs. 9780.46                   
                                                                                                   
     Lusaka. Jan.-Feb. 1973.                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 11  Meeting of UNCITRAL Working Group on                 "                                        
     International Shipping Legislation, New                         Rs. 8361.40                   
                                                                                                   
     York. 5-16 February 1973.                                                                     
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX I -- contd.                                                  
                                                                                                   
 1                       2                             3                4                          
                                                                                                   
 12  1st Meeting of ISO/TC23/SC7-Equipment for       Official    Rs. 1082.90                       
     Harvesting and Conservation Sub-Commit-                                                       
     tee of Agricultural Tractors and Machinery,                                                   
     Rome. 6-7 February 1973.                                                                      
 13  189th Session of the Governing Body of             "        Rs. 6808.00                       
     ILO Geneva. 8 February-2 March 1973.                                                          
 14  FAO Technical Conference on Fishery                "                                          
     Development, Vancouver. 10-23 February                                                        
     1978.                                                                                         
 15  23rd Session of the UN Commission for              "       Rs. 10548.00                       
     Social Development, New York. 12                                                              
     February-2 March 73.                                                                          
 16  International Convention on Trade in certain       "        Rs. 8422.14                       
     Species of wild  life, Washington.                                                            
 16  February-2 March 1973.                                                                        
 17  UNESCO Experts meeting to study working            "        Expenditure                       
     documents on the items of General Con-                        by UNESCO                       
     ference dealing with Instruments for                                                          
     Analysis of Culture. 20-24 February 1973.                                                     
 18  6th Session of FAO Inter-Governmental              "        Rs. 3482.25                       
     Group on Jute Kenaf and Allied Fibres,                                                        
     Rome. 21-23 February 1973.                                                                    
 19  29th Session of UN Commission on Human             "       Rs. 30100.00                       
     Rights, Geneva. 26 February-6 April                                                           
     1973.                                                                                         
 20  Annual Conference of Pacific Area Travel           "        Rs. 8610.00                       
     Association, Tokyo. February 1973.                                                            
 21  Meeting of the UN Sea-bed Committee,               "       Rs. 20220.00                       
     New York. 5 March-6 April 1973.                                                               
 22  UNIDO/IRRI Regional Study and Expert               "                                          
     Group Meeting on the Design and Manufac-                                                      
     ture of Wet land Rice Mechanisation                                                           
     Machinery in the developing countries of                                                      
     Asia and Far East, Philippines.                                                               
     12-17 March 1973.                                                                             
 23  4th Asian Pacific Weed Science Society Con-         "         Rs. 907.17                      
     ference Rotorua (New Zealand). 12-16                                                          
     March 1973.                                                                                   
 24  First Session of the UN Committee on Science       "       Rs. 12590.00                       
     and Technology for development, New York.                                                     
     12-30 March, 1973.                                                                            
 25  FAO Expert Consultation on Animal                  "                                          
     Genetic Resources, Nanzilly (France).                                                         
     19-24 March 1973.                                                                             
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX I-contd.                                                     
                                                                                                   
 1                           2                          3                4                         
                                                                                                   
 26  12th Session of the Legal Sub-Committee        Official             Nil                       
     of the Committee of Peaceful uses of Outer-                                                   
     space at New York. 26 March to 12 April                                                       
     1973.                                                                                         
 27  Commonwealth Sugar Agreement Ministerial          "                                           
     Level consultations, London. 28-29 March                                                      
     1973.                                                                                         
 28  South Asia Regional Travel Commission,            "         Rs. 1165.00                       
     Colombo. March 1978.                                                                          
 29  3rd Meeting of IPFC/Working Party on              "                                           
     Economics of Agriculture, Bangkok. 2-5                                                        
     April 1973.                                                                                   
 30  Conference on waves and instabilities in          "          US$ 618.00                       
     Plasma, Austria. 2-7 April 1973.                                                              
     31  6th Session of UNCITRAL, Geneva. 2-18         "         Rs. 9119.75                       
     April 1973.                                                                                   
 32  International Council of Combustion Engineers     "         Rs. 2982.00                       
     Washington. 5-9 April, 1973.                                                                  
 33  Annual Meeting of CIMMYT, Mexico. 8-12            "                                           
     April 73.                                                                                     
 34  3rd Session of FAP Sub-Committee on               "         Rs. 2882.25                       
     Fisheries Education and Training, Rome.                                                       
     9-17 April 1973.                                                                              
 35  Expert Consultation and Development of a          "                                           
     Co-operative Planning for Better Family                                                       
     Living Programme, Paris. 9-14 April                                                           
     1973.                                                                                         
 36  International Conference for the Support          "                                           
     of victims of colonialism and apartheid in                                                    
     South Africa, Oslo. 9-14 April 1973.                                                          
 37  62ad Session of the Mekong Committee,             "         Rs. 1570.00                       
     Tokyo, 11-24 April 1973.                                                                      
 38  Seminar on Regional Approaches to Agri-           "                                           
     cultural Development Planning, Philip-                                                        
     pines. 15-21 April 1973.                                                                      
 39  Seminar on Agriculture Problems in South          "                                           
     East Asia, Malacca. 17-25 April 1973.                                                         
 40  Annual Conference of IRRI, Philippines.           "                                           
     23-27 April 1973.                                                                             
 41  1973 Session of the United Nations Childrens'     "          Rs. 801.05                       
     Fund Executive Board, Now York.                                                               
     26 April-11 May 1973.                                                                         
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX I-contd.                                                     
                                                                                                   
 1                           2                        3                 4                          
                                                                                                   
 42  Commonwealth Specialist Conference on         Official      Rs. 2697.20                       
     Teacher Education, Nairobi. 26 April-                                                         
     11 May 1973.                                                                                  
 43  World Administrative Telegraph and Tele-          "         Rs. 6971.40                       
     phone Conference, Geneva. April 1973.                                                         
 44  28th Session of Administrative Council            "         Rs. 1500.00                       
     of the International Telecommunication                                                        
     Union, Geneva. April 1973.                                                                    
 45  10th Session of the UN Scientific and             "                                           
     Technical Sub-Committee of the Committee                                                      
     on the Peaceful uses of Outerspace, New                                                       
     York. 7-18 May 1973.                                                                          
 46  First Session of the UN Sugar Conference,         "                                           
     Geneva. 7-30 May 1973.                                                                        
 47  UIC/ORE International Colloquium,                 "         Rs. 1570.00                       
     Utrecht. 7-11 May 1973.                                                                       
 48  Preparatory Meeting of the non-aligned            "                                           
     countries Meeting, Kabul. l3-l5 May l973.                                                     
 49  3rd International Congress on Experiments I       "                                           
     Mechanics, Los Angeles. 13-18 May 1973.                                                       
 50  International Television Conference, Mount-       "             $524.00                       
     reaux. 18-24 May 1973.                                                                        
 51  8th Session of the Co-ordinating Council for      "         Rs. 2375.00                       
     the International Hydrological Decade                                                         
     UNESCO, Paris. 20-30 May 1973.                                                                
 52  First Session of the International Geological     "                                           
     Correlation Programme, Paris. 20-25                                                           
     May 1973.                                                                                     
 53  XLI General Session of OIE, Paris. 21-26          "          Rs. 248.10                       
     May 1973.                                                                                     
 54  Session of the Codex Committee of the             "                                           
     Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Pro-                                                             
     gramme, Washington. 21-25 May 1973.                                                           
 55  COSPAR Conference, Konstanz (W.                   "            $ 757.00                       
     Germany). 22 May-6 June 1973.                                                                 
 56  XVI plenary meeting of COSPAR Federal             "           US $ 1668                       
     Republic of Germany. 25 May-6 June 1973.                         DM 192                       
 57  Final Workshop Meeting on changes in              "                                           
     Rice farming in Selected Areas of Asia,                                                       
     Manila. 28 May-1 June 1973.                                                                   
 58  Symposium on the Design of Water Re-              "          Rs. 2860.0                       
     sources Project of Inadequate Data,                                                           
     Madrid. 4-9 June 1973.                                                                        
 59  21st Session of the Protein Advisory Groups,      "                                           
     New York. 4-8 June 1973.                                                                      
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX I-contd.                                                     
                                                                                                   
 1                  2                                  3               4                           
                                                                                                   
 60  FAO/IAEA Panel Meeting on Isotopes             Official                                       
     Tracer Aided Studies, Poland. 4-8 June                                                        
     1973.                                                                                         
 61  Annual Meeting of Board of Trustees of IRRI,      "                                           
     Philippines. 7-9 June 1973.                                                                   
 62  lnternational Conference on Marketing,            "         Rs. 3970.69                       
     Greenbrier (USA). 8-13 June 1973.                                                             
 63  60th Session of FAO Council, Rome.                "         Rs. 7068.47                       
 64  24th Executive Council Meeting of the ICID,       "         Rs. 3071.40                       
     Prague. 11-15 June 1973.                                                                      
 65  Intersputnik Conference, Bulgaria. 12-18          "               $ 377                       
     June 1973.                                                                                    
 66  11th Congress of ICLD, Madrid. 11-15              "         Rs. 6973.86                       
     June 1978.                                                                                    
 67  First Session of the Governing Council of the     "        Rs. 75000.00                       
     UN Environment Programme, Geneva.                                                             
     12-22 June 1973.                                                                              
 68  Second Quarterly Meeting of Coconut Pro-          "                                           
     duction and Productivity, Bangkok. 18-23                                                      
     June 1973.                                                                                    
 69  Symposium on magnetospheric motions,              "            US $ 191                       
     USA. 18-22 June 1973.                                                                         
 70  The 19th American Astronautical Society           "                                           
     meeting in the capacity of co-Vice Chair-                                                     
     man. Dallas, USA- 19-21 June 1973.                                                            
 71  4th "Pacem in Maribus" Convocation, Malts.       "         Rs. 1496.00                        
     23-26 June 1973.                                                                              
 72  Seminar on 'lnstructional Training Techni-        "              Met by                       
     ques for Broadcasting', Kuala Lumpur.                            UNESCO                       
     25 June-2 July 1973.                                                                          
 73  Asian African legal Consultative Committee's      "         Rs. 3200.00                       
     Sub-Committee, Geneva. 28-30 June                                                             
     1973.                                                                                         
 74  95th Executive Committee Meeting of               "        Rs. 10433.00                       
     IUOTO, Warsaw. June 1973.                                                                     
 75  International Congress "The Sun in the            "                 Nil                       
     service of Mankind", Paris. 2-6 July 1973.                                                    
 76  UN Committee of Sea-bed, Geneva. 2 July-          "       Rs. 130121.00                       
     24 August 1973.                                                                               
 77  4th Meeting on Co-operation among Indust-         "         Rs. 6544.15                       
     rial Development Financing Institutions,                                                      
     West Berlin. 4-11 July 1973.                                                                  
 78  55th Session of the UN Economic and Social        "        Rs. 33760 00                       
     Council, Geneva. 4 July-10 August 1973.                                                       
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX I-contd.                                                     
                                                                                                   
 1                          2                          3                4                          
                                                                                                   
 79  1st Meeting of the Advisory Group of the      Official                                        
     International Soyabean Research, USA.                                                         
     9-10 July 1973.                                                                               
 80  FAO ad-hoc Consultation on the Interna-           "        Rs. 1928. 00                       
     tional Plant Protection Convention,                                                           
     Rome. 9-13 July 1973.                                                                         
 81  First Meeting of the Planning and Editing         "                 Nil                       
     Committee of the Asian Area Common                                                            
     Reading Materials Development Programme,                                                      
     Tokyo. 9-14 July 1973.                                                                        
 82  Meeting of the FAO Technical Advisory             "                                           
     Committee on Fisheries, Rome. 10-19                                                           
     July 73.                                                                                      
 83  5th Session of CCP Inter-Governmental             "                                           
     Group on Banana and its Sub-Group                                                             
     of Exporters, Bremen. 10-20 July 1973.                                                        
 84  10th Session of Joint ECE/Codex Alimentious       "                                           
     Group of Experts on Standardisation of                                                        
     Fruit Juices, Geneva. 16-20 July 1973.                                                        
 85  Working Group on Statistics of the Distri-        "         Expenditure                       
     bution of Income, Consumption & Accu-                           by IBRD.                      
     mulation, Bangkok. 16-21 July 1973.                                                           
 86  5th UN Congress on Prevention of Crime and        "                                           
     Treatment of Offenders. 16-21 July                                                            
     1973.                                                                                         
 87  UN Seminar on "The Family in a changing           "          Rs. 750.00                       
     Society" Problems & Responsibilities of its                                                   
     Members, London. 18-31 July 1973.                                                             
 88  International Symposium on the Hydrology          "         Rs. 2343.00                       
     of Lakes, Finland. 23-27 July 1973.                                                           
 89  Meeting of the FAO Technical Consultative         "                                           
     Group on Agriculture Research, Washington.                                                    
     24 July-4 August 1973.                                                                        
 90  Inaugural Session of the Working Group on         "                                           
     Stratigraphic Correlation between Sedi-                                                       
     mentary Basins of the ECAFE Region,                                                           
     Bangkok. 24-30 July 1973.                                                                     
 91  The PATA Board of Directors Meeting,              "         Rs. 5193.00                       
     Noumea (New Caledonia). July 1973.                                                            
 92  FAO/DANIDA Seminar on Milk Manage-                                                            
     ment, Denmark. 4-26 August. 1973.                                                             
 93  Plasma Physics Workshop session Italy.            "                                           
     13-31 August 1973                                                                             
 94  5th Regional Conference of Development            "         Rs. 2291.75                       
     Banks of Asia. 14-17 August 1973.                                                             
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX I-contd.                                                     
                                                                                                   
 1                 2                                   3                4                          
                                                                                                   
 95  13th International Cosmic Ray Conference,      Official           $ 998                       
     Denver. 17-30 August 1973.                                                                    
 96  13th International Conference on                  "        Rs. 16400.60                       
     Agriculture Economics, Brazil. 19-30                                                          
     August 1973.                                                                                  
 97  Seminar on Communication Revolution               "            US $ 688                       
     sponsored by Australian National Commit-                                                      
     tee for UNESCO, Melbourne. 19-27                                                              
     August 1973.                                                                                  
 98  39th Session of I. S. I. Vienna. 20-30             "          Rs.4925.00                      
     August 1973.                                                                                  
 99  XIII International Congress on Genetics           "                                           
     USA 20-24 August 1973.                                                                        
 100 Third International Gondwana Symposium,           "                                           
     Canberra. 20-25 August 1973.                                                                  
 101 International Conference on Nuclear Physics       "             US$ 449                       
     Germany 27 August-1 September 1973                               DM 200                       
 102 Seminar on Prevention of Narcotic Offences        "         By Govt. of                       
     Tokyo. 2 September-4 October 1973.                               Japan.                       
 103 15th Congress of the International Associa -      "         Rs. 3037.00                       
     tion for Hydraulic Research, Istanbul. 3-9                                                    
     September 1973.                                                                               
 104 ECAFE Seminar on Water Resources Manage-          "         Rs. 3840.00                       
     ment, Bangkok. 3-21 September 1973.                                                           
 105 Session on the Sare, Effective and Efficient      "                                           
     utilization of Insecticides, Bangkok. 3-12                                                    
     September 1973.                                                                               
 106 10th International Symposium on Space             "           69400 yen                       
     Technology and Science, Tokyo. 3-8                                                            
     September 73.                                                                                 
 107 Summit Conference of Non-aligned countries        "       Rs. 111982.00                       
     Algiers. 3-10 September 1973.                                                                 
 108 IAGA Assembly meetings (2participants),           "            us $ 660                       
     Japan. 9-21 September 1973.                                                                   
 109 Meeting of Panel of Coconut, Manila. 10-15        "                                           
     September 1973.                                                                               
 110 Regional Seminar of Experts on Population         "                 Nil                       
     Dynamics and Educational Planning, Bang-                                                      
     kok. 10-18 Sept. 1973.                                                                        
 111 2nd Session of the UN Sugar Conference,           "                                           
     Geneva. 10 September-13 October 1973.                                                         
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX I-contd.                                                     
                                                                                                   
 1                       2                             3               4                           
                                                                                                   
 112 Meeting of the Working Group on Papavev        Official        By U. N.                       
     Bractentum of the UN Fund for Drug                                                            
     Abuse Control, Tehran. 13-17 September,                                                       
     1973.                                                                                         
 113 UIMC-24th Congress, London. 17-22                 "         Rs. 2588.00                       
     September, 1973.                                                                              
 114 34th Session of the International Conference      "        Rs. 13897.13                       
     on Education and 9th Session of the Council                                                   
     of IBE, Geneva. 18-28 September 1973.                                                         
 115 5th International Congress on Soil Zoolo.         "                                           
     gy, Prague, and 2nd International                                                             
     Cololquium on Collembola, Jevany. 19-26                                                       
     September, 1973.                                                                              
 116 9th Session of Asia Pacific Forestry Commis-      "         Rs. 3556.10                       
     sion, Malaysia, Singapore, Australia &                                                        
     Hong Kong. 20-28 September, 1973.                                                             
 117 1st World Congress on Water Resources,            "        Rs. 11550.00                       
     Chicago. 23-28 September, 1973.                                                               
 118 Meeting of FAO ad-hoc Panel on                    "                                           
     Vertebrate Peat Control and Ricel Gall                                                        
     Ridge, Bangkok. 26-27 September, 1973.                                                        
 119 Meeting of AGRIS, Rome. 26-28 September           "                                           
     1973.                                                                                         
 120 Meeting of the Institute of Development           "                                           
     Studies, Sussex. 27-30 September,                                                             
     1973.                                                                                         
 121 International Meeting of Experts on UNESCO        "                 Nil                       
     Associated Schools Project, Quebec. 29 Sept.                                                  
     -7 Oct. 1973.                                                                                 
 122 International Symposium on Space Tech-            "        US $ 1591.00                       
     nology & Science, Tokyo. September,                            Yen 7000                       
     1973.                                                                                         
 123 Inter-Country Workshop on Instant Health          "                                           
     Kathmandu. September /October, 1973.                                                          
 124 Plenipotentiary Conference of the Inter-          "        Rs. 19623.00                       
     national  Telecommunication Union,                                                            
     Spain. September, 1973.                                                                       
 125 Symposium on Farm Water Management,               "                                           
     Utah (USA) 1-8 October, 1973.                                                                 
 126 Second Consultative Group Meeting on              "                                           
     Regional Tectonic Map of Asia and Far                                                         
     East, Kuala Lumpur. 1-3 October,                                                              
     1973.                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX I-contd.                                                     
                                                                                                   
 1                             2                       3              4                            
                                                                                                   
 127 37th Study Seminar of the Institute of         Official   By Government                       
     Development Studies at the University                           of U.K.                       
     of Sussex, U. K. 1 October-2 November                                                         
     1973.                                                                                         
 128 International Criminal Police Organisation        "                                           
     (Interpol) Vienna. 2-9 October, 1973.                                                         
 129 Second inter-regional Seminar on Statis-          "         Met by UNDP                       
     tical Organisation, Ottawa. 3-12                                                              
     October 1973.                                                                                 
 130 6th Session of FAO Statistics Committee           "                                           
     of Experts, Rome. 3-11 October 1973.                                                          
 131 9th Regional Conference on Geology and            "                                           
     Mineral Resources Development, Kuala                                                          
     Lumpur. 4-15 October 1973.                                                                    
 132 International Astronautical Federation            "               $ 160                       
     Congress held in the U. S. S. R.                                                              
     6-13 October 1973.                                                                            
 133 Meetings of the ad hoc Committee of the UN        "                                           
     Commission on Narcotic Drugs for the   Far                                                    
     East Region. 7 October-7 November, 1973.                                                      
 134 48th Session of FAO's Committee on Com-           "                                           
     modity Problems, Rome. 8-19 October                                                           
     1973.                                                                                         
 135 Workshop on "Measurement of Real Pro-             "         Met by U.N.                       
     gress at the local level" organised by UN                                                     
     Research Institute for Social Develop-                                                        
     ment. 13-19 October 1973.                                                                     
 136 7th Session of the FAO Advisory Commit-           "                                           
     tee of Experts on Marine Fisheries,                                                           
     Italy. 15-24 October, 1973.                                                                   
 137 Meeting of the International Federation           "                                           
     of Institutes of Advanced Studies, Paris.                                                     
     16-20 October 1973.                                                                           
 138 Meeting of the Selection Committee cons-          "         Rs. 3853.00                       
     tituted by UNDP Headquarters at Geneva,                                                       
     21-26 October 1973.                                                                           
 139 FAO ad hoe Government Consultation                "         Rs. 3052.44                       
     on Fertilizers Rome. 22-24 October                                                            
     1973.                                                                                         
 140 UN/UNESCO African Regional Seminar                "                                           
     on Satellite Broadcasting Systems for                                                         
     Education and Development, Addis Ababa.                                                       
     22-31 October 1973.                                                                           
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX I-contd.                                                     
                                                                                                   
 1                   2                                 3                 4                         
                                                                                                   
 141 Third Extraordinary Session of the General     Official             Nil                       
     Conference of the UNESCO, Paris.                                                              
     23-27 October 1973.                                                                           
 142 International Symposium on Animal                 "                                           
     Research, Japan. 23-28 October 1973.                                                          
 143 Conference on Machine Processing of Re-           "            $1125.00                       
     motely Sensed Data at West Lafayette,                                                         
     Indiana, USA, and Conference on Mana-                                                         
     gement of utilization of Remote Sensing                                                       
     Data, South Dakota, USA. 29 October                                                           
     1 November and 22-30 November 1973.                                                           
 144 23rd General Assembly meeting of IUOTO,           "         Rs. 7438.00                       
     Caracas. October 1973.                                                                        
 145 PATA Board of Directors' Meeting, San             "                                           
     Francisco. October 1973.                                                                      
 146 Inter-Regional Clinical and Public Health         "                                           
     Aspects of Human Reproduction, Tehran.                                                        
     3-6 November 1973.                                                                            
 147 17th Session FAO Conference and 61st and          "        Rs. 54247.80                       
     62nd Session FAO Council, Rome. 4                                                             
     November-1 December 1973.                                                                     
 148 Meeting of the Managing Committee of              "         Rs. 2456.00                       
     the World System of Scientific Informa-                                                       
     tion (UNISIST) of UNESCO, Paris.                                                              
     5-9 November 1973.                                                                            
 149 UNESCO's Asian Programme of Educational           "                 Nil                       
     Innovation for Development Meeting, Bang-                                                     
     kok. 5-19 November 1973.                                                                      
 150 17th Session of the International Lead and        "                                           
     Zinc Study Group, Geneva. 7-13                                                                
     November 1973.                                                                                
 151 3rd World Symposium of Heads of Police            "                                           
     Colleges, Paris. 11-17 November 1973.                                                         
 152 Meeting of the FAO Technical Advisory             "                                           
     Committee, Rome. 12-13 November                                                               
     1973.                                                                                         
 153 Meeting of the Govt. experts to review the        "                                           
     application of the agreements on the importa-                                                 
     tion of educational, scientific and cultural                                                  
     materials, Geneva. 26 November-3 December                                                     
     1973.                                                                                         
 154 67th Session of the I.W.C., London.               "                                           
     November 1973.                                                                                
 155 Expert Group Meeting on Flood Damage              "                                           
     Prevention, Now York. 3-6 December                                                            
     1973.                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX I-contd.                                                     
                                                                                                   
 1                     2                               3                4                          
                                                                                                   
 156 2nd International Film Festival, Tehran.      Officail                                        
     December 1973.                                                                                
 157 25th Session of the Commission on the             "       Re. 24,800.00                       
     Status of Women, New York. 14 January                                                         
     to 1 February 1974.                                                                           
 158 UN Symposium on Population and Human              "       Rs. 20,800.00                       
     Rights, Amsterdam. 21 to 29 January                                                           
     1974.                                                                                         
 159 30th Session of the Commission on                 "       Rs, 37,000.00                       
     Human Rights, Now York. 4 February                                                            
     to 8 March 1974.                                                                              
 160 International Forum on the Role of                "                                           
     Women in Population and Development,                                                          
     New York. 25 February to 1 March, 1974.                                                       
 161 International Conference on Launch                "         US $ 559.92                       
     bases, Korou (French Guyana).                                                                 
 162 International] Ball Bearing Symposium,            "         US $ 620.00                       
     MIT Cambridge (USA).                                                                          
 163 7th Space Simulation Conference, Los              "         US $ 520-00                       
     Angeles.                                                                                      
 164 International Conference on Structural.           "            $ 100.00                       
     Mechanics in Reactor Technology, Berlin.                                                      
 165 XV Plenery Meeting of COSPAR inclu-               "      (pound) 278.00                       
     ding specialised Symposia, West Germany.                                                      
 166 First Meeting of the Board of Governors of        "         Rs. 3126.84                       
     INTELSAT, Washington.                                                                         
 167 World Administrative Telegraph and                "         Rs. 4525.23                       
     Telephone Conference, Berne.                                                                  
 168 Meeting of the Standing Committee of the          "          Rs. 834.73                       
     C.T.C., Singapore.                                                                            
 169 Meeting of the Working Party and Group            "         Rs. 3255.00                       
     of Deputies (Long Term Planning),                                                             
     Montreal.                                                                                     
 170 Meeting of Inter Sputnik Council, Moscow.         "         Rs. 1586.00                       
 171 3rd Meeting of the Board of Governors of          "         Rs. 3912.00                       
     INTELSAT, Washington.                                                                         
 172 4th Meeting of the Board of Governors of          "         Rs. 3400.00                       
     INTELSAT, Washington.                                                                         
 173 5th Meeting of the Board of Governors of          "         Rs. 1076.10                       
     INTELSAT, Canary Island.                                                                      
 174 6th Meeting of the Board of Governors of          "         Rs. 4100.00                       
     INTELSAT, Washington, and the First                                                           
     Meeting of the National Co-ordinators of                                                      
     Asian Telecommunications Network,                                                             
     Tehran.                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX I-contd.                                                     
                                                                                                   
 1                            2                        3                4                          
                                                                                                   
 175 Consultation of Lay Reporting of Prenatal      Official                                       
     and Maternal morbidity data and its                                                           
     analysis held by WHO at Geneva.                                                               
 176 Seminar on Demographic Research in                "                                           
     relation to Population Growth targets and                                                     
     2nd General Assembly for International                                                        
     Co-ordination of National Research in                                                         
     Damography (CICRED).                                                                          
 177 General Conference of the International           "                                           
     Union for Scientific Study of Population                                                      
     (IUSSP).                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
                             B. IN INDIA                                                           
                                                                                                   
 1   14th Annual Session of the Asian-African          "                 Nil                       
     Legal Consultative Committee, New                                                             
     Delhi 10-17 January 1973.                                                                     
 2   International Seminar on Hydraulics of            "                                           
     Aluvial Streams, New Delhi. 15-19                                                             
     January 1973.                                                                                 
 3   Inter-Regional Seminar on Petroleum               "                                           
     Refining in Developing countries, New.                                                        
     Delhi. 22-31 January 1973.                                                                    
 4   Meeting of Finance and Rates Experts of           "                                           
     C. T. Council, Bombay. January 1973.                                                          
 5   U. N. Inter-Regional Seminar on Current           "                                           
     Issues of Water Resources Administration,                                                     
     New Delhi. 22 January-27 February 1973.                                                       
 6   International Colloquium on showing of            "                                           
     Railway Knowledge, New Delhi. 5-6                                                             
     February 1973.                                                                                
 7   Third Session of the U. N. Committee on           "         Rs.37500.00                       
     Natural Resources, New Delhi. 6-17                                                            
     February 1973.                                                                                
 8   International Symposium on Recent                 "                 Nil                       
     Researches and Applications of Geoche-                                                        
     mistry, Patna. 20-26 February 1973.                                                           
 9   2nd Congress of SBRAO at IARI New                 "                                           
     Delhi. 22-28 February 1973.                                                                   
 10  Seminar on Physical Planning and Area             "                                           
     Development, New Delhi. March 1973,                                                           
 11  Joint FAO/IAEA Seminar on the appli-              "                                           
     cation of Nuclear Techniques in Agriculture                                                   
     at IARI, New Delhi. 2-20 April 1973.                                                          
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX I-contd.                                                     
                                                                                                   
 1                       2                             3                4                          
                                                                                                   
 12  Seminar on 10th Anniversary of World           Official                                       
     Food Programme, Now Delhi. 2 May 1973.                                                        
 13  2nd FAO/SIDA Training Centre on Maize,            "                                           
     Sorghum and Millet for Africa and the                                                         
     Near East, Delhi. 18 June-14 December                                                         
     1973.                                                                                         
 14  Meeting of the Group of Experts of C. T.          "                                           
     Council, Bombay. June 1973.                                                                   
 15  2nd Meeting of International Commission           "                                           
     on Science Policy and Summer School,                                                          
     Now Delhi. 18-28 July 1973.                                                                   
 16  Commonwealth Telecommunications Coun-             "                                           
     cil Meeting, Bangalore. July 1973.                                                            
 17  Participation by the Foreign team of              "                                           
     experts in the field of communication                                                         
     techniques in the agriculture extension                                                       
     workshop, Udaipur. 20 August-20                                                               
     September 1973.                                                                               
 18  12th All India Wheat Worker Workshop at           "                                           
     IARI, Now Delhi. August 1973.                                                                 
 19  FAO/Agricultural Banking Seminar, Hydera.         "                                           
     bad. 10 September-13 October 1973.                                                            
 20  The South Central Asia Regional Staff             "                                           
     Conference on UNICEF, Now Delhi. 1-6                                                          
     October 1973.                                                                                 
 21  5th South East Asia Post Graduate Nemo.           "                                           
     tology Course, Aligarh. Commencing from                                                       
     3 October 1973.                                                                               
 22  FAO/NORAD Regional Seminar/Workshop               "                                           
     on utilization of Small Plegic fish, Erna-                                                    
     kulam. 8-12 October 1973.                                                                     
 23  International UNESCO Post Graduate                "                                           
     Course on Teaching of Agricultural                                                            
     Engineering Ludhiana. 22 October-8                                                            
     November 1973.                                                                                
 24  Seminar at the 32nd Plenary Meeting of            "                                           
     the International Cotton Advisory Com-                                                        
     mittee, New Delhi. October/November                                                           
     1973.                                                                                         
 25  FAO-9th Session of the Plant Protection           "                                           
     Committee for the South East Asia and                                                         
     Pacific Regions, New Delhi. 2-9 November                                                      
     1973.                                                                                         
 26  FAO/NORAD Training Course in Accous-              "                                           
     tic Methods for Fish Detection and                                                            
     Abundance Estimation, Cochin. 15-23                                                           
     November 1973.                                                                                
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX I-concld.                                                    
                                                                                                   
 1                  2                                  3              4                            
                                                                                                   
 27  Fourth Asian Conference on Work of Blind       Official                                       
     held under the auspices of the Asian                                                          
     Committee of the World Council for the                                                        
     Welfare of the Blind, Bombay. 2-8                                                             
     December 1973.                                                                                
 28  7th Asia Electronics Conference and 3rd           "                                           
     General Assembly of Asia Electronics                                                          
     Union, New Delhi. 5-11 December                                                               
     1973.                                                                                         
 29  Forestry and Forest Product Conference,           "                                           
     Dehradun 6-11 December 1973.                                                                  
 30  Symposium at IARI on the method of broad-         "                                           
     ing short term wheat varieties under Indo-                                                    
     USSR Protocol. 10 December 1973.                                                              
 31  Regional Seminar for the Executive Secre-         "                                           
     taries of National Book Development                                                           
     Councils in Asia, New Delhi. 10-15                                                            
     Dec. 1973.                                                                                    
 32  12th Session of Conference of Asian Statis-       "                                           
     ticians, New Delhi. 10-22 December                                                            
     1973.                                                                                         
 33  Discussion on various issues having bearing       "                                           
     on Agricultural Banking in relation to                                                        
     Co-operative and Commercial Banks                                                             
     organised by FAO, Ministry of                                                                 
     Agriculture, Reserve Bank of India &                                                          
     State Bank of India.                                                                          
 34  International Jury for Mohammad Raza              "                                           
     Palhavi and Nadezhda K. Krupskaya                                                             
     Literacy Prizes.                                                                              
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 Jan 08, 1973                                                                                      
 Appendix II International Organisations                                                           
 Jan 01, 1973                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX II                                                           
                                                                                                   
         International Organisations of which India became a Member/                               
                         ceased to be a Member                                                     
                                                                                                   
 Serial   Name of the International Organisation of      Ceased to be a                            
 NO.         which India became a Member                     Member                                
                                                                                                   
 1   UN Population Commission of the UN                                                            
     Economic and Social Council.                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 2   National Railways Safety Council, USA.                                                        
                                                                                                   
 3   International Union of Official Travel Orga-                                                  
     nisation (IUOTO).                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 4   South Asia Regional Travel Commission                                                         
     (SARTC).                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
   Jan 01, 1973                                                                                    
 Appendix III Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or renewed                                 
  APPENDIX III                                                                                     
                                                                                                   
            Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or renewed by                                
                    India with other countries in 1973*                                            
                                                                                                   
                       (*This List is not exhaustive)                                              
                                                                                                   
 S.    Title of Convention/Treaty/          Date of    Date of    Date on   Rema                   
 rks                                                                                               
 No.             Agreement                  signa-     Ratifi-    which                            
                                            ture       cation/    entered                          
                                                       Accept-    into                             
                                                       ance/      force                            
                                                       Confir-                                     
                                                       mation                                      
                                                                                                   
 1                  2                          3          4           5                            
  6                                                                                                
                                                                                                   
     MULTILATERAL                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
     General Agreement on Tariffs and                                                              
      Trade (GATT)                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 1  Protocol for the Accession of the        1-2-73     1-2-73     1-2-73                          
     People's Republic of Bangladesh                                                               
     to the General Agreement on                                                                   
     Tariffs and Trade.                                                                            
                                                                                                   
     International Atomic Energy Agency                                                            
      (I.A.E.A.)                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 2  Amendment of Article VI of the,                     7-3-73     1-6-73                          
     Statute of the International                                                                  
     Atomic Energy Agency as                                                                       
     adopted by the General Confer-                                                                
     ence of the International Atomic                                                              
     Energy Agency on Sep 28, 1970                                                                 
     at its one hundred and                                                                        
     forty second plenary meeting.                                                                 
                                                                                                   
     International Development Asso-                                                               
      ciation (I.D.A.)                                                                             
                                                                                                   
     Credit No. 356 IN                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 3  Development Credit Agreement             9-2-73                                                
     industrial Development Bank of                                                                
     India Project) between India                                                                  
     and International Development                                                                 
     Association (I.D.A.).                                                                         
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX III-contd.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1                        2                        3        4         5                            
                                                                                                   
       Credit No. 356 IN                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 4  Project Agreement (Industrial               9-2-73                                             
     Development Bank of India                                                                     
     Project) between International                                                                
     Development Association and                                                                   
     Industrial Development Bank                                                                   
     of India.                                                                                     
                                                                                                   
       Credit No. 357 IN                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 5  Development Credit Agreement                9-2-73                                             
     (Nangal Fertilizer Expansion                                                                  
     Project) between India and                                                                    
     International Development Asso-                                                               
     ciation.                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
       Credit No. 357 IN                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 6  Project Agreement (Nangal                   9-2-73                                             
     Fertilizer Expansion Project)                                                                 
     between International Develop-                                                                
     ment Association and Fertilizer                                                               
     Corporation of India.                                                                         
                                                                                                   
       Credit No. 378 IN                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 7  Development Credit Agreement                9-5-73                                             
     Mysore Agricultural Wholesale                                                                 
     Markets Project) between India                                                                
     and International Development                                                                 
     Association.                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
       Credit No. 378 IN                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 8  Project Agreement (Mysore                   9-5-73                                             
     Agricultural Wholesale Markets                                                                
     Project) between International                                                                
     Development Association and                                                                   
     Agricultural Refinance Corpo-                                                                 
     ration.                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
       Credit No. 378 IN                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 9  Mysore Agreement (Mysore                    9-5-73                                             
     Agricultural Wholesale Markets                                                                
     Project) between International                                                                
     Development Association and                                                                   
     State of Mysore.                                                                              
                                                                                                   
       Credit No. 391 IN                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 10 Development Credit Agreement                8-6-73                                             
     (Madhya Pradesh Agricultural                                                                  
     Credit Project) between India                                                                 
     and International Development                                                                 
     Association (I.D.A.).                                                                         
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 L/S1MofE.A.                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX III-contd.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1                           2                  3          4         5                             
 6                                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
       Credit No. 391 IN                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 11 Project Agreement (Madhya Pra-            8-6-73                                               
     desh Agricultural Credit Pro-                                                                 
     ject) between International                                                                   
     Development Association and                                                                   
     Agricultural Refinance Corpo-                                                                 
     ration and Madhya Pradesh                                                                     
     State Co-operative Land Deve-                                                                 
     lopment Bank Limited.                                                                         
                                                                                                   
       Credit No. 391 IN                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 12 Madhya Pradesh Agreement                  8-6-73                                               
     (Madhya Pradesh Agricultural                                                                  
     Credit Project) between the                                                                   
     State of Madhya Pradesh and                                                                   
     International Development                                                                     
     Association.                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
       Credit No. 392 IN                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 13 Development Credit Agreement              8-6-73                                               
     (Uttar Pradesh Agricultural                                                                   
     Credit Project) between India                                                                 
     and International Development                                                                 
     Association.                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
       Credit No. 392 IN                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 14 Project Agreement (Uttar Pra-             8-6-73                                               
     desh Agricultural Credit Pro-                                                                 
     ject) between International Deve-                                                             
     lopment Association and Agri-                                                                 
     cultural Refinance Corporation                                                                
     and Uttar Pradesh State Co-                                                                   
     operative Land Development                                                                    
     Bank Limited.                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
       Credit No. 392 IN                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 15 Uttar Pradesh Agreement (Uttar            8-6-73                                               
     Pradesh Agricultural Credit Pro                                                               
     Project) between the State of                                                                 
     Uttar Pradesh and International                                                               
     Development Association.                                                                      
                                                                                                   
       Credit No. 402 IN                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 16 Development Credit Agreement             25-6-73                                               
     (Eighth Industrial Imports Pro                                                                
     ject) between India and Inter-                                                                
     national Development Associa-                                                                 
     tion.                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX III-contd.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1                 2                             3           4         5                           
   6                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
     International Labour Organization                                                             
         (I.L.O.)                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 17 Instrument for the Amendment                          26-5-73                                  
     of the Constitution of the Inter.                                                             
     national Labour Organisation                                                                  
     1972.                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
     United Nations High Commissioner                                                              
         for Refugees                                                                              
         Project No. RF/LS/IND.1/73                                                                
                                                                                                   
 18 Agreement under the Programme             15-3-73                                              
     of the United Nations High                                                                    
     Commissioner for Refugees for                                                                 
     Assistance to Land settlements/                                                               
     repairs in Chandragiri/Mahen-                                                                 
     dragarh.                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
         Project No. 71/LS/IND 5                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 19 Supplementary Agreement under             15-6-73                                              
     the Programme of the United                                                                   
     Nations High Commissioner for                                                                 
     Refugees for Assistance towards                                                               
     Local settlement.                                                                             
                                                                                                   
         Project No. 73/LS/IND. 4(a)                                                               
                                                                                                   
 20 Agreement under the Programme             10-8-73                                              
     of the United Nations High                                                                    
     Commissioner for Refugees for                                                                 
     Vocational Training.                                                                          
                                                                                                   
         Project No. 73/LS/IND. 4(c)                                                               
                                                                                                   
 21 Agreement under the Programme             10-8-73                                              
     of the United Nations High                                                                    
     Commissioner for Refugees for                                                                 
     Vocational Training.                                                                          
                                                                                                   
         Project No. 73/LS/IND. 4(b)                                                               
                                                                                                   
 22 Agreement under the Programme             19-9-73                                              
     of the United Nations High                                                                    
     Commissioner for Refugees for                                                                 
     Vocational Training.                                                                          
                                                                                                   
    Project No. 69/LS/IND. 3-7 0-731                                                               
         LS/IND 6                                                                                  
 23 Supplementary Agreement under             19-9-73                                              
     the Programme of the United                                                                   
     Nations High Commissioner for                                                                 
     Refugees for Consolidation of the                                                             
     Manipat Land Settlement,                                                                      
     Madhya Pradesh, India.                                                                        
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX III-contd.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1                   2                         3           4         5        6                    
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
     Project No. 73/LS/IND. 5(c)                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 24 Agreement under the Programme           27-9-73                                                
     of the United Nations High Com-                                                               
     missioner for Refugees for Assis-                                                             
     tance towards Local settlement.                                                               
                                                                                                   
             BANGLADESH                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 25 Credit Agreement between the            29-1-73               29-1-73                          
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of the People's                                                                    
     Republic of Bangladesh for                                                                    
     Rupees twelve million three                                                                   
     hundred and ten thousand.                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 26 Agreement between the Govern-            7-4-73                                                
     ment of India and the Govern-                                                                 
     ment of the People's Republic                                                                 
     of Bangladesh regarding the                                                                   
     supply of telecommunication                                                                   
     equipment.                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 27 Agreed Minutes of the meeting           25-5-73                                                
     held in Dacca on 22nd, 23rd and                                                               
     24th May 1973, between the                                                                    
     Planning Commissions of India                                                                 
     and Bangladesh.                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 28 Trade Agreement between the              5-7-73               28-9-73                          
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of the People's                                                                    
     Republic of Bangladesh.                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 29 Protocol with reference to Article       5-7-73               28-9-73                          
     IV of the Trade Agreement (5th                                                                
     July, 1973) between India and                                                                 
     Bangladesh.                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 30 Agreement between the Republic of       27-8-73               27-8-73                          
     India and the People's Republic                                                               
     of Bangladesh on Co-operation in                                                              
     the fields of the Peaceful Uses of                                                            
     Atomic Energy.                                                                                
                                                                                                   
             BULGARIA                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 31 Exchange of Letters between the        29-11-73              29-11-73                          
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of the People's                                                                    
     Republic of Bulgaria regarding                                                                
     establishment of Joint Commis-                                                                
     sion for Economic, Scientific and                                                             
     Technical Co-operation.                                                                       
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX III-contd.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1                       2                       3           4          5                          
   6                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
             CANADA                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 32 Agreement between the Govern-             31-1-73                                              
     ment of India and the Govern-                                                                 
     ment of Canada regarding Re.                                                                  
     scheduling of Loan Instalments                                                                
     in respect of Rajasthan Atomic                                                                
                                                                                                   
     Power Project, Stage 1.                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 33 Exchange of Letters between the            2-2-73                                              
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of Canada for pro-                                                                 
     viding a further loan of C$3.0                                                                
     Million (II Tranche) for ONGC/                                                                
     Oil India Ltd.                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 34 Agreement between the Govern-             28-2-73                                              
     moat of India and the Govern-                                                                 
     ment of Canada regarding Re-                                                                  
     scheduling of Loam Instalments                                                                
     in respect of the Loan for Diesel                                                             
     Locos.                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 35 Exchange of Letters regarding             28-2-73                                              
     amendment of the agreement                                                                    
     signed on 21st February 1967,                                                                 
     concerning a development loan                                                                 
     in the amount of eleven, million                                                              
     eight hundred and fifty thousand                                                              
     Canadian dollars.                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 36 Loan Agreement between the                16-3-73                                              
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of Canada for C$                                                                   
     7.5 Million for Polybutadience                                                                
     Synthetic Rubber Project of                                                                   
     Indian Petrochemicals Corpora-                                                                
     tion Limited (I.P.C.L.).                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 37 Exchange of Letters between the           31-3-73                                              
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of Canada for                                                                      
     amending the existing credit                                                                  
     agreement which was signed on                                                                 
     16th July 1971.                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 38 Exchange of Letters between the          31-3-73                                               
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of Canada for                                                                      
     extending the terminal drawal                                                                 
     date from 31st March 1973,                                                                    
     to 31st December 1973, for                                                                    
     Canadian Development Loan of                                                                  
     C $ 6 Million for purchase of                                                                 
     Loco Components.                                                                              
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX III-contd.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1                       2                     3          4         5          6                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 39 Exchange of Letters between the         21-5-73                                                
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of Canada regard-                                                                  
     ing amendment for inclusion of                                                                
     certain items for procurement                                                                 
     of telecommunication equip-                                                                   
     ment by P&T Board (Under the                                                                  
     Agreement dated 30th Septem-                                                                  
     ber 1969, between India and                                                                   
     Canada for development loan in                                                                
     the amount of C $ 40 Million                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 40 Exchange of Letters between the         25-5-73                                                
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of Canada regard-                                                                  
     ing amendment to the agree-                                                                   
     ment signed on 16th July 1971.                                                                
                                                                                                   
 41 Canadian Development Loan               18-7-73                                                
     Agreement for C $ 50. 0 Million                                                               
     for Industrial Commodities and                                                                
     Fertilizers.                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 42 Exchange of Letters for grant            6-8-73               6-8-73                           
     assistance of C $ 15 Million for                                                              
     import of rapeseed. or rapeseed                                                               
     products front Canada.                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 43 Canadian Development Loan                9-8-73                                                
     Agreement for three million nine                                                              
     hundred and seventy two thou-                                                                 
     sand Canadian dollars for the                                                                 
     procurement of turbine genera-                                                                
     tor equipment required for                                                                    
     augmentation Of Power Houses                                                                  
     Number 3 and Number 4 of the                                                                  
     KUNDAH Hydel Project in                                                                       
     Tamil Nadu.                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 44 Memorandum of understanding              9-8-73               9-8-73                           
     between India and Canada con-                                                                 
     cerning the Supply of the Turbine                                                             
     Generator Equipment required                                                                  
     for the augmentation of Power                                                                 
     Houses Numbers 3 and 4 of the                                                                 
     KUNDAH Hydel Project in                                                                       
     Tamil Nadu.                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                           APPENDIX III-contd.                                                     
                                                                                                   
 1                   2                        3             4           5                          
     6                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 45 Exchange, of Letters between the       4-10-73                                                 
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of Canada for C $ 6                                                                
     Million to finance the purchase                                                               
     of equipment etc., from Canada                                                                
     for Oil and Gas exploration                                                                   
     by the ONGC/Oil India Ltd.                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 46 Exchange of Letters between the       30-10-73                                                 
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of Canada for pro-                                                                 
     viding freight financing for                                                                  
     'Potash' against Canadian Com-                                                                
     modities/Fertilizers Loan Agree-                                                              
     merit for C $ 50 Million of 18th                                                              
     July 1,973.                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 47 Agreement between the Govern-         27-11-73                                                 
     ment of India and the Govern-                                                                 
     ment of Canada for develop-                                                                   
     ment Loan of C $ 10 Million for                                                               
     import of Potash from Canada.                                                                 
                                                                                                   
             DENMARK                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 48 Agreement between the Govern-          28-6-73             28-6-73                             
     meat of Denmark and the                                                                       
     Government of India for the                                                                   
     setting up of an ABATTOIR at                                                                  
     CFTRI* Mysore.                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 49 Exchange of Letters between the        30-8-73             30-8-73                             
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of Denmark regard-                                                                 
     ing extension of the February                                                                 
     1963 Agreement for a further                                                                  
     period of five years i.e. until 18th                                                          
     February 1978.                                                                                
                                                                                                   
     *Central Food Technological Research Institute.                                               
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX III contd.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1                        2                     3             4          5                         
       6                                                                                           
                                                                                                   
             FRANCE                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 59 Indo-French Financial Protocol-           7-2-73                                               
     1973-74 (Relative to French                                                                   
     credits for financing the Develop-                                                            
     ment Plan in India).                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 51 Indo-French, Special Financial            7-2-73                                               
     Protocol 1973-74 (Relative to                                                                 
     the French Credits for financing                                                              
     the goods and services for the                                                                
     Indian Atomic Energy and Space                                                                
     Departments).                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 52 Agreement between the Govern-            18-9-73              18-9-73                          
     ment of India and the Govern-                                                                 
     ment of France regarding debt                                                                 
     relief for 1973-74.                                                                           
                                                                                                   
     FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF                                                                           
         GERMANY                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 53 Exchange of Letters between the          19-1-73              19-1-73                          
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of Federal Republic                                                                
     of Germany regarding the exten-                                                               
     sion of the Agreement for Joint                                                               
     Agricultural Development Pro-                                                                 
     jects in Mandi and Kangra Dis-                                                                
     tricts of Himachal Pradesh.                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 54 Additional Agreement between             28-3-73                                               
     the Government of India and                                                                   
     the KREDITANSTALT FUR                                                                         
     WIEDER-AUFBAU for a                                                                           
     Credit of DU 98 Million for Debt                                                              
     Relief Prolongation-1972-73.                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 55 Exchange of Letters between the           3-5-73               3-5-73                          
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of the Federal                                                                     
     Republic of Germany for the                                                                   
     supply of 6,000 tons of fertilizer                                                            
     and 5,000 pairs of pruning                                                                    
     shears for Mandi Project.                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 56 Exchange of Letters between the           3-5-73               3-5-73                          
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of the Federal                                                                     
     Republic of Germany for the                                                                   
     supply of 4,000 tons of fertilizer                                                            
     for Kangra Project.                                                                           
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX III-contd.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1                2                            3           4           5                           
      6                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 57 Exchange of Letters between the          3-5-73                 3-5-73                         
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of the Federal                                                                     
     Republic of Germany for the                                                                   
     supply of 3,120 tons of fertilizer                                                            
     to Almora Project.                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 58 Exchange of Letters between the          3-5-73                 3-5-73                         
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of the Federal Re-                                                                 
     public of Germany for the sup-                                                                
     ply of 3,000 tons of fertilizer for                                                           
     Mandi Project.                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 59 Exchange of Letters between the          3-5-73                 3-5-73                         
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of the Federal Re-                                                                 
     public of Germany for the                                                                     
     supply of 3,200 tons of fertilizer                                                            
     for Kangra Project.                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 60 Loan Agreement between                  24-7-73                                                
     KREDITANSTALT   FUR                                                                           
     WIEDER-AUFBAU and the                                                                         
     Government of India for DM                                                                    
     12,000,000 (Caustic Soda Pro-                                                                 
     ject T.C.C.).                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 61 Arbitration Agreement with              24-7-73                                                
     reference to Article X, paragraph                                                             
     (6) of the above mentioned                                                                    
     Loan Agreement dated 24th                                                                     
     July 1973.                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 62 Project Agreement between               24-7-73                                                
     KREDITANSTALT FUR                                                                             
     WIEDER-AUFBAU and the                                                                         
     Travancore-Cochin Chemicals                                                                   
     Ltd. (India).                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 63 Arbitration Agreement with re-          24-7-73                                                
     ference to Article VI, paragraph                                                              
     (5) of the above mentioned Pro-                                                               
     ject Agreement dated 24th July                                                                
     1973.                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 64 Agreement between the Govern-           28-8-73                 28-8-73                        
     ment of India and the Govern-                                                                 
     ment of the Federal Republic of                                                               
     Germany concerning Financial                                                                  
     Assistance in 1973-74.                                                                        
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX III-contd.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1                    2                       3          4          5          6                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 65 Exchange of Letters between the         18-9-73              18-9-73                           
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of the Federal Re-                                                                 
     public of Germany regarding                                                                   
     extension of the agreement                                                                    
     concerning Indo-German Agri-                                                                  
     cultural Development Project,                                                                 
     Almora (U.P.).                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 66 Additional Agreement between           19-10-73                                                
     KREDITANSTALT FUR                                                                             
     WIEDER-AUFBAU and the                                                                         
     Government of India for DM                                                                    
     98,000,000 for Debt Relief                                                                    
     (Prolongation-1973-74).                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 67 Arbitration Agreement with             19-10-73                                                
     reference to Article IX, para-                                                                
     graph (6) of the above men-                                                                   
     tioned agreement dated 19th                                                                   
     October 1973.                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 68 Exchange of Letters between the        11-12-73              11-12-73                          
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of the Federal Re-                                                                 
     public of Germany regarding                                                                   
     extension of the agreement con-                                                               
     cerning Indo-German Agricul-                                                                  
     tural Development Project,                                                                    
     Nilgiris (Tamil Nadu).                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 69 Loan Agreement between the             21-12-73                                                
     Government of India and                                                                       
     KREDITANSTALT FUR                                                                             
     WIEDER-AUFBAU for DM                                                                          
     one hundred million (Commodi-                                                                 
     ties XV).                                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 70 Arbitration Agreement with re-         21-12-73                                                
     ference to the provision of Article                                                           
     X, paragraph (6) of the above                                                                 
     noted Loan Agreement.                                                                         
                                                                                                   
             GREECE                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 71 Trade Agreement between the             31-1-73              31-1-73                           
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of Greece.                                                                         
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX III-contd.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1                      2                     3           4            5                           
    6                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
             IRAN                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 72 Exchange of Notes between the                                  28-5-73                         
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Imperial Government of Iran                                                                   
     for the avoidance of double                                                                   
     taxation of income of enterprises                                                             
     operating aircraft.                                                                           
                                                                                                   
    Notes of Imperial Government                                                                   
     of Iran-29-3-1973 and Govern-                                                                 
     ment of India-1-4-1973.                                                                       
                                                                                                   
             IRAQ                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 73 Agreement between the Govern-            6-4-73                                                
     ment of India and the Govern-                                                                 
     ment, of Iraq bearing title "Co-                                                              
     operation Agreement" between                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 74 Agreement on Economic and                6-4-73    26-7-73     26-7-73                         
     Technical Co-operation bet-                                                                   
     ween the Government of India                                                                  
     and the Government of the Re-                                                                 
     public of Iraq.                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 75 Cultural Agreement between the          19-4-73    13-9-73     13-9-73                         
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of the Republic of                                                                 
     Iraq.                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
             JAPAN                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 76 Exchange of Notes between the           26-1-73                                                
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of Japan regarding                                                                 
     foreign exchange requirements.                                                                
                                                                                                   
         XII Yen Credit (1972-73)                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 77 Loan Agreement between the               2-2-73                                                
     Export-Import Bank of Japan                                                                   
     and the President of India.                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 78 Rescheduling Agreement between           2-2-73                2-2-73                          
     the Export-Import, Bank of                                                                    
     Japan and the President of                                                                    
     India.                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX III-contd.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1                 2                            3            4          5                          
  6                                                                                                
                                                                                                   
             NEPAL                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 79 Agreement between the Govern-             2-2-73                2-2-73                         
     ment of India and His Majesty's                                                               
     Government of Nepal regarding                                                                 
     the supply of Iodised Salt to                                                                 
     Nepal.                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 80 Agreement between the Govern-            23-2-73                                               
     ment of India and His Majesty's                                                               
     Government of Nepal for a tem-                                                                
     porary stand-by Credit of Rs. 10                                                              
     crores.                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 81 Agreement between the Govern-             5-3-73                5-3-73                         
     ment of India and His Majesty's                                                               
     Government of Nepal regarding                                                                 
     the Projects taken up under the                                                               
     Additional Assistance Prog-                                                                   
     ramme.                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 82 Exchange of Letters between the           5-3-73                5-3-73                         
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of Nepal regarding                                                                 
     the Projects taken up under the                                                               
     Additional Assistance Prog-                                                                   
     ramme.                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
             NETHERLANDS                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 83 Credit Agreement between the             22-8-73                                               
     Government of India and De                                                                    
     Nederlandse Investerings Bank                                                                 
     Voor Ontwikkelingslanden                                                                      
     68,000,000 Netherlands guil-                                                                  
     ders.                                                                                         
 84 Addendum to the Loan Agree-              22-8-73                                               
     ment between the President                                                                    
     of India and De Nederlandse                                                                   
     Investerings Bank Voor Ont-                                                                   
     wikkelingslanden dated 22nd                                                                   
     Augusts 1973, for a maximum                                                                   
     amount forty-five million                                                                     
     Netherlands guilders as project                                                               
     Loan in addition to the eighteenth                                                            
     Loan for 68,000,000 Nether-                                                                   
     lands guilders.                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 85 Exchange of Letters between the          3-10-73               3-10-73                         
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of Netherlands for                                                                 
     setting up of Joint Indo-Nether-                                                              
     lands Committee for Economic                                                                  
     Co-operation.                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX III-contd.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1                        2                     3           4           5                          
    6                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
             PAKISTAN                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 86 Agreement between India and              28-8-73                                               
     Pakistan, concluded with the                                                                  
     concurrence of the Government                                                                 
     of Bangladesh.                                                                                
                                                                                                   
             PHILIPPINES                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 87 Cultural Agreement between                6-9-69     20-12-73    20-12-73                      
     India and the Philippines.                                                                    
                                                                                                   
             SWEDEN                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 88 Exchange of Letters between the           7-3-73                   7-3-73                      
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of Sweden regar-                                                                   
     ding Debt Relief.                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 89 Agreement between the Govern-            18-6-73                  18-6-73                      
     ment of India and the Govern-                                                                 
     ment of Sweden regarding Deve-                                                                
     lopment Co-operation.                                                                         
                                                                                                   
             TURKEY                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 90 Trade Agreement between the              19-9-73                  19-9-73                      
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of the Republic of                                                                 
     Turkey.                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
    UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST                                                                      
         REPUBLICS (USSR)                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 91 Protocol between the Minister           27-12-73                                               
     of Heavy Industry and Steel &                                                                 
     Mines of India (Shri T. A. Pai)                                                               
     and Minister of Coal Industry                                                                 
     of the U.S.S.R.(Shri B. F. Brat-                                                              
     chenko) for further expansion                                                                 
     of scientific and technical co-                                                               
     operation in the field of Coal                                                                
     Industry.                                                                                     
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX III-contd.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1                         2                     3          4         5                            
  6                                                                                                
                                                                                                   
         UNITED KINGDOM (UK)                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 92 Exchange of Letters between the           7-3-73                                               
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of the United                                                                      
     Kingdom regarding amendment                                                                   
     to the United Kingdom/India                                                                   
     Maintenance Loan, 1972.                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 93 Exchange of letters between the          28-3-73                                               
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of the United                                                                      
     Kingdom regarding the second                                                                  
     amendment to the United                                                                       
     Kingdom/India Maintenance                                                                     
     Loan, 1972.                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 94 Exchange of Notes between the            24-5-73                                               
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of the United                                                                      
     Kingdom of Great Britain and                                                                  
     Northern Ireland regarding                                                                    
     United Kingdom/India Capital                                                                  
     Investment Loan, 1973 for four-                                                               
     teen million pounds sterling                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 95 Exchange of Letters between the          24-5-73                                               
     Government of India and the                                                                   
     Government of United Kingdom                                                                  
     of Great Britain and Northern                                                                 
     Ireland regarding United                                                                      
     Kingdom/India Capital Invest-                                                                 
     ment Loan, 1973 for fourteen                                                                  
     million pounds sterling.                                                                      
                                                                                                   
     UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                                                                      
         (U.S.A.)                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 96 Agreement between the Govern-            30-1-73                                               
     ment of India and the Govern-                                                                 
     ment of USA regarding Amend-                                                                  
     ment No. 1 to PL 480 Loan                                                                     
     Agreement No. 386-G-182 dated                                                                 
     March 8, 1968.                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 97 Agreement between the Govern-            30-1-73                                               
     ment of India and the Govern-                                                                 
     ment of USA regarding amend-                                                                  
     ment No. 1 to PL 480 Loan                                                                     
     Agreement No. 386-G-197 dated                                                                 
     March 10, 1969.                                                                               
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX III-concld.                                                  
                                                                                                   
 1                         2                  3             4          5                           
      6                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 98  Agreement between the Govern-         30-1-73                                                 
     ment of India and the Govern-                                                                 
     ment of USA regarding Amend-                                                                  
     ment No. 1 to PL 480 Loan                                                                     
     Agreement No. 386-G-205 dated                                                                 
     January 14, 1970.                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 99  Agreement between the Govern.         30-3-73                  30-3-73                        
     ment of India and the Govern-                                                                 
     ment of the United States of                                                                  
     America regarding the Consoli-                                                                
     dation and Rescheduling of                                                                    
     certain debts owed to the United                                                              
     States Government and its                                                                     
     Agencies.                                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 100 Agreement between the Govern-         30-3-73                                                 
     ment of India and the Govern-                                                                 
     ment of the United States of                                                                  
     America regarding the Consoli-                                                                
     dation and rescheduling of pay-                                                               
     ment under PL 480 Title I Agri-                                                               
     cultural Commodity Agreement.                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 101 Agreement between the Govern-         30-3-73                                                 
     ment of India and the Govern-                                                                 
     ment of U.S.A. relating to debt                                                               
     relief on AID Loans.                                                                          
                                                                                                   
         REPUBLIC OF ZAIRE                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 102 Protocol on Economic, Commer-         23-1-73                                                 
     cial, Technical, Scientific, Cul-                                                             
     tural, Aviation and Maritime                                                                  
     Co-operation between the Govern-                                                              
     ment of India and the National                                                                
     Executive Council of the Re-                                                                  
     public of Zaire.                                                                              
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 pg157>                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
   Sep 28, 1970                                                                                    
 Appendix IV ITEC Programme                                                                        
 APPENDIX IV                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
                            ITEC Programme                                                         
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 (A) Proposal for Training under Consideration                                                     
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1. Afghanistan                 12 trainees are proposed to be accepted in                         
                                 Mining and Industry, and others in Health.                        
                                                                                                   
 2. Cyprus                      Three trainees in weights and measures are                         
                                 expected to come.                                                 
                                                                                                   
 3. Ethiopia                    6 trainees are likely to come for training in                      
                                 Forestry, Handloom technology etc.                                
                                                                                                   
 4. ECA                         8-10 trainees are expected to come from                            
                                 ECA for training in research and develop-                         
                                 ment in Science and Technology with                               
                                 particular reference to industrialization.                        
                                 The candidates are expected to be men                             
                                 holding top-managerial positions in their                         
                                 home countries.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 5. Fiji                        3 trainees in rural development are expect-                        
                                 ed.                                                               
                                                                                                   
 6. Laos                        One nominee for training in forestry is ex-                        
                                 pected. Besides, two officers are expected                        
                                 to visit India for a month to study the                           
                                 administration of forests.                                        
                                                                                                   
 7. Libya                       31 trainees in vocational courses are ex-                          
                                 pected to come.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 8. Madagascar                  Trainees in meteorology, coking coal, etc                          
                                 are expected.                                                     
                                                                                                   
 9. Mauritius                   A number of trainees in small scale indus-                         
                                 tries, community development and allied                           
                                 fields are expected.                                              
                                                                                                   
 10. Maldives                   17 trainees are expected to come for training                      
                                 in primary school education and higher                            
                                 education and telecommunications.                                 
                                                                                                   
 11. Nigeria                    As a result of the visit of a delegation led                       
                                 by the Chairman of the Nigerian Oil Cor-                          
                                 poration, requests were received for facili-                      
                                 ties in India for the training of their en-                       
                                 gineering geologists and technicians in                           
                                 the field of Oil exploration, refining and                        
                                 fertilizer industry, and arrangement for a                        
                                 special training course at the Institute of                       
                                 Petroleum Exploration, Dehra Dun. In the,                         
                                 field of Steel, the Nigerians have requested                      
                                 training facilities for their technicians and                     
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                               pg158>                                                              
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 APPENDIX IV-contd.                                                                                
                                                                                                   
                                 the Steel Authority of India Ltd., have                           
                                 agreed to train 24 Nigerian technicians in                        
                                 batches of six each. A batch of 22 trainees                       
                                 are undergoing training in Oil exploration                        
                                 at Dehra Dun. Three more trainees in                              
                                 Hydrographic Survey at the Hoogly River                           
                                 Development Board, Calcutta, are expect-.                         
                                 ed.                                                               
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 12. Papua-New Guniea           5 trainees in electrical engineering are ex-                       
                                 pected to come.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 13. Senegal                    One trainee for training at the Film and                           
                                 T.V. Institute, Poona is expected to                              
                                 come.                                                             
                                                                                                   
 14. Sudan                      15 trainees are expected to come in Phar-                          
                                 macy, medicine, dentistry, radiography,                           
                                 law, animal husbandry, mica.                                      
                                                                                                   
 15. Sri Lanka                  Trainees in various fields including card-                         
                                 board, handmade paper, sugar, glucose,                            
                                 mica, etc. are expected.                                          
                                                                                                   
 16. Tanzania                   38 trainees are proposed to be accepted for                        
                                 training in the fields of Pharmacy, Enginee-                      
                                 ring, Accountancy and Commerce and                                
                                 Small Scale Industries.                                           
                                                                                                   
 17. Western-Samoa              An Officer from the Government of Western                          
                                 Samoa is expected to visit for 60 days to                         
                                 study small scale industries. Besides four                        
                                 trainees in small scale industries are ex-                        
                                 pected to come.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 18. Zanzibar                   13 trainees in small scale industries are ex.                      
                                 pected to come.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 19. Zambia                     2 trainees in Personnel Management/Tea-                            
                                 chers Training in India, are expected to                          
                                 come.                                                             
                                                                                                   
 (B) Deputation of Indian   Experts under consideration                                            
                                                                                                   
 1. Afghanistan                 48 experts in the fields of health, irrigation                     
                                                                                                   
                                 and power, industry, education, public                            
                                 works, mining etc., are expected to be                            
                                 deputed.                                                          
                                                                                                   
 2. Barbados                    A proposal to send an lnsurance Supervisor                         
                                 is under consideration.                                           
                                                                                                   
 3. Democratic Republic of      A proposal to depute 5 experts in different                        
    Vietnam                      fields of Agriculture arid Animal Hus-                            
                                 bandry is tinder consideration.                                   
                                                                                                   
 4. Ecuador                     A two-member team is proposed to be de-                            
                                 puted to advise that Government on food                           
                                 technology.                                                       
                                                                                                   
 5. Ethiopia                    A proposal to depute a Gynaecologist and                           
                                 a nurse/midwife is under consideration.                           
                                                                                                   
                               pg159>                                                              
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX IV-contd.                                                    
                                                                                                   
 6.  Fiji                       An engineer for conducting studies in the                          
                                 possibilities of development of hydroelec.                        
                                 tric resources in Fi j is under consideration.                    
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 7.  Indonesia                  Two additional teachers are likely to be de.                       
                                 puted.                                                            
 8.  Iraq                       A delegation of 21 Railway experts is pro.                         
                                 posed to be deputed shortly.                                      
                                                                                                   
 9.  Mauritius                  20 experts are proposed to be deputed in                           
                                 agriculture, engineering architecture, edu-                       
                                 cation, fisheries, tea management, etc.                           
                                                                                                   
 10. Maldives                  One teacher is proposed to be deputed.                              
                                                                                                   
 11. People's Demotratic Republic  One Bus Transport Economist is proposed                         
     of Yemen                       to be deputed. Besides 3 experts are pro-                      
                                    posed to be deputed to explore possibili-                      
                                    ties of technical and economic co-opera-                       
                                    tion.                                                          
                                                                                                   
 12. Peru                       An expert in leather technology is proposed                        
                                 to be deputed.                                                    
                                                                                                   
 13. Sri Lanka                  Two experts in animal husbandry, four                              
                                 for installation of microwave link between                        
                                 India and Sri Lanka and another for collect-                      
                                 ing the necessary data in connection with                         
                                 the Kotamalee Project, are proposed to be                         
                                 deputed.                                                          
                                                                                                   
 14. Somalia                    A proposal to depute one Legal Adviser on                          
                                 land tenure matters, is under consideration.                      
                                                                                                   
 15. Sudan                      A proposal to depute two experts-one                               
                                 Economic Adviser and one Pharmacologist                           
                                 is under consideration.                                           
                                                                                                   
 16. Tanzania                   8 experts in fields of coconut cultivation,                        
                                 paper technology and agriculture are pro-                         
                                 posed to be deputed.                                              
                                                                                                   
 17. Tonga                      It is proposed to depute a Mechanical En-                          
                                 gineer to work for the Ministry of Works.                         
                                                                                                   
 18  Zambia                     Two experts in Imports and Exports and                             
                                 Planning are proposed to be deputed.                              
                                                                                                   
 (C) Donations/Gifts under ITEC Programme                                                          
                                                                                                   
 1.  Afghanistan                Technical literature on irrigation, agricul-                       
                                 ture, electric generation, etc. costing Re.                       
                                 26,000 has been made.                                             
                                                                                                   
 2.  Burma                      Chemicals and books costing Rs. 50,000                             
                                 have been gifted.                                                 
                                                                                                   
 3.  Cambodia                   An additional grant of Rs.5,86,000 has been                        
                                 made to the multi-national Prek Thnot                             
                                 irrigation project.                                               
                                                                                                   
                               pg160>                                                              
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
  APPENDIX IV-contd.                                                                               
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 4. Fiji                        A gift of scientific and laboratory equipment                      
                                 worth Rs. 50,000 has been made to the                             
                                 South Pacific University. A gift of grass                         
                                 carp fish for breeding purposes is to be                          
                                 made shortly.                                                     
                                                                                                   
 5. Guinea                      Hospital equipment costing Rs. 1 lakh has                          
                                 been made.                                                        
                                                                                                   
 6. Iraq                        100 Kgs. of oil seeds have been donated by                         
                                 the Punjab Agricultural University. An-                           
                                 other gift of agricultural implements cost-                       
                                 ing Rs. 25,000 has been made during the                           
                                 year.                                                             
                                                                                                   
 7. Laos                        Donation of vegetable seeds worth Rs. 16,500                       
                                 has been made.                                                    
                                                                                                   
 8. Malaysia                    Equipment costing Rs. 3.25 lakhs for the                           
                                 proposed Technical Training Centre in the                         
                                 State of Negri Sembilan is being gifted.                          
                                                                                                   
 9. Mauritius                   A consignment of 25,000 fish fry costing                           
                                 Rs. 2600 was presented for experimental                           
                                 purposes. A grant of Rs. 44 lakhs has                             
                                 already been agreed to be made towards                            
                                 our contribution to the Mahatma Gandhi                            
                                 Institute which covers deputation of                              
                                 experts and cost of equipment and mater-                          
                                 ial. Another gift of 100 goats costing Rs. 1                      
                                 lakh has been made.                                               
                                                                                                   
 10. Oman                       Laboratory equipment and chemicals cost-                           
                                 ing Rs. 1 lakh has been made for use in                           
                                 their Agricultural Research Institute.                            
                                                                                                   
 11. Peru                       Electrical equipment costing Rs. 3.73 lakhs                        
                                 is being gifted for a transmission network.                       
 12. Somalia                    62 sewing machines and 50 knitting machi-                          
                                 nes costing about Its. 85,000 are being                           
                                 gifted.                                                           
                                                                                                   
 13. Sudan                      It is proposed to donate books/publication                         
                                 on Indian Law and a provision of Rs. 10,000                       
                                 has been made.                                                    
                                                                                                   
 14. Tanzania                   A common facility centre as part of the In -                       
                                 dustrial Estate is proposed to be donated                         
                                 at a cost of Rs. 10.5 lakhs.                                      
                                                                                                   
 15. Y.A.R.                     A gift of 100 irrigation pump sets costing                         
                                 Rs. 8 lakhs is contemplated during the                            
                                 current year.                                                     
                                                                                                   
 16. Zambia                     A donation of drugs and pharmaceuticals                            
                                 costing Rs. 3.64 lakhs has been made.                             
                                                                                                   
                               pg161>                                                              
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX IV-concld.                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
         (D) Deputation of Indian Experts under ITEC Programme                                     
                                                                                                   
 Name of the country                                 During 1973-74                                
                                                    (Up to Oct. 1973)                              
                                                                                                   
 AFGHANISTAN                                                87                                     
 CYPRUS                                                      1                                     
 E.C.A.                                                      1                                     
 ETHIOPIA                                                    4                                     
 FIJI (including Tonga)                                      8                                     
 INDONESIA                                                   2                                     
 IRAN                                                        2                                     
 IRAQ                                                       21                                     
 KENYA                                                       1                                     
 LAOS                                                        2                                     
 MALAYSIA                                                    7                                     
 MALDIVES                                                    2                                     
 MAURITIUS                                                  31                                     
 MALTA                                                       1                                     
 MOROCCO                                                    31                                     
 OMAN                                                        4                                     
 SOUTH YEMEN                                                13                                     
 SENEGAL                                                     2                                     
 SOMALIA                                                    16                                     
 SRI LANKA                                                   7                                     
 TANZANIA                                                   17                                     
 UPPER VOLTA                                                 2                                     
 ZAMBIA                                                      1                                     
                                                                                                   
                                                           235                                     
                                                                                                   
                               pg162>                                                              
   Jan 01, 1973                                                                                    
 Appendix V Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts Abroad                                  
 APPENDIX V                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts Abroad during 1973-74                              
                                                                                                   
 The expenditure during 1973-74 on Headquarters of this Ministry is of. the                        
 order of Rs. 283.12 lakhs, a sum of Rs. 133.95 lakhs is towards Establishment                     
 charges, a sum of Rs. 104.88 lakhs for publicity, cables, diplomatic bags                         
 services etc., a sum of Rs. 36.53 lakhs for travelling expenses and the balance                   
 of Rs. 7.76 lakhs for Interim Relief.                                                             
                                                                                                   
 The expenditure on Missions/Posts including Special Missions in Thimpu and                        
 Gangtok is Rs. 1326.90 lakhs out of which a sum of Rs. 727.57 lakhs is spent on                   
 Establishment charges including Foreign and other Compensatory allowances, a                      
 sum of Rs. 66.36 lakhs on passages for transfers and local tours, Rs. 39.96                       
 lakhs for publicity contingencies and Rs. 491.01 lakhs on official and                            
 residential accommodation, P&T charges and other office contingencies. The                        
 average expenditure per Mission comes to Rs. 11.34 lakhs.                                         
                                                                                                   
 The expenditure mentioned above (viz., Rs. 1610.02 lakhs as per details below)                    
 on Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad includes expenditure on External                        
 Publicity programme/activities. The break-up of this expenditure is as under:-                    
  (Rs. in lakhs)                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 (a) HEADQUARTERS                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
     (i) Salaries (Officers 25, Staff 119)               8.68                                      
    (ii) Travelling Expenses                             2.06                                      
   (iii) Publicity Contingencies Charges                37.00                                      
                                                        47.74                                      
                                                                                                   
                               pg163>                                                              
                                                                                                   
                              APPENDIX V-concld.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 (b) Missions/Posts Abroad                                                                         
                                                                                                   
     (i)  salaries (officers 50, Staff 304)                          44.64                         
    (ii)  Foreign Allowance, Compensatory allowance                  24.88                         
   (iii)  Passages and Travelling Expenses                            5.27                         
    (iv)  Publicity Contingencies                                    39.96                         
     (v)  Other Charges including renting of residential acco-                                     
          mmodation and other Office contingencies..                 16.85                         
                                                                    131.60                         
                         TOTAL EXTERNAL PUBLICITY                   179.34                         
                                                                                                   
    The expenditure on External Publicity as detailed above comes                                  
 to 8.98% of the expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts                                    
 abroad.                                                                                           
                                                                                                   
                                                                     (Rs. in lak                   
 hs)                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
                                     Establish-    Travelling    Other        To                   
 tal                                                                                               
                                     ment          Expenses     Charges                            
                                     Charges                                                       
                                                                                                   
 I. SECRETARIAT                                                                                    
     (a) Headquarters                  133.03        34.47       67.88       235                   
 .38                                                                                               
     (b) External Publicity Division     8.68         2.06       37.00        47                   
 .74                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
                                       141.71        36.53      104.88       283                   
 .12                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 II. OVERSEAS ESTABLISHMENT                                                                        
     (a) Missions/Posts abroad         658.05        61.09      476.16      1195                   
 .30                                                                                               
     (b) Publicity Wing                 69.52         5.27       56.81       131                   
 .60                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
                                       727.57        66.36      532.97      1326                   
 .90                                                                                               
        GRAND TOTAL                    869.28       102.89      637.85      1610                   
 .02                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
                               pg164>                                                              
   Jan 01, 1973                                                                                    
 APPENDIX V                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts Abroad during 1973-74                              
                                                                                                   
 The expenditure during 1973-74 on Headquarters of this Ministry is of. the                        
 order of Rs. 283.12 lakhs, a sum of Rs. 133.95 lakhs is towards Establishment                     
 charges, a sum of Rs. 104.88 lakhs for publicity, cables, diplomatic bags                         
 services etc., a sum of Rs. 36.53 lakhs for travelling expenses and the balance                   
 of Rs. 7.76 lakhs for Interim Relief.                                                             
                                                                                                   
 The expenditure on Missions/Posts including Special Missions in Thimpu and                        
 Gangtok is Rs. 1326.90 lakhs out of which a sum of Rs. 727.57 lakhs is spent on                   
 Establishment charges including Foreign and other Compensatory allowances, a                      
 sum of Rs. 66.36 lakhs on passages for transfers and local tours, Rs. 39.96                       
 lakhs for publicity contingencies and Rs. 491.01 lakhs on official and                            
 residential accommodation, P&T charges and other office contingencies. The                        
 average expenditure per Mission comes to Rs. 11.34 lakhs.                                         
                                                                                                   
 The expenditure mentioned above (viz., Rs. 1610.02 lakhs as per details below)                    
 on Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad includes expenditure on External                        
 Publicity programme/activities. The break-up of this expenditure is as under:-                    
  (Rs. in lakhs)                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 (a) HEADQUARTERS                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
     (i) Salaries (Officers 25, Staff 119)               8.68                                      
    (ii) Travelling Expenses                             2.06                                      
   (iii) Publicity Contingencies Charges                37.00                                      
                                                        47.74                                      
                                                                                                   
                               pg163>                                                              
                                                                                                   
                              APPENDIX V-concld.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 (b) Missions/Posts Abroad                                                                         
                                                                                                   
     (i)  salaries (officers 50, Staff 304)                          44.64                         
    (ii)  Foreign Allowance, Compensatory allowance                  24.88                         
   (iii)  Passages and Travelling Expenses                            5.27                         
    (iv)  Publicity Contingencies                                    39.96                         
     (v)  Other Charges including renting of residential acco-                                     
          mmodation and other Office contingencies..                 16.85                         
                                                                    131.60                         
                         TOTAL EXTERNAL PUBLICITY                   179.34                         
                                                                                                   
    The expenditure on External Publicity as detailed above comes                                  
 to 8.98% of the expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts                                    
 abroad.                                                                                           
                                                                                                   
                                                                     (Rs. in lak                   
 hs)                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
                                     Establish-    Travelling    Other        To                   
 tal                                                                                               
                                     ment          Expenses     Charges                            
                                     Charges                                                       
                                                                                                   
 I. SECRETARIAT                                                                                    
     (a) Headquarters                  133.03        34.47       67.88       235                   
 .38                                                                                               
     (b) External Publicity Division     8.68         2.06       37.00        47                   
 .74                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
                                       141.71        36.53      104.88       283                   
 .12                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 II. OVERSEAS ESTABLISHMENT                                                                        
     (a) Missions/Posts abroad         658.05        61.09      476.16      1195                   
 .30                                                                                               
     (b) Publicity Wing                 69.52         5.27       56.81       131                   
 .60                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
                                       727.57        66.36      532.97      1326                   
 .90                                                                                               
        GRAND TOTAL                    869.28       102.89      637.85      1610                   
 .02                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
                               pg164>                                                              
   Jan 01, 1973                                                                                    
 Appendix VI List of Indian Missions/Posts                                                         
 Jan 01, 1973                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
                             APPENDIX VI                                                           
                                                                                                   
         List of Indian Missions/Posts opened in the year 1973-74                                  
                                                                                                   
 S.      Country              Location                 Remarks                                     
 No.                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 1       Bangladesh           Rajshahi               Assistant High                                
                                                      Commi                                        
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 LS/1MofEA-3,500-12-3-1974-GIPS                                                                    
                                                                                                   
                             Errata                                                                
                                                                                                   
 Para    Line       Correction to be made                                                          
                                                                                                   
 1       10         Add s after State                                                              
         1-2        Insert  after Bengalees,                                                       
                    POWs & Agreement                                                               
 1       6          Read Prime Minister for Prime Minster                                          
 1       4          Delete 1 in Majestly                                                           
 4       3          Read 83 crores for 64.3 crores                                                 
 2       3          Read over-flights for over-light                                               
 1       22         Read over-flights for over-lights                                              
 2       3          Add full stop after Bali                                                       
 2       3          Read INS for INC after Bali                                                    
 4       1          Read year for years                                                            
 3       3          Read Australia for Austarlia                                                   
 1       9          Read forestry for foretry                                                      
 2       3          Read Minister of Planning for                                                  
                    Miniser of Planning.                                                           
 3       4          Read Manea for Manean.                                                         
 6       1                -do-                                                                     
 3       7          Read Non-aligned for Non-alignment                                             
         8          Read Sweden for Sudan                                                          
                    Commission for Commi                                                           
                                                                                                   
 3       4          Read "third and fourth meetings"                                               
                    for "third meetings"                                                           
                                                                                                   
External website that External website    External website    External website    External website 
opens in a new window that opens in a new that opens in a new that opens in a new that opens in a  
                      window              window              window              new window       

    Address : Patiala House, Annexe - BNew Delhi                              
   -110001                                           Page last updated on: 09 
    Telephone: 23389073, 23382694, 23073685;                  December, 2013  
   Fax: 23386340, 23387700;Feedback :            Site designed and maintained 
   dirlibmea.gov.in                                  by: National Informatics 
    Officer In-charge:-                                         Centre (NIC), 
    (c)Content Owned by MEA Library Ministry of   DeitY, MoCIT, Government of 
   External Affairs, Government of India                               India. 
   Terms & Conditions | Privacy Policy |         Visitors:                    
   Copyright Policy | Hyperlinking Policy |      
   Accessibility Statement | Help                

   java script is required for this page
   MEAs App twitter Facebook Google plus YouTube flickr
   loading
