   java script is required for this page java script is required for this
   page java script is required for this page java script is required for
   this page java script is required for this page java script is required
   for this page

   Sun, February 08, 2015 at 03:09:56 IST Indian Flag
   Ministry of                      Print Content Small Font Medium Font      
    External       MEA Library      Large Font                                
    Affairs,   Ministry of External   * Sitemap                               
   Government  Affairs, Government    * Contact Us                            
    of India         of India         * Feedback                              
                                      * _____________________           [  ]  

     * Home
     * Director's Office
          * Director Lib & Info
          * Library Officers & Staff
     * Journals
          * Current Journals
          * Online Journals
          * CD-ROMs Databases
     * Online Services
          * Business Monitor Online
          * EIU
          * JSTOR
          * Janes Online Services
          * Kessing World News Archive
          * Marketline MDIC
          * Online Service Links
     * Newspapers
          * E-Newspapers
          * Subscribed Print Newspapers
     * Library Bulletins
          * Foreign Affairs Documentation Bulletin
          * Recent Additions
          * Chronicle of Events
     * Alert
          * Book Alert
          * Article Alerts
     * Important Abbrevations

 Annual Reports Prior to 1999                                                              
   * Home >   Annual Reports Prior to 1999 >   Annual Report 1984-85       * Home          
 Annual Report 1984-85                                                     * Director's    
                                                                             Office        
 CONTENTS                                                                  * Journals      
                              Introduction                                 * Online        
 S.No. CHAPTERS                                       Page No.(iii-xii)      Services      
 I. India's Neighbours                                1-8                  * Newspapers    
 II. South-East Asia                                  9-12                 * Alert         
 III. East Asia                                       13-17                * Important     
 IV. West Asia and North Africa                       18-20                  Abbrevations  
 V. Africa (South of the Sahara)                      21-23                * Back          
 VI. Europe                                           24-32                                
 VII. The Americas                                    33-37                                
 VIII. United Nations and International Conferences   38-65                                
 IX. Foreign Economic Relations                       66-72                                
 X. Policy Planning                                   73-74                                
 XI. External Publicity                               75-78                                
 XII. Cultural Relations                              79-81                                
 XIII. Protocol                                       82                                   
 XIV. Passport, Emigration and Consular Services      83-85                                
 XV. Administration and Organisation                  86-89                                
 XVI. Use of Hindi in Official Work                   90-92                                
 APPENDICESa                                          93-127                               
 -(ii)>                                                                                    
 INTRODUCTION                                                                              
 The focus of Indian foreign policy during the year under review is                        
 encapsulated in a speech of the late Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira                      
 Gandhi, delivered just a few days before her tragic assassination. She                    
 stated :                                                                                  
                                                                                           
 "We inhabit a fragmented world, caught in the clash of wills and                          
 objectives. The utter mistrust between the militarily strong has gone                     
 so deep that even the word `peace' is looked upon as a dangerous trap.                    
 But human-kind can survive only if the big powers learn to co-exist. We                   
 must help to create an atmosphere conducive to discussions and the will                   
 to find solutions. The other divide is between the developed and the                      
 developing. For the first time in the human history, we have the                          
 technological means to end hunger and want, yet the benefits of all                       
 this knowledge reach only a few. Levels of living remain uneven. These                    
 are our most urgent concerns. India has been working to bring closer                      
 together what are called East and West, South and North."                                 
                                                                                           
 India is deeply concerned over the escalating arms race, the rise in                      
 international tensions and the absence of willingness for constructive                    
 dialogue among the major nuclear weapon powers which have increased the                   
 risks of the outbreak of a nuclear war. India is of the view that a                       
 concerted world-wide effort must be made to halt the arms race and its                    
 dangerous extension to outer space. With this in view, the late Prime                     
 Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi, together with the Heads of Government                   
 or State of Argentina, Greece, Mexico, Sweden and Tanzania, launched on                   
 22 May 1984 a major peace initiative. This five-Continent initiative,                     
 inter-alia, stated :                                                                      
                                                                                           
 "As leaders of nations, member-States of the United Nations, we have a                    
 commitment to take constructive action towards halting and reversing                      
 the nuclear arms race. The people we represent are no less threatened                     
 by nuclear war than the citizens of the nuclear weapon states. It is                      
 primarily the responsibility of the nuclear weapon states to prevent a                    
 nuclear catastrophe but this problem is too important to be left to                       
 these states alone."                                                                      
                                                                                           
 The joint statement called on the nuclear weapon states to halt the                       
 testing, production and deployment of nuclear weapons and their                           
 delivery systems to be followed by a programme of arms reduction,                         
 leading to general and complete disarmament. It also urged measures to                    
 strengthen the United Nations system and to ensure urgently needed                        
 transfer of substantial resources from the arms race to social and                        
 economic development.                                                                     
 -(iii)>                                                                                   
                                                                                           
 This appeal, which represented a significant step in mobilising world                     
 public opinion in favour of disarmament evoked strong support in the                      
 international community at large. The responses of the nuclear weapon                     
 states, however, have, with one exception, been less than encouraging.                    
                                                                                           
 The leaders of these six countries decided to meet in New Delhi in                        
 January, 1985 to consider ways to further their efforts. The Delhi                        
 Declaration adopted on 28th January 1985, reaffirmed the appeal of May                    
 1984. It further called for urgent steps to prevent an arms race in                       
 outer space and for a comprehensive treaty prohibiting the testing of                     
 nuclear weapons. The six leaders have also discussed various follow-up                    
 measures.                                                                                 
                                                                                           
 India is equally concerned about the persistence of economic distress                     
 among large sections of mankind and the widening gap between the                          
 developed and developing. Keeping this in view, India drew attention in                   
 various international fora to the close link between disarmament and                      
 development. It was pointed out that significant reductions in the                        
 wasteful global military expenditure, which is rapidly approaching the                    
 staggering figure of US $ 1000 billion a year, by a handful of                            
 industrialised countries alone, will not only help ease tensions the                      
 world over but also contribute to recovery and growth in the world                        
 economy. This could be used to augment the currently decreasing levels                    
 of assistance to developing nations. India has repeatedly emphasised at                   
 various international fora that the proposals for a Conference on                         
 Disarmament and Development should be taken up seriously.                                 
                                                                                           
 In her capacity as Chairperson of the NAM, the late Prime Minister,                       
 Shrimati Indira Gandhi, addressed letters to all the participants of                      
 the London Summit of industrialised countries and sent her personal                       
 emissaries to the capitals of these countries to impress upon them the                    
 significance and continuing validity of the approach suggested by the                     
 New Delhi Summit on economic issues. The industrialised countries were                    
 called upon to take a more constructive attitude towards the problems                     
 of the developing countries as well as the structural problems facing                     
 the world economy. The late Prime Minister also set up a Group of                         
 Experts consisting of leading economists from Algeria, India, Mexico,                     
 Tanzania and Yugoslavia, to examine the functioning of the existing                       
 international monetary and financial system and the modalities of the                     
 proposal for an International Conference on Money and Finance for                         
 Development. The report submitted by the group makes a valuable                           
 contribution towards clarifying ideas and making suggestions for                          
 resolving the present monetary and financial problems facing the                          
 international economy.                                                                    
                                                                                           
 Consistent with its position at the helm of the Non-Aligned Movement,                     
 India has taken a number of initiatives and, along with the members of                    
 the Co-ordinating Bureau, played an active and significant role in                        
 important international fora, such as the UN General Assembly and the                     
 Security Council. On issues such as Disarmament, Apartheid, Namibia,                      
 Palestine, Cyprus and Central America, the Movement has taken a number                    
 of measures as follow-up action to the decisions taken at the Seventh                     
 Non-Aligned Summit held in New Delhi in March 1983.                                       
 -(iv)>                                                                                    
                                                                                           
 The tragic assassination of Shrimati Indira Gandhi on 31st October 1984                   
 took from us one of the world's foremost champions of peace,                              
 disarmament and development. She epitomised the aspirations of the                        
 entire human race, She was dedicated to an international order in which                   
 power would be tempered by compassion, and knowledge and capability                       
 were at the service of humanity. She was against all forms of                             
 exploitation and foremost in advocating a lessening of economic                           
 disparity among nations. As Chairperson of the Non-Aligned Movement,                      
 she gave the Movement content, dynamism and cohesion. Her death was not                   
 only a great loss to the Indian people but to all the peace-loving                        
 people of the world. The great respect, affection and esteem with which                   
 she was held was demonstrated by the visit of more than 35 Heads of                       
 State/Government and more than 120 delegations from all over the world                    
 to New Delhi to pay homage at her funeral.                                                
                                                                                           
 The smooth and orderly manner in which Shri Rajiv Gandhi was appointed                    
 Prime Minister and the free, fair and peaceful manner in which the                        
 general elections were subsequently held and the new Government headed                    
 by Shri Rajiv Gandhi installed in office impressed the entire world as                    
 evidence of the maturity and strength of the Indian democratic system.                    
 Immediately on assuming office, the Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi,                    
 reiterated his commitment to the basic approach and principles of                         
 foreign policy, bequeathed by Jawaharlal Nehru and Indira Gandhi. He                      
 stated :                                                                                  
                                                                                           
 "We have always believed in working for peace. Our policy is to be                        
 friends with all countries on the basis of reciprocity and mutual                         
 benefit. Our commitment to non-alignment and new economic order based                     
 on justice, equality and mutual co-operation is unshakable. This means                    
 a total dedication to the twin causes of peace and development. We also                   
 believe in safeguarding the independence of states and upholding the                      
 principles of non- interference and non-intervention."                                    
 In the immediate neighbourhood of South Asia, India's policy is                           
 directed towards promoting mutual trust, understanding and co-                            
 operation. India was determined to resolve problems with these                            
 countries on the basis of mutual respect, sovereign equality and                          
 friendship.                                                                               
                                                                                           
 The continued violence against Tamils in Sri Lanka has caused deep                        
 concern in India. The situation does not lend itself to a military                        
 solution. The only approach is to seek a political solution acceptable                    
 to all concerned. India, therefore, viewed with dismay the lack of any                    
 progress in the All Party Conference, and its termination in December                     
 1984.                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 India was unhappy at the promulgation of a surveillance zone by the Sri                   
 Lankan Government in the waters between Sri Lanka and India and                           
 consequent harassment,                                                                    
 -(v)>                                                                                     
 killing and capture of innocent Indian fishermen. When their naval                        
 craft intruded into our waters, our coastguard took appropriate                           
 measures to deal with them. India viewed with concern the induction of                    
 foreign security and intelligence organisations into Sri Lanka as also                    
 the irresponsible accusations by Sri Lankan leaders of Indian support                     
 for the so-called Tamil militants. These are totally baseless                             
 accusations. We have repeatedly stated that we were opposed to all                        
 forms of violence and terrorism.                                                          
                                                                                           
 The Government of India hope that a political solution to the problems                    
 of the Tamils will be found soon within the framework of a united Sri                     
 Lanka so that the more than 40 thousand Sri Lankan refugees now in                        
 India can return to their country in safety and dignity.                                  
                                                                                           
 The Government of India continued its efforts to develop cordial and                      
 co-operative relations with Pakistan in keeping with India's commitment                   
 to the letter and spirit of the Simla Agreement. The discussions during                   
 the year on the two drafts of the 'Friendship Treaty' proposed by India                   
 and the 'No-War Pact' proposed by Pakistan resulted in convergence of                     
 views on certain aspects though basic difference continued to remain.                     
 However, Pakistan's deep involvement in Punjab developments and their                     
 help and encouragement to terrorism and hijacking caused a set-back to                    
 progress on bilateral relations. The Government of India was                              
 constrained to call off the Foreign Secretary level talks scheduled for                   
 July 1984 and the Joint Commission meeting scheduled for August 1984                      
 because Pakistan's objectives and intentions remained unclear. It was                     
 felt that Pakistan could not continue to act in hostility while                           
 professing friendship. While the Government of India is committed to                      
 pursuing a relationship of good neighbourliness, cordiality and                           
 co-operative bilateralism with Pakistan, it is hoped that Pakistan                        
 would respond positively in carrying forward the relations between the                    
 two countries for the mutual benefit of the peoples of the two                            
 countries.                                                                                
 While there has been a steady improvement in India's bilateral                            
 relations with Bangladesh, particularly in the area of economic                           
 co-operation, certain problems persist, involving issues such as the                      
 augmentation of Ganga waters at Farakka, the large scale infiltration                     
 of migrants from Bangladesh, the Bangladesh reaction to our decision to                   
 construct a fence along India-Bangladesh border to prevent further                        
 infiltration, the problem of settlement of claims of Indian nationals                     
 in regard to vested properties and the lease of the Tin Bigha Corridor                    
 to Bangladesh. While the dialogue on the augmentation of Ganga waters                     
 is continuing, the Government of India's decision to erect a barbed                       
 wire fence on the border to stop further illegal immigration of                           
 Bangladesh nationals into India led to unpleasant incidents earlier                       
 during the year including unprovoked firing by Bangladesh security                        
 forces on Indian personnel engaged in construction work within Indian                     
 territory. India has conveyed to Bangladesh that the barbed fence is                      
 not an issue between the two countries and is not directed against                        
 Bangladesh. As regards the properties of Indian nationals which were                      
 vested in the Government of Bangladesh without any compensation, the                      
 Government of Bangladesh issued in                                                        
 -(vi)>                                                                                    
                                                                                           
 August 1984 instructions stopping further vesting of such properties or                   
 the transfer of properties already vested. Regarding the Tin Bigha                        
 Corridor, the Government of India is taking steps to facilitate the                       
 early implementation of the agreement for lease in perpetuity of the                      
 Tin Bigha Corridor.                                                                       
 India continued to consolidate the close and cordial relations existing                   
 with Bhutan and Nepal. India not only made major contributions to                         
 Bhutan's Fifth Plan but has even initiated discussions on her Sixth                       
 Plan beginning in 1987 which will introduce a new phase in Bhutan's                       
 development. Indian agencies have been executing major projects in the                    
 field of telecommunications, hydrology, geology, roads and archaeology                    
 and also several other projects on a smaller scale. India is closely                      
 involved in the development of education and technical skills in                          
 Bhutan. The inauguration of the Devi Ghat Hydro-electric Project by His                   
 Majesty the King of Nepal during the year marked a significant                            
 milestone in Indo-Nepal economic co-operation. There were other                           
 numerous large and small projects under implementation in the field of                    
 health care, drinking water supply, education, construction of roads                      
 and a sports complex, underlining the extent of this co-operation. The                    
 discussions between the two countries on various projects in the field                    
 of water resources have made significant progress. Indo-Nepal                             
 co-operation in trade and industry, particularly increased Indian                         
 private sector interest in Nepal, is gaining momentum.                                    
                                                                                           
 India's cordial and friendly relations with Burma and Maldives were                       
 further strengthened by the exchange of visits at different levels and                    
 steps taken to enlarge trade and economic relations.                                      
                                                                                           
 India continued to work bilaterally and with the other non- aligned                       
 states for the removal of all foreign military presence from the Indian                   
 Ocean. India viewed with disquiet the further increase of the military                    
 presence of the Great Powers in the Indian Ocean reflecting the                           
 heightened tension and uncertainty in international relations. The                        
 Great Powers sought to improve the military facilities available to                       
 them in the littoral states and to seek fresh bases and facilities in                     
 the area. India hoped that the littoral states would not align                            
 themselves with either of the Great Powers or offer facilities which                      
 would invite countervailing reaction. India continued to work for the                     
 convening of the UN Conference on the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace.                    
 It is a matter of regret for India that the Conference has been                           
 postponed to the first half of 1986.                                                      
                                                                                           
 India has viewed with concern the tense situation in and around the                       
 Indo-Chinese States. The outbreak of fighting in Kampuchea, the                           
 continued tension along the Sino-Vietnamese frontier and differences                      
 between Laos and Thailand regarding sovereignty over three villages on                    
 their frontier have all contributed to the building up of the tense                       
 situation in the area. Even though different proposals were put forward                   
 by the Indo-Chinese States on the one hand and the ASEAN countries on                     
 the other for finding a political solution to the problems in the                         
 region, there is as yet no agreement among all the concerned parties                      
 for holding negotiations with a view to finding a solution. India                         
 -(vii)> continues to believe that a political solution to the problems                    
 of the region can be found and that the proposal made in the Political                    
 Declaration of the Seventh Non-Aligned Summit Conference provide a good                   
 basis for finding such a solution.                                                        
                                                                                           
 India has made concerted efforts to expand its relations with the                         
 countries of East Asia. The Fifth Round of India-China official level                     
 talks was held in Beijing from 17 to 22 September 1984. Apart from                        
 having an indepth exchange of views on the boundary question, the                         
 occasion was also utilised for promoting bilateral exchanges in the                       
 fields of culture, education, science and technology. The India-China                     
 Trade Agreement incorporating the most favoured nation clause was                         
 signed and this is expected to create a good basis for further growth                     
 of trade relations between the two countries.                                             
                                                                                           
 The visit of the Japanese Prime Minister in May 1984 marked a new phase                   
 in Indo-Japanese relations and signified the mutual desire for further                    
 consolidation and expansion of the cordial relations existing between                     
 the two countries. The visit of a high-powered Japanese Government                        
 Economic Mission from 30 November to 7 December 1984 and the holding of                   
 the 17th Business Co-operation Committee meeting during this visit                        
 enabled the two sides to discuss the scope and problems of investment                     
 and collaborations in India particularly in the field of automobiles                      
 and electronics. Steps were also taken to strengthen the economic,                        
 trade and cultural relations with the Republic of Korea and the                           
 Democratic People's Republic of Korea and Mongolia.                                       
                                                                                           
 India continued to extend material and moral support to the people of                     
 Palestine. India viewed with concern the prevailing tension in West                       
 Asia brought about, among other things, by the continuing presence of                     
 Israeli troops in Lebanon. India urged the withdrawal of all foreign                      
 forces, beginning with that of Israel, from Lebanon and expressed the                     
 hope that the Lebanese people would, in a spirit of national                              
 reconciliation, quickly bring about peace and security in Lebanon. The                    
 visit of the late Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi, in April 1984                   
 to Libya and Tunisia contributed considerably to the strengthening of                     
 relations with these countries.                                                           
                                                                                           
 The continuing Iran-Iraq war which entered its fifth year received                        
 utmost attention from the Indian Government and the late Prime Minister                   
 both in her capacity as Chairperson of the Non- Aligned Movement and as                   
 the Prime Minister of India, tried to find ways and means to bring                        
 about an immediate end to the war and settlement of the dispute by                        
 negotiations. She sent special emissaries to the concerned capitals and                   
 also undertook consultations with other members of the Non-Aligned                        
 Movement and friendly countries in order to achieve the objective of                      
 peace in the region. Unfortunately the various proposals put forward                      
 could not bring about an end to the unfortunate conflict.                                 
                                                                                           
 India continued to improve her relations with countries in the Gulf                       
 region in diverse fields. The visit of the President of India, Giani                      
 Zail Singh, to the Yemen Arab Republic and Peoples' Democratic Republic                   
 of Yemen in October 1984 contributed                                                      
 -(viii)>                                                                                  
 considerably to the strengthening of India's relations with these                         
 countries. The unprecedented step taken by the Government of the United                   
 Arab Emirates in returning the hijackers of an Indian Airlines plane                      
 from Dubai in September 1984 highlighted the close and friendly                           
 relations existing between India and the UAE. India's economic and                        
 commercial relations with the Gulf countries continued to show                            
 substantial progress and efforts have been made from the Indian side                      
 towards greater export of manufactures, equipment, machinery and                          
 complete projects.                                                                        
                                                                                           
 India continued with its policy of strengthening the on-going process                     
 of multifaceted co-operation with the countries of the African region                     
 extending moral, material and diplomatic support to the friendly states                   
 and liberation movements while continuing with its policy of firm                         
 opposition to the system of apartheid and racial discrimination in                        
 South Africa and a total boycott of the racist regime practising it.                      
 India responded with understanding to the fast evolving political                         
 situation in Southern Africa and generally endorsed the position in                       
 this regard taken by the Frontline States at their meeting in Arusha                      
 (Tanzania) in April 1984. The Arusha meeting, inter-alia, called upon                     
 South Africa to dismantle the root cause of instability in the region,                    
 i.e., apartheid. India rejected outright the so-called constitutional                     
 reforms within South Africa, introduced by the racist regime, and urged                   
 the people of South Africa to oppose the elections (held under the new                    
 Constitution), aimed at dividing and weakening the struggle against                       
 apartheid.                                                                                
 The great importance attached by India to relations with the African                      
 countries was demonstrated in its decision to make a donation of one                      
 lakh tonnes of wheat to the drought-affected countries in Africa. The                     
 Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, pledged India's solidarity with the                    
 famine-affected African countries and expressed India's readiness to                      
 share its experience and resources in helping them to meet this                           
 challenge.                                                                                
                                                                                           
 The President of India visited Mauritius to participate in the 150th                      
 anniversary of Indian emigration to Mauritius, in which a number of                       
 cultural delegations from India also participated. Counterpart                            
 celebrations of this event were also held in India. India also took                       
 steps to strengthen its relations with Nigeria, Ethiopia and Kenya.                       
                                                                                           
 India's economic and trade relations with the countries of Western                        
 Europe continued to grow during the year. India received from these                       
 countries considerable financial assistance. Some of these countries,                     
 particularly the Federal Republic of Germany, France and the UK                           
 continued to be important sources of technology transfers into India.                     
 With the growth of economic relations with the ten countries of the                       
 EEC, who are at present amongst India's major trading partners, the                       
 need was felt for political consultations with the EEC. Accordingly,                      
 India and the EEC decided to institutionalise political co-operation                      
 and this was inaugurated by the Foreign Minister, Shri Narasimha Rao,                     
 in April 1984 during his visit to France (which held the Presidency of                    
 the EEC during January-June 1984).                                                        
 -(ix)>                                                                                    
 The extensive political and economic relations with the USSR and the                      
 countries of East Europe were further consolidated during the year. The                   
 visit of the late Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi, to the Soviet                   
 Union to pay respect to the memory of President Andropov, was utilised                    
 to exchange views on bilateral relations and important international                      
 issues with the newly elected General Secretary of CPSU Central                           
 Committee, Mr. K. U. Chernenko. An important event in bilateral                           
 economic relations was the successful Indian National Exhibition in                       
 Moscow organised by TFAI in August-September 1984. This Exhibition gave                   
 a comprehensive view of the Indian industry and economy and also led to                   
 mutually beneficial commercial transactions. Another notable event in                     
 Indo-Soviet co-operation was the joint space venture which took place                     
 in August 1984. The visit of the President of the Presidium of                            
 Yugoslavia, Mr. Veselin Djuranovic, along with a high-level delegation,                   
 to India in August 1984 provided an opportunity to hold extensive                         
 discussions on bilateral issues, as well as on the activities of India                    
 and Yugoslavia in the Non-Aligned Movement. The occasion was also                         
 utilised for an indepth review of Indo-Yugoslav economic co- operation                    
 and trade.                                                                                
                                                                                           
 Despite the perception on various issues remaining different, India                       
 made sincere efforts for better understanding with USA during the year                    
 under review. The continued supply of sophisticated arms by USA to                        
 Pakistan was the single most important factor generating friction                         
 between the two countries. India repeatedly impressed upon the US                         
 Government officials that the supply of sophisticated arms to Pakistan                    
 adversely affected Indo-US relations, encouraged an arms race on the                      
 Sub-Continent and jeopardised the normalisation of relations between                      
 Pakistan and India. Another issue which cast a shadow over Indo-US                        
 relations was the activities of extremist leaders who were operating                      
 from the US and supporting the so-called Khalistan movement in India.                     
 The repeated Indian plea that such activities were detrimental to                         
 Indo-US relations had little effect although the proposed Congressional                   
 hearing on Punjab to be held by the Sub-Committee for Asia and Pacific                    
 Affairs and the Human Rights Committee of the US Congress was first                       
 postponed and later cancelled. The US Government also played a                            
 commendable role in the termination of the hijacking of an Indian                         
 Airlines Boeing 737. On the economic and commercial front the relations                   
 between the two countries expanded significantly during the year. India                   
 accepted the invitation of NASA to include an Indian scientist in the                     
 US space shuttle mission. A Memorandum of Understanding on the transfer                   
 of high technology between the two countries was initialled during the                    
 year.                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 Indo-Canadian relations remained cordial and the economic and                             
 commercial relations between the two countries were further                               
 consolidated by the visit of a Canadian industrial delegation, which                      
 participated in the Canada-India Joint Business Council meeting held in                   
 May 1984, and the visit of an economic mission from Canada's Manitoba                     
 province.                                                                                 
                                                                                           
 India's relations with countries of Central and South America and the                     
 Caribbean were further strengthened during the year by exchanges of                       
 visits at various                                                                         
 -(x)>                                                                                     
 levels. The State visit of the President of India to Mexico and                           
 Argentina in April 1984 and his meeting with the President of Peru                        
 during a brief halt in Lima and the visits of the Presidents of Mexico                    
 and Argentina to India in January 1985 contributed significantly to the                   
 strengthening of relations between India and these Latin American                         
 countries. The first Indo-Mexican Joint Commission meeting which was                      
 held in September 1984, discussed, apart from recent developments and                     
 economic prospects in the context of the present world situation, steps                   
 for increased bilateral trade and closer co-operation in the areas of                     
 industry, energy, finance, transport and tourism. An agreement of                         
 Economic Co-operation between India and Argentina was signed during the                   
 visit of the President of Argentina to India in January 1985.                             
                                                                                           
 India viewed with concern the continued tension and uncertainty in the                    
 region of Central America. The Prime Minister and Chairman of the                         
 Non-Aligned Movement, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, issued on 14 November 1984 a                     
 statement on the Central American crisis, expressing concern over the                     
 escalating tensions and threats of armed conflicts in the region,                         
 especially in and around Nicaragua.                                                       
                                                                                           
 India is deeply concerned that the economic crisis continued to                           
 dominate the economic prospects of both developed and developing                          
 countries during the year under review. Though some industrialised                        
 countries, particularly in North America, experienced a degree of                         
 economic recovery, such recovery was uneven and appeared to be                            
 transient. At any rate, it has had little impact on developing                            
 countries. Developing countries in general, and the low income                            
 countries in particular, continued to suffer from rising protectionism                    
 in industrialised countries and a sharp decline in the availability of                    
 concessional finance. Further, there has been a growing tendency on the                   
 part of major industrialised countries to seek unilateral or bilateral                    
 solutions for their immediate problems and a systematic effort to                         
 weaken the multilateral institutions in the fields of development,                        
 finance and trade. Instead of intensifying multilateral co-operation,                     
 there appears to be a move to retreat from multilateralism. India,                        
 together with the Non-Aligned and other developing countries, has                         
 sought to reverse this trend and to strengthen international economic                     
 co-operation. Unfortunately, the response from the major industrialised                   
 countries has been quite disappointing. They have taken a somewhat                        
 complacent view of the debt and development crisis and in effect have                     
 affirmed the adequacy of the existing financial institutions to deal                      
 with the situation.                                                                       
                                                                                           
 An important element of the New International Economic Order is greater                   
 co-operation among developing countries themselves. Intensive work                        
 continued during the year under review to promote such co-operation. A                    
 number of technical meetings were held under the Caracas Programme of                     
 Action for Economic Co-operation among Developing Countries (ECDC).                       
 Some of the initiatives taken under the Caracas Programme are the                         
 establishment of a Global System of Trade Preferences among developing                    
 countries, the proposal for the establishment of a Bank of Developing                     
 Countries (South Bank), the establishment of an Action                                    
 -(xi)>                                                                                    
 Committee on Fossil Fuels and the setting up of a Multi-Sectoral                          
 Information Network for technical co-operation among developing                           
 countries.                                                                                
                                                                                           
 One of the concrete manifestations of ECDC is the agreement reached                       
 among the seven countries of South Asia to launch an Integrated                           
 Programme of Action for South Asian Regional Co- operation (SARC).                        
 After the adoption of the SARC Declaration at the meeting of the                          
 Foreign Ministers held in New Delhi in August 1983, intensive work has                    
 begun for the implementation of the agreed programmes of co-operation.                    
 The second meeting of Foreign Ministers was held in Male on 10 and 11                     
 July 1984. It was stressed at this meeting that increasing emphasis                       
 should be placed on operational activities and the formulation of                         
 specific projects. To this end, the meeting accepted India's suggestion                   
 that consideration should be given to the convening of meetings at the                    
 level of Ministers in some vital areas. The meeting decided to                            
 recommend the convening of the SAARC Summit in Dhaka in the last                          
 quarter of 1985.                                                                          
                                                                                           
 The implementation of the Indian Technical and Economic Co- operation                     
 (ITEC) Programme continued to be one of the major activities of the                       
 Ministry during the year. Compared with the initial budgetary                             
 allocation of Rs. 0.44 million in 1964, when the ITEC Programme was                       
 launched, the allocation of Rs. 65 million during the year under review                   
 signifies a tremendous increase in India's technical co-operation with                    
 developing countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America over the years.                    
 This is aside from the specific individual programmes of co-operation                     
 with neighbouring countries such as Nepal, Bangladesh and Bhutan, and                     
 from technical assistance to other developing countries rendered                          
 through the Colombo Plan, SCAAP and through the provision for technical                   
 co-operation out of the amount earmarked for India by the UNDP.                           
                                                                                           
 As part of India's endeavour to strengthen south-south co- operation,                     
 India further strengthened its relations with multilateral regional                       
 groupings such as the Economic Commission for Africa, African                             
 Development Bank, Economic Commission of West African States and the                      
 Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference.                                    
                                                                                           
 India's external publicity effort had to face a particular challenge                      
 due to developments in the Punjab. Since national and international                       
 attention was focused on the Punjab situation, it became necessary to                     
 disseminate correct information on a very wide scale. Hostile                             
 propaganda and misreporting had to be combated. To meet this challenge,                   
 India's information activity was considerably enhanced and effective                      
 use was made of modern facilities such as video and audio tapes and                       
 documentary films. Efforts were also made to project India's firm                         
 commitment to democracy, non-alignment and world peace, peaceful use of                   
 nuclear energy and outer space, moral and material commitment against                     
 apartheid and in support of majority rule in Namibia and support in the                   
 Palestinian cause. In the context of India's                                              
 -(xii)>                                                                                   
 chairmanship of the Non-Aligned Movement, steps were taken to publicise                   
 India's initiative within the framework of NAM. In spite of the trials                    
 and tribulations the country has undergone during the year, India                         
 remianed faithful to the basic tenets of our foreign policy such as our                   
 firm commitment to the policy of Non-Alignment and to promotion of                        
 international co- operation and understanding. Our size, population,                      
 history and geopolitical situation have placed special responsibilities                   
 on us, and we have the added obligation of leading the Non-Aligned                        
 Movement. We have discharged our responsibilities playing a significant                   
 role in promoting peace, security, disarmament and development in the                     
 world.                                                                                    
 -(xiii)>                                                                                  
 INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS                                                                        
                                                                     Top                   
 It is a basic tenet of India's policy to foster relations of mutual                       
 trust, understanding and co-operation with neighbouring countries in                      
 south Asia. This stems from India's awareness that her own security and                   
 welfare are inextricably linked with the security and welfare of her                      
 neighbours.                                                                               
                                                                                           
 The ethnic disturbances in Sri Lanka in July-August 1983 and the                          
 continued violence against Tamils caused deep concern in India. India                     
 continued to emphasise the urgent need of finding a political solution                    
 which would restore ethnic harmony in Sri Lanka and enable the                            
 communities there to live in amity and peace.                                             
                                                                                           
 In early January 1984, as part of India's good offices to Sri Lanka for                   
 facilitating an early political settlement of the ethnic problem, the                     
 Indian Prime Minister's Special Envoy, Shri G. Parthasarathi, paid his                    
 third visit to Sri Lanka. The visit paved the way for the Tamil United                    
 Liberation Front's participation in the All Parties Conference proposed                   
 by President Jayewardene. Despite several rounds of discussions,                          
 however, the Conference failed to achieve substantial progress and was                    
 terminated in December 21, 1984 without any settlement being reached.                     
                                                                                           
 The Sri Lankan Government also enacted a series of extra- ordinary                        
 measures such as the promulgation of a Surveillance Zone in the waters                    
 between India and Sri Lanka, restricting the movement of vessels. The                     
 Government of India informed the Sri Lankan Government that such a zone                   
 was not compatible with the provisions of the Indo-Sri Lanka Maritime                     
 Boundary Agreement and could cause harassment to Indian fishermen who                     
 have been traditionally plying in these waters. Later several incidents                   
 occurred involving harassment, intimidation and attacks on Indian                         
 fishermen by Sri Lankan naval craft. The Indian Government protested to                   
 the Sri Lankan Government over these incidents.                                           
                                                                                           
 The Sri Lankan Government announced the establishment of an Israeli                       
 Interests Section in the U.S. Embassy in Colombo and obtained the                         
 services of the Israeli intelligence organisation and British security                    
 experts. The induction of foreign security and intelligence                               
 organisations in Sri Lanka was viewed with concern in India.                              
 Unfortunate allegations were made in Sri Lanka questioning India's                        
 policy and intentions. The Government of India repeatedly stated that                     
 there was no truth, whatsoever, in such allegations. India was only                       
 interested in an early resolution of the                                                  
 -2>                                                                                       
 ethnic problem in Sri Lanka since it had direct repercussions for her.                    
 Over 40,000 Sri Lankan Tamils had fled their homes in Sri Lanka and                       
 sought refuge in India, India had provided them with shelter on                           
 humanitarian grounds. The Indian Government hoped that a situation                        
 would soon be created in Sri Lanka which would enable these refugees to                   
 return to their own country.                                                              
                                                                                           
 India reiterated her opposition to all forms of violence. India                           
 emphasised that the ethnic problem in Sri Lanka was essentially a                         
 political one and should be resolved peacefully through a negotiated                      
 political settlement within the framework of Sri Lanka's unity and                        
 territorial integrity.                                                                    
                                                                                           
 President Jayawardene paid an official visit to India on 30th June,                       
 1984. India's policy of non-interference in Sri Lanka's internal                          
 affairs and her commitment to Sri Lanka's integrity was clarified to                      
 him. The necessity and urgency of a political solution acceptable to                      
 all concerned was also stressed during the visit.                                         
                                                                                           
 The Government of India continued its efforts to develop cordial and                      
 co-operative relations with Pakistan in keeping with India's commitment                   
 to the letter and spirit of the Simla Agreement. The four                                 
 Sub-Commissions of the India-Pakistan Joint Commissions which met in                      
 January 1984, made some modest progress. During Foreign Secretary's                       
 visit to Pakistan in May 1984, a protocol on 'Group Tourism' was signed                   
 and travel restrictions were somewhat eased by amending the Visa                          
 Agreement of 1974. Detailed discussions on the two drafts of the                          
 'Friendship Treaty' proposed by India and the 'No-War Pact' proposed by                   
 Pakistan resulted in a convergence of views on certain aspects, though                    
 differences continued to remain on some of the basic concepts. The                        
 Information Minister, Shri H. K. L. Bhagat, visited Pakistan in July                      
 1984 to reiterate our desire for good neighbourly relations and to make                   
 an assessment of Pakistan's real motives and intentions.                                  
                                                                                           
 Pakistan's deep involvement in the Punjab developments, highly                            
 provocative statements made by Pakistan leaders, distorted and                            
 mischievous projection of Punjab developments by the Pakistan official                    
 media including their television, had cast their shadow. Pakistan's                       
 continued interference in our internal affairs even after the visit of                    
 our Information Minister and their subsequent help and encouragement to                   
 terrorism and hijacking caused a further set-back to the development of                   
 bilateral relations. The Government of India was constrained to call                      
 off the Foreign Secretary-level talks scheduled for July 1984 and the                     
 Joint Commission meeting scheduled for August 1984, because it was felt                   
 that Pakistan should have some time to clearly formulate its objectives                   
 and intentions before negotiations were resumed. It was felt that                         
 Pakistan cannot continue to act in hostility while professing                             
 friendship. The active assistance given to the hijackers of the August                    
 1984 hijacking incident, including the handing over of a pistol at                        
 Lahore, continuing assistance to extremist elements in Punjab, and                        
 facilities extended to Sikh extremists from third countries to indulge                    
 in virulent anti-India propaganda in November 1984 during Guru Nanak                      
 Dev's birth anniversary continued to cause misgivings in the minds of                     
 our people.                                                                               
 -3>                                                                                       
                                                                                           
 The Government of India remains committed to the search for a                             
 relationship of good neighbourliness, cordiality and cooperative                          
 coexistence with Pakistan. The Government of India's earnest hope is                      
 that Pakistan will respond positively in carrying forward the relations                   
 between the two countries for the mutual benefit of our peoples.                          
                                                                                           
 India continued to be of the view that there can only be a political                      
 settlement of the issues related to Afghanistan through peaceful                          
 negotiations and supported the UN Secretary-General's efforts towards                     
 that end. The Government's policy continued to reflect India's abiding                    
 interest in the independence, sovereignty, non-alignment, stability and                   
 security of Afghanistan and our anxiety for the early return of                           
 normalcy in that country, free from all kinds of interference and                         
 intervention.                                                                             
 In the bilateral field, Indo-Afghan relations developed satisfactorily.                   
 The Government of India continued to pursue its efforts to strengthen                     
 the friendly relations that have existed between India and Bangladesh.                    
                                                                                           
 There were a number of high level exchanges during the period under                       
 review. The Standing Committee of the India-Bangladesh Joint Economic                     
 Commission held its second meeting in New Delhi on 15-16 October, 1984,                   
 in an atmosphere of cordiality, goodwill and understanding. The                           
 Committee reviewed the recent developments in trade matters and agreed                    
 to make continued efforts to expand and diversify bilateral trade. The                    
 Committee also reviewed the progress of collaboration in the fields of                    
 industry, including small and cottage industries, transport and                           
 communication, science and technology. Several new projects on which                      
 Indian assistance was sought, were identified.                                            
                                                                                           
 An Indo-Bangladesh Protocol on Inland Water Transport and Trade was                       
 signed in New Delhi on 17 September, 1984 at the conclusion of                            
 Secretary-level talks. This protocol is valid for two years unlike                        
 earlier protocols on Inland Water Transport which were valid for one                      
 year only.                                                                                
                                                                                           
 While there has been a steady improvement in our bilateral relations                      
 with Bangladesh, particularly in the area of economic cooperation,                        
 certain problems have persisted. These involve issues such as : the                       
 augmentation of Ganga waters at Farakka; the large scale infiltration                     
 of migrants from Bangladesh; Bangladesh's reaction to our decision to                     
 prevent further infiltration by constructing a fence along the                            
 Indo-Bangladesh border; the problem of settlement of claims of Indian                     
 nationals whose properties were taken over by the Government of                           
 erstwhile East Pakistan, now                                                              
 -4> Bangladesh, as vested properties; and the lease of the Tin Bigha                      
 Corridor to Bangladesh.                                                                   
                                                                                           
 The Memorandum of Understanding of October, 1982 on augmentation of the                   
 Ganga flows at Farakka and for sharing of Ganga waters expired on 31                      
 May 1984. The position of the Government of India has all along been                      
 that a long-term sharing agreement can be assured only by a suitable                      
 augmentation of the Ganga waters. The need to augment the flows of the                    
 Ganga at Farakka has been recognised by Bangladesh. However, Bangladesh                   
 has not been willing to accept our proposal to augment the flows of the                   
 Ganga from the Brahmaputra, through a link canal. The 26th and 27th                       
 Meetings of the JRC were unable to make any progress on this issue.                       
 Recognising the need for continuing the dialogue, the two sides agreed                    
 to meet at an early date in Dhaka.                                                        
                                                                                           
 The Government of India's decision to erect a barbed wire fence on the                    
 border to stop the flow of illegal immigrants into India, which has                       
 created serious socio-economic and political problems in our                              
 north-eastern states, led to unpleasant incidents earlier during the                      
 year under review including unprovoked firing by Bangladeshi security                     
 forces on Indian personnel engaged in construction work within Indian                     
 territory. We have conveyed to Bangladesh that the barbed wire fence is                   
 not an issue between the two countries and is not directed against                        
 Bangladesh. The Government of India have decided to resume construction                   
 of the fence soon.                                                                        
                                                                                           
 As regards properties of Indian nationals, which were vested in the                       
 Government of Bangladesh without any compensation, the Government of                      
 India has repeatedly taken up the matter with the Government of                           
 Bangladesh. In August 1984 instructions were issued by the Bangladesh                     
 Government stopping further vesting of such properties and the transfer                   
 of properties already vested.                                                             
                                                                                           
 Further progress has been made in the demarcation of the Indo-                            
 Bangladesh boundary. Till recently it was not possible to implement the                   
 agreement on the Tin Bigha Corridor owing to legal difficulties. The                      
 Government is now in the process of working out such details as                           
 construction of the flyover, acquisition of land for lease to                             
 Bangladesh etc., so that the Agreement with Bangladesh on Tin Bigha can                   
 be implemented soon.                                                                      
                                                                                           
 Around seventy Bangladeshi scholars have availed themselves of                            
 scholarships offered by India during 1984-85, for pursuing studies in                     
 Indian universities and technical institutes. Training facilities have                    
 also been made available to Bangladeshi personnel on Indian railways                      
 and in the NSI, Kanpur. Indian experts also visited Bangladesh during                     
 the year under review to provide consultancy services in the areas of                     
 sugar technology, cement and small industries.                                            
 -5>                                                                                       
 High level contacts, both formal and informal, reflected the close and                    
 cordial ties that mark India's relations with Bhutan. His Majesty the                     
 King of Bhutan was the Chief Guest at our Republic Day 1984                               
 celebrations. Opportunities offered by the visit of Bhutanese                             
 dignitaries were utilised for consultation on both international and                      
 bilateral matters and revealed a close identity of perceptions. His                       
 Majesty was also present at the last rites of the late Prime Minister,                    
 Smt. Indira Gandhi. Bhutan declared 21 days of mourning and 49 days of                    
 prayers and during this period no celebrations were held even on the                      
 occasion of the Bhutanese National Day which fell within that period.                     
                                                                                           
 The Indo-Bhutan Trade Agreement signed in December, 1983 came fully                       
 into operation. Necessary steps were taken to facilitate Bhutan's trade                   
 flow across our border and its trade with third countries. A                              
 Telecommunications Agreement was signed during the year under review,                     
 following which the Indo-Bhutan Microwave Link, an important bilateral                    
 project, came into operation. The Link permits communications by                          
 telephone between the Royal Kingdom, India and third countries, and is                    
 a symbol of the joint progress of the two countries.                                      
                                                                                           
 Major Indo-Bhutanese projects are nearing completion. The Rs. 204                         
 crores 336 MW Chukha Hydel Project is programmed to be inaugurated in                     
 1985. Work on a transmission line network to distribute power from this                   
 project within Bhutan is being implemented with Indian aid. Power                         
 surplus to Bhutan's needs will be available for utilisation in India.                     
                                                                                           
 Inauguration of Chukha-I could clear the way for the Chukha- II,                          
 capable of generating 1000 MW of power, on which bilateral discussions                    
 have been initiated. The Royal Bhutanese Government has approached                        
 India for financing the 1500 tonne a-day Nangalam Cement Plant, for                       
 which the detailed feasibility studies, conducted over the last two                       
 years, are nearly complete. Discussions and studies also began for a                      
 broadcasting station at Thimpu, to be set up under the Indian aid                         
 programme.                                                                                
 Bhutan is presently in its Fifth Development Plan (1981-87) with an                       
 outlay of Rs. 433 crores, of which India would finance Rs. 134 crores.                    
 During the year under review, a sum of Rs. 28.60 crores was granted to                    
 Bhutan as plan subsidy over and above project aid. Further assistance                     
 upto Rs. 5 crores has been granted by India for projects, such as the                     
 construction of a Secretariat Complex and the renovation of Bhutan's                      
 famous monasteries and administrative centres.                                            
                                                                                           
 In the fields of telecommunications, hydrology, geology, roads,                           
 archaeology, etc. Indian agencies made major contributions in planning                    
 and research, and several projects on a smaller scale, yet important                      
 for local development, are being envisaged and executed by these                          
 agencies. Our close involvement with the development of education and                     
 technical skills in Bhutan continued, with India offering scholarships                    
 and subsidies up to Rs. 10 lakhs during the year.                                         
 -6>                                                                                       
                                                                                           
 Bhutan is now approaching the start of its Sixth Plan, which begins in                    
 1987 and which will introduce a new phase in Bhutan's development.                        
 India has initiated discussions on this aspect and on the further                         
 evolution of bilateral links, all of which form part of the continuous                    
 joint effort between India and Bhutan towards consolidating and                           
 increasing bilateral ties and mutual confidence.                                          
                                                                                           
 Relations between India and Nepal continued to develop in a cordial                       
 manner, building on the deep and enduring ties that exist between the                     
 two countries in almost every field of socio-economic development.                        
                                                                                           
 There were exchanges of high level visits during the year under review,                   
 notably the visit of the Nepalese Foreign Minister in July 1984, the                      
 visit of the Nepalese Prime Minister for our late Prime Minister's                        
 cremation in November 1984, and the visit of India's Minister of State                    
 for Energy to Nepal in March 1984. These visits were utilised for                         
 extensive and useful exchanges on various aspects of Indo-Nepal                           
 relations.                                                                                
                                                                                           
 Economic co-operation was, as hitherto, an important area that required                   
 and received a measure of attention. While progress in setting up the                     
 Joint Commission was slow, several fresh agreements were signed on new                    
 projects for execution in Nepal. These included agreements on the                         
 expansion of Industrial Estates and Hospitals, renovation and extension                   
 of Canal Systems and technical assistance for implementing                                
 Entrepreneurial Development Programmes. The 14.1 MW Devighat                              
 Hydro-electric Project, constructed under Indian aid at a cost of about                   
 Rs. 49 crores, was inaugurated by His Majesty the King of Nepal in                        
 March 1984. This project, which was completed a year and half ahead of                    
 schedule, marked a significant milestone in Indo-Nepalese economic                        
 co-operation. The Birendra Police Hospital at Kathmandu, which is                         
 equipped with Indian assistance, was also inaugurated. Besides these,                     
 there are numerous other large and small projects being undertaken in                     
 the fields of health care, drinking water supply schemes, education,                      
 construction of roads and a sports complex. All of them are under                         
 implementation, and the Nepal Government has expressed its satisfaction                   
 at their progress.                                                                        
                                                                                           
 Another aspect of Indo-Nepalese co-operation in the economic field                        
 which has been gaining increasing momentum relates to the interest of                     
 the Indian private sector in Nepal. Several Indian commercial                             
 organisations and Chambers of Commerce have sent teams to Nepal to                        
 discuss proposals for mutually beneficial co- operation in trade and                      
 industry, and a government team is shortly to visit Nepal with the                        
 purpose of reviewing the entire area of such co-operation and                             
 specifying fields in which joint ventures between the two countries can                   
 be usefully promoted.                                                                     
                                                                                           
 The seventh inter-governmental committee meeting between India and                        
 Nepal took place at Kathmandu in June 1984. There was general agreement                   
 that both the                                                                             
 -7> Treaties of Trade and Transit between the two countries were                          
 functioning well, and that, except for some procedural details, no                        
 substantive difficulties were encountered. On the trade side, India has                   
 increased the number of Nepalese products eligible for preferential                       
 entry into India. On the transit side, India will consider a further                      
 streamlining of the relevant procedures.                                                  
                                                                                           
 There were intensive discussions between the two countries on various                     
 projects in the field of water resources, notably the Karnali,                            
 Pancheshwar and Rapti projects. Significant progress has been achieved                    
 in respect of the Karnali project, and India is hopeful that there will                   
 be increasing co-operation in the years to come between India and Nepal                   
 in this extremely important area of utilisation of river waters.                          
                                                                                           
 The two countries also interacted to mutual benefit within the SARC                       
 framework. In the fields of telecommunications, a team of                                 
 telecommunication experts from India held discussions with Nepalese                       
 officials in May 1984 on steps to improve telecommunication services.                     
 In the field of sports also, India cooperated extensively with Nepal                      
 and assisted in the holding of the South Asian Federation Games at                        
 Kathmandu in September 1984. The largest contingent participating in                      
 the games was from India.                                                                 
                                                                                           
 Our traditionally friendly and cordial relations with Burma were                          
 further strengthened. U Ne Win, Chairman of the ruling Burma Socialist                    
 Programme Party, made a private visit to India in November 1984 and met                   
 Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi. The Burmese Foreign and Trade                          
 Ministers also paid official visits to India, and a high level commerce                   
 and economic delegation from India visited Burma to improve trade                         
 relations. An agreement was reached with the Burmese Government towards                   
 delimitation of the maritime boundary between the two countries in the                    
 Andaman Sea, Coco Channel and the Bay of Bengal. This awaits                              
 ratification by the two Governments.                                                      
                                                                                           
 India's close association and friendship with Maldives continued to be                    
 built during the year under review. In connection with South Asian                        
 Regional Co-operation (SARC) Foreign Ministers Conference, Foreign                        
 Minister and Foreign Secretary visited Maldives in July 1984.                             
                                                                                           
 The Maldives Minister for Trade and Industry and Deputy Minister for                      
 Defence and National Security, Mr. Illias Ibrahim, paid an official                       
 visit to India in September 1984. He was accompanied by the Maldivian                     
 Deputy Minister of Planning and the Maldivian Foreign Secretary. During                   
 this visit, bilateral discussions were held with a view to diversify                      
 and expand trade between the two countries. It was decided that a                         
 direct shipping service between India and Maldives would be started                       
 soon. The two sides identified agriculture, agro-based industries and                     
 fishing, coconut plantation and                                                           
 -8>                                                                                       
 coconut based industries as specific areas for co-operation. It was                       
 agreed that the State Trading Corporation of India and the State                          
 Trading Organisation of Maldives would hold further discussions for                       
 ensuring a minimum bulk cargo to make the proposed new shipping service                   
 between India and Maldives economically viable. India also offered                        
 assistance to Maldives in projects financed by international                              
 organisations in that country. An Indian team visited Madives in                          
 December 1984 to study the possibilities of trade and economic                            
 cooperation in the light of the bilateral talks. India continued to                       
 offer training facilities to Maldivian officials in different fields                      
 such as customs, civil aviation, man-power survey and secretarial work                    
 under the Indian Technical & Economic Co-operation Programme.                             
                                                                                           
 Heightened tension and uncertainty in international relations were                        
 reflected in a further increase of the military presence of the Great                     
 Powers in the Indian Ocean. The facilities at the Anglo-American base                     
 of Diego Garcia continued to be expanded and upgraded. Simultaneously,                    
 the Great Powers sought to improve other military facilities available                    
 to them in the littoral States, and to seek fresh bases and facilities                    
 in the area.                                                                              
                                                                                           
 These developments are a source of concern to India. The presence of                      
 extra-regional military forces has an adverse impact on our security,                     
 introduces new tensions and conflicts, exacerbates others, and thereby                    
 endangers peace and stability in our neighbourhood.                                       
                                                                                           
 During the year under review, bilaterally and with other Non- Aligned                     
 States, India continued to work for the removal of all foreign military                   
 presence from the Indian Ocean. Though the Great Powers have not                          
 resumed discussions on reducing, and eventually removing, their                           
 military presence from the Indian Ocean, India hopes that littoral                        
 States will not align themselves with either of the Great Powers, or                      
 offer facilities, which would invite counter reactions.                                   
 India continues to work for the convening of the UN Conference on the                     
 Indian Ocean as a zone of peace. It is a matter of regret that the                        
 Conference has now been postponed to the first half of 1986.                              
 India maintained its support for the claim of Mauritian sovereignty                       
 over the Chagos Archipelago, including Diego Garcia, and called for its                   
 early return to Mauritius.                                                                
 -9>                                                                                       
 SOUTH-EAST ASIA                                                                           
                                                                     Top                   
 During the period under review, India's relations with countries of                       
 South-East Asia and the Pacific remained friendly. Exchanges of high                      
 level visits contributed to the strengthening of India's relations with                   
 many of the countries in this region.                                                     
                                                                                           
 The major problem in South-East Asia, i.e. the situation in Kampuchea,                    
 could not be resolved during the period under review. India continues                     
 to believe that a political solution to the problems of the region can                    
 be found and that the proposals made in the Political Declaration of                      
 the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned                     
 countries provided a good basis for finding such a solution. In                           
 particular, India believes that all states in the region should enter                     
 into a dialogue which would lead to the resolution of differences among                   
 themselves and the establishment of durable peace and stability in the                    
 area, as well as the elimination of the involvement and threats of                        
 intervention by outside powers.                                                           
                                                                                           
 A significant development was the regaining of independence by Brunei                     
 on 1 January 1984. Brunei became the sixth member of the ASEAN and it                     
 obtained membership of the UN at the last General Assembly session.                       
 India welcomed the independence of Brunei and our President sent a                        
 congratulatory message to the Sultan of Brunei on the occasion. Smt.                      
 Mohsina Kidwai, the then Minister of State for Health and Family                          
 Welfare, led the Indian delegation to the Independence Day celebrations                   
 of Brunei.                                                                                
                                                                                           
 Soon after his election as Prime Minister of New Zealand, Mr. David                       
 Lange announced that he would re-open the New Zealand High Commission                     
 in New Delhi which had been closed by his predecessor, Mr. Robert                         
 Muldoon, in 1982. Mr. Lange paid two visits to India during the period                    
 under review, first as leader of the Opposition and, subsequently, in                     
 October 1984, as the Prime Minister of New Zealand. He called on the                      
 President and the late Prime Minister, Smt. Indira Gandhi. He announced                   
 the                                                                                       
 -10>                                                                                      
 appointment of Sir Edmund Hillary (the Everest hero) as New Zealand's                     
 Resident High Commissioner in New Delhi.                                                  
                                                                                           
 Mr. Le Duan, the Secretary-General of the Central Committee of the                        
 Communist Party of Vietnam, visited India during September 1984. He was                   
 accompanied by a high powered delegation which included the Deputy                        
 Prime Minister, apart from some other Ministers and high officials. He                    
 held discussions with the President, the late Prime Minister and other                    
 Indian leaders on bilateral, regional and international issues. It was                    
 decided that economic co-operation between India and Vietnam would be                     
 strengthened in the years to come.                                                        
 Other important visits exchanged with Vietnam in 1984 included a visit                    
 by the Commerce Minister of Vietnam to India during November 1984; by                     
 Mr. Tran Vi, Chairman of the People's Committee of Hanoi, in April-May                    
 1984. The then Secretary (East) in the Ministry of External Affairs,                      
 Shri Natwar Singh, visited Vietnam in June-July 1984. He called on Mr.                    
 Pham Van Dong, the Prime Minister of Vietnam, Mr. Nguyen Co Thach,                        
 Vietnamese Foreign Minister, and General Giap, apart from holding                         
 discussions on bilateral and international issues with the                                
 Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs of Vietnam. During the course of this                    
 visit, an agreement for the the grant of an Indian credit of Rs. 10                       
 crores to Vietnam was signed. Shri Natwar Singh formally handed over                      
 the first three Indian diesel locomotives supplied under our credits to                   
 Vietnam during the course of this visit.                                                  
                                                                                           
 The former Foreign Minister, Shri P.V. Narasimha Rao, paid an official                    
 visit to Indonesia in June 1984. He called on President Suharto and                       
 held extensive discussions with the Foreign Minister of Indonesia, as                     
 well as with other Indonesian Ministers and dignitaries. The                              
 discussions were held in warm and friendly atmosphere. They revealed a                    
 broad agreement of views between India and Indonesia on a number of                       
 major international issues. There are no bilateral problems between the                   
 two countries and relations continue to be friendly. During the course                    
 of Shri Narsimha Rao's visit, a conference of Indian Heads of Missions                    
 from ASEAN/Indo-China countries and Australia was held in Jakarta.                        
                                                                                           
 The then Secretary (East), Shri Natwar Singh, paid a visit to Malaysia,                   
 Singapore and Thailand in March 1984. He called on the Malaysian                          
 Foreign Minister and other members of the Malaysian Cabinet, in                           
 addition to holding discussions with the Secretary- General of the                        
 Malaysian Foreign Office. The Malaysian side agreed with our view that                    
 the differences that exist, between the two countries on the issue of                     
 Kampuchea                                                                                 
 -11>                                                                                      
 should not, in any way, hamper the growth and development of bilateral                    
 friendly relations between India and Malaysia. Subsequently, in May                       
 1984, the fourth Indo-Malaysian Joint Committee meeting was held in                       
 Kuala Lumpur.                                                                             
                                                                                           
 During his visit to Singapore, Shri Natwar Singh called on the Deputy                     
 Prime Minister as well as on the Foreign Minister of Singapore, and                       
 held discussions with the Permanent Secretary of the Foreign Ministry                     
 of Singapore. The talks covered bilateral, regional and international                     
 matters. It was agreed that the differences in perception between India                   
 and Singapore on the Kampuchean issue should not come in the way of the                   
 development and strengthening of the friendly relations between the two                   
 countries. The Permanent Secretary of the Foreign Ministry of Singapore                   
 paid a return visit to India in August 1984, and the discussions held,                    
 revealed that relations between the two countries continued to be                         
 friendly and good.                                                                        
                                                                                           
 Shri Natwar Singh, during his brief visit to Thailand exchanged views                     
 with the Permanent Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Thailand. It was                      
 agreed that the differences between Thailand and India relating to the                    
 situation in Kampuchea should not be allowed to come in the way of the                    
 development and strengthening of bilateral ties between the two                           
 countries. The Permanent Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Thailand paid                   
 a return visit to India in October 1984 and this visit was symbolic of                    
 the growing friendship between the two countries. Significantly, this                     
 was the first ever visit to India by a Thai Permanent Secretary for                       
 Foreign Affairs.                                                                          
                                                                                           
 Relations between India and the Philippines continued to be friendly                      
 and cordial. The Philippines authorities readily assisted India by                        
 deporting Shri Jasbir Singh (nephew of Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale) to                     
 India.                                                                                    
                                                                                           
 The Australian Foreign Minister stated that Australia was keen to                         
 improve and enhance ties with India. The 15th round of the annual                         
 Indo-Australian bilateral talks was held in New Delhi in October 1984.                    
 The two delegations were headed by the Foreign Secretaries of the two                     
 countries. It was agreed that relations between India and Australia                       
 would be strengthened and diversified in different fields.                                
                                                                                           
 The Prime Minister of Vanuatu, Father Walter Lini, paid a state visit                     
 to India in May 1984. He called on the President and the late Prime                       
 Minister, Smt. Indira Gandhi.                                                             
 -12>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 All the countries from South-East Asia and many countries from the                        
 Pacific region sent special delegations to attend the funeral of the                      
 late Prime Minister, Smt. Indira Gandhi. The Heads of State and                           
 Government from the following countries were present : Vietnam, Laos,                     
 Kampuchea, Nauru, Australia, New Zealand, Fiji and Vanuatu. The                           
 Vice-President of Indonesia attended the funeral while the Philippines                    
 delegation was headed by Mrs. Imelda Marcos, the First Lady and the                       
 wife of President Marcos. Countries which sent Ministers or other high                    
 dignitaries as heads of their respective delegations were : Malaysia,                     
 Singapore, Thailand, Papua New Guihea and Brunei.                                         
 -13>                                                                                      
 EAST ASIA                                                                                 
                                                                     Top                   
 During the year under review, the dialogue with the Government of the                     
 People's Republic of China towards a settlement of the boundary                           
 question as well as for the promotion of bilateral exchanges in the                       
 fields of culture, education, science and technology, was continued.                      
 The fifth round of official level talks between the two countries took                    
 place in Beijing from 17 to 22 September 1984. The general atmosphere                     
 of India China relations remained cordial.                                                
                                                                                           
 During the fifth round of official level talks, both sides had an                         
 indepth exchange of views on the boundary question. Even though                           
 complete agreement could not be reached, differences were further                         
 narrowed. It was agreed that both sides would commence substantive                        
 discussions on the boundary question from the next round of talks.                        
 Cultural, scientific and technological exchanges were also discussed                      
 during the fifth round of talks. It was agreed to exchange cultural                       
 troupes, exhibitions, academicians and scholars and a programme for                       
 scientific and technological exchanges was also drawn up.                                 
                                                                                           
 On 15 August 1984, an India-China Trade Agreement, which incorporates                     
 the most favoured nation clause, was signed in Beijing. This became the                   
 first Government to Government level agreement to be signed between the                   
 two countries since the exchange of Ambassadors in 1976. The agreement                    
 is expected to create a good base the further growth of trade links                       
 between India and China.                                                                  
                                                                                           
 The Chinese Government expressed their deep shock and regret on the                       
 tragic death of Smt. Indira Gandhi. The Chinese President and Premier                     
 addressed a joint condolence message to the President of India. The                       
 Chinese Premier also paid tributes in Beijing to Smt. Gandhi's efforts                    
 to improve Sino-Indian relations and stated that her death was a great                    
 loss to the Non-Aligned Movement and the cause of world peace. He,                        
 along with several other Chinese dignitaries, visited the Indian                          
 Embassy to sign the Condolence Book. The Chinese Vice-Premier and                         
 Special Envoy, Mr. Yao Yilin, attended the funeral of Smt. Gandhi.                        
 During his meeting with the Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, the                        
 Chinese Vice-Premier expressed the desire to see Sino-Indian relations                    
 "restored to what they were in the 1950s".                                                
 -14>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 The Chinese Premier, Mr. Zhao Ziyang, in a message of congratulations                     
 sent to Shri Rajiv Gandhi on his assumption of office and the formation                   
 of the new Government, stated that "with the joint efforts of the                         
 Chinese and Indian Governments, Sino Indian relations have visibly                        
 improved and developed." The Chinese Premier expressed the hope that                      
 the traditional friendship existing between India and China would be                      
 further strengthened and that "Sino-Indian friendly relations will                        
 develop to a new high".                                                                   
                                                                                           
 The state visit, from 3 to 6 May 1984 of the Japanese Prime Minister,                     
 after a gap of 23 years, marked a new phase in India- Japan relations                     
 against the background of increasing exchanges, and signified the                         
 desire for further consolidation and expansion of existing cordial                        
 relations between the two countries. The visit afforded an opportunity                    
 to both sides to exchange views on international and bilateral                            
 relations, and on the need for imparting greater substance and momentum                   
 to India-Japan relations in various fields.                                               
                                                                                           
 The Japanese Prime Minister led a high powered delegation at the time                     
 of the state funeral of the late Prime Minister, Smt. Indira Gandhi.                      
 The Japanese Government and people reacted with shock and sorrow to the                   
 tragic assassination of Smt. Gandhi, recalling her eminent leadership                     
 and the interest the late Prime Minister took in India-Japan relations.                   
 Condolence messages were received from Emperor Hirohito, Prime Minister                   
 Mr. Yasuhiro Nakasone, Foreign Minister Mr. Shintaro Abe and from other                   
 dignitaries in Japan.                                                                     
                                                                                           
 Visits were exchanged between the two countries at various levels. A                      
 52-member high powered Japanese Government Economic Mission visited                       
 India from 30 November to 7 December 1984. The 17th Business                              
 Cooperation Committee Meeting was also held during the Mission's                          
 visit-the 16th meeting having taken place in Tokyo in July 1984. During                   
 the calls on the high Indian dignitaries by the leader of the Mission,                    
 and at the official level, the Japanese delegation discussed the scope                    
 and problems of investment and collaborations in India, particularly in                   
 the field of automobiles and electronics. Computer technology,                            
 telecommunication, non-conventional sources of energy, mineral                            
 development, agriculture, fisheries and above all diversified and                         
 balanced trade were also covered in the discussions.                                      
                                                                                           
 President Giani Zail Singh, during his transit through Tokyo on 3 May                     
 1984, met the representatives of the Indian community in Japan. The                       
 Commerce Minister, Shri Vishwanath Pratap Singh, led an Indian                            
 delegation to the Annual ESCAP Meeting in April 1984. The Speakers of                     
 the Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh Assemblies also visited Japan. The                   
 visits at the level of senior officials were those of Finance Secretary                   
 Shri P. K. Kaul, former Secretary (East) in the Ministry of External                      
 Affairs, Shri K. Natwar Singh. Secretary, Department of Ocean                             
 Development, Dr. S. Z. Qasmi,                                                             
 -15>                                                                                      
 and Agriculture Secretary Shri S. P. Mukerji. The Comptroller and                         
 Auditor General of India, Shri T. N. Chaturvedi, participated in an                       
 International Conference held in May 1984. India participated in the                      
 Hoteres and Foodex-84 in Tokyo. The Trade Development Authority of                        
 India organised a Home Furnishings and General Merchandise Exhibition                     
 in Osaka in November 1984.                                                                
                                                                                           
 The 6th meeting of the Japan-India Mixed Commission, under the Cultural                   
 Agreement of 1956, was held at Tokyo in March 1984 to discuss                             
 cooperation in the scientific and technical fields, and the exchange of                   
 scholars, academicians, youths, publications etc. Exhibitions of                          
 ancient Indian sculpturess and modern Indian arts, and a photo                            
 exhibition on the life of Mahatma Gandhi were organised in Tokyo and                      
 other places in Japan. Performances by Purulia Chhau dance troupe from                    
 Bihar, sponsored by the ICCR, Bhopa and Rai dances representing the                       
 folk arts from Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh were organised, on                            
 invitation, in Japan as also performances by individual artists. A                        
 Gagaku dance troupe from Japan gave performances at the time of the                       
 International Buddhist Conference held in New Delhi.                                      
                                                                                           
 The late Indian Prime Minister's gift of two baby elephants, airlifted                    
 from Bombay, was warmly received on 30 September 1984 at Tokyo Ueno Zoo                   
 in the presence of several high Japanese dignitaries including the                        
 Prime Minister and his wife.                                                              
                                                                                           
 Japanese Prime Minister, Mr. Yasuhiro Nakasone, congratulated Shri                        
 Rajiv Gandhi on the victory of the Congress(I) in the General Elections                   
 and stated that this was "a manifestation of the will of the people of                    
 India". The Japanese Prime Minister expressed the hope that the close                     
 ties between Japan and India would "develop more than ever in various                     
 fields" and also expressed his confidence that Shri Rajiv Gandhi would                    
 "perform a leading role for the increasing development of India and for                   
 the peace and prosperity of the world".                                                   
                                                                                           
 The level and nature of exchanges between India and the Republic of                       
 Korea (ROK) reflected the further growth of bilateral relations between                   
 the two countries in the economic and commercial fields. Visits from                      
 India included those of MMTC, handloom and carpets, and sports goods                      
 delegations. The exhibition of Indian silks, handlooms and carpets in                     
 June 1984, was inaugurated by Shri P. A. Sangma, the Deputy Minister of                   
 Commerce. India participated in the Seoul International Trade Fair                        
 1984, which was visited by the Chairman TFAI, Shri Mohammad Yunus, as                     
 well as in the World Philatellic Exhibition in October 1984 in Seoul.                     
                                                                                           
 A 21-member Economic Mission from the ROK visited India in October 1984                   
 to discuss the expansion of economic cooperation, joint ventures and                      
 bilateral trade. Earlier in July 1984 the 6th meeting of India-ROK                        
 Joint Business Council was held in Seoul.                                                 
 -16>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 A 19-member team from the National Defence College paid a visit to the                    
 ROK, for the first time, from 27 September to 2 October 1984. The                         
 Cultural Exchange Programme for the years 1984- 86 in the fields of                       
 education, art, culture, science, media, sports etc., was concluded                       
 earlier for the year and exchanges, under the programme, of sports                        
 teams and academicians etc., took place. Purulia Chhau dance troupe of                    
 Bihar also visited the ROK in September 1984 during the International                     
 Folklore Festival in Seoul.                                                               
                                                                                           
 On the tragic assassination of Smt. Gandhi, the ROK President sent a                      
 message of condolences. The ROK was represented by Speaker of the                         
 National Assembly, Mr. Mun Shick Chae, at the state funeral of the late                   
 Prime Minister.                                                                           
                                                                                           
 With a view to maintaining contacts at various levels, a number of                        
 visits were exchanged between India and the Democratic People's                           
 Republic of Korea (DPRK). From the DPRK, the Minister of                                  
 Communications, Mr. Kim Yong Chai, in his capacity as a Member of the                     
 Central Committee of the Worker's Party of Korea, the Chairman of the                     
 Education Commission, Mr. Choi Tai Bok, and the Minister of Foreign                       
 Trade, Mr. Choi Jong Gun, visited India during the year under review.                     
 An Indian delegation led by the Additional Secretary in the Ministry of                   
 Commerce, Shri Anand Sarup, visited Pyongyang in October 1984 to review                   
 bilateral trade and to explore the possibility of increased exchanges                     
 in trade and trade information. The need for increasing the economic                      
 content in India-DPRK relations was recognised in these discussions.                      
                                                                                           
 The then Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs, Shri Kalp Nath                      
 Rai, led a Parliamentary delegation to the DPRK from 7 to 11 September                    
 1984. Some Members of Parliament, academicians and journalists were                       
 invited to the DPRK by various organisations, mainly for study and                        
 exchange of views on the "Juche" idea. For the state funeral of the                       
 late Shrimati Gandhi the DPRK was represented by Vice President Mr. Pak                   
 Sung Chol. President Kim II Sung sent a message of condolences.                           
 Visits were also exchanged between India and the DPRK, under the                          
 Cultural Exchange Programme, in the fields of art, culture, education                     
 including adult education, films etc.                                                     
 The visit to Mongolia in July 1984 by the then Minister of State for                      
 External Affairs, Shri A. A. Rahim, on the occasion of the Mongolian                      
 National Day celebrations, signified the cordial relations between                        
 India and Mongolia. Shri Rahim was separately received by the                             
 President, Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Mongolia besides                        
 other high dignitaries. The Cultural Exchange Programme for the year                      
 1984-86, under the cultural and scientific co-operation agreement, was                    
 signed during the visit. In June 1984, a Special Envoy of the Mongolian                   
 President visited India and met the late Prime Minister Smt. Indira                       
 Gandhi.                                                                                   
 -17>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 On the tragic assassination of Smt. Gandhi, a joint message of                            
 condolences was received from the Party General Secretary and the                         
 Chairman of the Council of Ministers, Mr. J. Batmunkh, and the Deputy                     
 Chairman of the Presidium, Mr. N. Jagvaral. At the state funeral of the                   
 late Prime Minister, Mongolia was represented by the First Deputy                         
 Chairman of the Council of Ministers, Mr. T. Ragohaa.                                     
                                                                                           
 The Government of India welcomed the Hong Kong accord agreed to between                   
 Great Britain and China on 26 September 1984, especially as it resolved                   
 a difficult problem with the agreement of the concerned parties. The                      
 Joint Declaration by the Governments of the UK and China on Hong Kong                     
 was signed in Beijing, on 19 December 1984, by the British Prime                          
 Minister, Mrs. Margaret Thatcher, and the Chinese Premier, Mr. Zhao                       
 Ziyang.                                                                                   
 -18>                                                                                      
 WEST ASIA AND NORTH AFRICA                                                                
                                                                     Top                   
 While India's ties with the Arab nations of West Asia and North Africa                    
 go back into antiquity it is only over the last few years that they                       
 have acquired a deep and multifaceted character encompassing not merely                   
 the political field but also extending to the economic and cultural                       
 fields.                                                                                   
                                                                                           
 1984 saw a series of high level exchanges between India and these                         
 nations underlining this close relationship. In this context,                             
 particular mention may be made of the visit of the Prime Minister, Smt.                   
 Indira Gandhi in April 1984 to Libya and Tunisia.                                         
                                                                                           
 India has been consistent in its support for the Palestinian people                       
 since the early part of this century. This was once again demonstrated                    
 in 1984, during which India continued to provide material and moral                       
 assistance to the people of Palestine. To underline this support,                         
 inspite of its pre-occupations with preparations for the General                          
 Elections in December 1984, India sent a delegation led by the Deputy                     
 Chairman of the Rajya Sabha to attend the 17th Session of the Palestine                   
 National Council held at Amman in November 1984.                                          
                                                                                           
 In view of its continued concern at the prevailing tension in West Asia                   
 brought about by, among other things, the continuing presence of                          
 Israeli troops in Lebanon, India called for the withdrawal of all                         
 foreign forces, beginning with those of Israel, from Lebanon and                          
 reiterated its support, for UN Security Council Resolutions 508 and                       
 509. India also expressed the hope that the Lebanese people would, in a                   
 spirit of national reconciliation, quickly bring about peace and                          
 security in Lebanon. India has consistently stood for a strong, united                    
 and non-aligned Lebanon.                                                                  
                                                                                           
 India's relations with Algeria have traditionally been marked with                        
 warmth and friendship. Throughout 1984 both countries, as members of                      
 the Non-Aligned Movement, co-operated extensively both on the                             
 international arena and on the bilateral plane.                                           
 -19>                                                                                      
 Economic ties between the two countries, which are based within the                       
 framework of strengthening South-South co-operation, were discussed at                    
 the second session of the Indo-Algerian Joint Commission meeting held                     
 in New Delhi from 27 February to 5 March 1984 and steps identified to                     
 foster greater co-operation. Similarly, an IndoLibyan Joint Commission                    
 Meeting was held in Tripoli from 22 to 28 May 1984 to further                             
 strengthen economic and commercial ties between India and Libya.                          
                                                                                           
 A serious effort was made to explore ways and means for strengthening                     
 economic and commercial relations between India and the Kingdom of                        
 Morocco. In this context, Mr. Azeddine Guessous, the Moroccan Minister                    
 of Trade, Industries and Tourism, visited India in September 1984.                        
 Subsequently, two Indian delegations visited Morocco in November 1984.                    
                                                                                           
 India has always sympathised with and supported the right of                              
 self-determination for the people of Western Sahara. During the year                      
 under review, party to party ties between the Polisario and the                           
 Congress (I) Party were strengthened through the visits of Polisario                      
 delegations to India.                                                                     
 On the sad occasion of the death of the Prime Minister, Smt. Indira                       
 Gandhi, several dignitaries attended her funeral from West Asia and                       
 North Africa region and in this context particular mention may be made                    
 of the attendance of the Prime Minister of Algeria, Vice-President and                    
 Foreign Minister of Syria, and Crown Prince Hassan of Jordan.                             
                                                                                           
 During the year under review, India's relations with countries in the                     
 Gulf region, namely Iran, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar,                     
 UAE, Oman, North Yemen and South Yemen continued to improve in diverse                    
 fields. The continuing Iran-Iraq war which has entered its fifth year                     
 received utmost attention from the Indian government, and efforts were                    
 made in India's individual capacity, as also in India's role as                           
 Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement, to find ways and means to bring                     
 about an immediate end to the war through negotiation. The late Prime                     
 Minister took personal interest in the matter and sent her special                        
 emissaries to the concerned capitals and also held discussions with                       
 other members of the Non-Aligned Movement and friendly countries in                       
 order to achieve the objective of peace in the region. Unfortunately,                     
 the receptivity of various proposals put forward was not much, and the                    
 unfortunate conflict continued.                                                           
 -20>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 The President of India Giani Zail Singh paid state visits to Yemen Arab                   
 Republic (YAR) and Peoples' Democratic Republic of Yemen (PDRY) in                        
 1984. The former Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri A. A.                       
 Rahim, visited Qatar in August 1984. The Amir of Qatar paid a state                       
 visit to India in February 1984. Other important dignitaries from the                     
 region also visited India to hold consultations on matters of mutual                      
 interest. Such visits included the visits of the Foreign Minister of                      
 Oman and the Commerce Minister of Iran. The Joint Commission meetings                     
 between India and Iraq and India and Iran were held in May 1984 and                       
 November 1984 respectively.                                                               
                                                                                           
 The UAE authorities took the welcome and unprecedented step of                            
 returning the hijackers of an Indian airliner from Dubai in 1984 to                       
 highlight the close and friendly relations between the two countries.                     
                                                                                           
 India's economic and commercial relations with the Gulf countries                         
 continued to show substantial progress. India's efforts were directed                     
 towards greater export of manufactures, equipment, machinery and                          
 complete projects etc. A number of Indian construction firms have been                    
 undertaking jobs in the Gulf countries, especially in Iraq.                               
                                                                                           
 A large number of Indian emigrants are working in the Gulf countries                      
 and it is estimated that India has one million people in these                            
 countries. There is general satisfaction at the performance of the                        
 workers by the host Governments and authorities and Indian nationals                      
 are by and large prosperous and happy in their respective countries.                      
 However, normal consular problems continue to engage our attention and                    
 our Missions abroad are rendering full assistance to our nationals                        
 whenever required.                                                                        
 -21>                                                                                      
 AFRICA (SOUTH OF THE SAHARA)                                                              
                                                                     Top                   
 India continued with its policy of strengthening the on-going process                     
 of multifaceted co-operation with the countries of the African region,                    
 extending moral, material and diplomatic support to the Frontline                         
 States and Liberation Movements. It firmly opposed the system of                          
 apartheid and racial discrimination in South Africa and advocated a                       
 total boycott of the racist regime practising it. In tune with this                       
 basic policy, India, in its individual capacity, and also as                              
 Chairperson of Non-Aligned Movement, responded to the fast evolving                       
 political situation in Southern Africa and generally endorsed the                         
 position in this regard taken by the Frontline States at their meeting                    
 in Arusha (Tanzania) in April 1984. The Arusha meeting, inter-alia,                       
 called upon South Africa to dismantle the root cause of the instability                   
 in the region, i.e. apartheid, and to honour Security Council                             
 Resolution 435 on Namibia. The so-called constitutional reforms within                    
 South Africa, introduced by the racist regime, were rejected outright                     
 by India. The Government of India, in an official statement, termed                       
 these as fraudulent. The Prime Minister, in a message to the Security                     
 Council, urged the people of South Africa to oppose the elections (held                   
 under the new Constitution), aimed at dividing and weakening the                          
 struggle against apartheid.                                                               
                                                                                           
 As a token of India's unequivocal support to the people of South Africa                   
 and Namibia, we received on official visits Mr. J. N. Pokela, the                         
 Chairman of the Pall Arricanist Congress of South Africa, a 5-member                      
 delegation of the Organisation of African Unity (OAU) Liberation                          
 Committee headed by the Vice Foreign Minister of Angola, and a                            
 senior-level delegation of the Council for Namibia. During the period                     
 under review, additional material assistance was given to the South                       
 West African People's Organisation (SWAPO) of Namibia and the African                     
 National Congress (ANC) and Pan Africanist Congress (PAC) of South                        
 Africa.                                                                                   
                                                                                           
 The great importance India attaches to relations with the African                         
 countries was also reflected in its decision to donate I lakh tonnes of                   
 wheat to the drought-affected countries in Africa. The Prime Minister,                    
 Shri Rajiv Gandhi, in an official statement, pledged our solidarity                       
 with the faminc-affected African countries and expressed our                              
 -22>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 readiness to share our experience and resources in helping them to meet                   
 this challenge. Even prior to this announcement, relief supplies by way                   
 of medicines were either dispatched, or were in the pipe-line, to                         
 several countries, including Ethiopia, Mali, Mozambique, Guinea-Bissau,                   
 Ghana, Rwanda, Swaziland, Madagascar and the People' Republic of Benin.                   
 Our Prime Minister's message of felicitation to the 20th Summit of the                    
 OAU also symbolised the great importance we attach to our relations                       
 with the African countries. The high-level of political representation                    
 from Africa at the funeral of the late Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira                    
 Gandhi, also illustrated the measure of deep understanding between                        
 India and Africa. The visitors included the Presidents of Tanzania,                       
 Uganda, Zambia and Mozambique; Vice-Presidents of Kenya and Liberia;                      
 and Prime Ministers of Mauritius and Zimbabwe.                                            
                                                                                           
 The visits of nearly three dozen delegations to and from Africa further                   
 deepened the mutual co-operation in economic, political, technical,                       
 cultural and other fields. The most important ones included the                           
 Ministerial visits from Ethiopia, Kenya, Mauritius and Mozambique. Our                    
 Lok Sabha Speaker visited Zambia. The level of our assistance under                       
 ITEC and other schemes to African countries was maintained and even                       
 augmented wherever felt necessary.                                                        
                                                                                           
 Soon after the military coup in Nigeria, Major General Mohammed Buhari                    
 sent a Special Envoy to India to brief the Government about the                           
 political developments eventually leading to the military takeover in                     
 that country. Our Prime Minister's Special Envoy also visited Nigeria                     
 in May 1984, inter alia, to assure the Nigerian leadership of India's                     
 continuing friendship and co-operation with the new regime.                               
                                                                                           
 Relations with Ethiopia received a further boost with the visits of the                   
 Ethiopian Permanent Secretary for Transport and Communications and the                    
 Minister of Information and National Guidance to lndia, during which                      
 discussions regarding co- operation in the field of rail and road                         
 transport and information and culture were held. A substantial number                     
 of other Ethiopian delegations at the official and technical level also                   
 visited India.                                                                            
                                                                                           
 The visit of Indian Minister of Industry and Labour to Kenya and the                      
 visit of the Kenyan Assistant Minister of Foreign Affairs to India                        
 further brightened the prospects of co-operation between India and                        
 Kenya in the field of industrial development.                                             
 -23>                                                                                      
 Indo-Mauritius relations reached a new peak during the period under                       
 review. The second meeting of the Joint Commission took place in Port                     
 Louis in February 1984. The Indian delegation was headed by our Foreign                   
 Minister. India agreed to extend assistance to Mauritius in 26 major                      
 projects, covering agriculture, industry, communications and civil                        
 aviation. As a mark of our keenness to share our technical expertise                      
 with the developing countries, a Mauritian scientist was included in                      
 the second Indian expedition to Antarctica. A Government to Government                    
 credit of Rs. 50 million and an EXIM Bank Credit of the same amount was                   
 extended. The President of India, Giani Zail Singh visited Mauritius to                   
 participate in the 150th anniversary of Indian immigration to                             
 Mauritius, in which a number of cultural delegations from India also                      
 participated. Reciprocal celebrations of this event were also held in                     
 India. Another hall-mark of bilateral relations was the visit of Smt.                     
 Ramdulari Sinha, the Minister of State in the Ministry of Home Affairs,                   
 who headed a delegation of nearly 150 prominent Indians, in October                       
 1984.                                                                                     
 -24>                                                                                      
 EUROPE WESTERN EUROPE                                                                     
                                                                     Top                   
 The countries of Western Europe have continued to play a significant                      
 role in India's foreign affairs during the period under review. The ten                   
 countries of the European Economic Community are amongst India's major                    
 trading partners. Western Europe, particularly the Federal Republic of                    
 Germany, France and the UK, continue to be important sources of                           
 technology transfer into India. Defence purchases from these countries                    
 are also not unimportant, and considerable financial assistance is                        
 obtained from them in terms of project loans.                                             
                                                                                           
 In 1984, there have been no visits to the countries of Western Europe                     
 by either our President or Prime Minister. However, the Federal                           
 Chancellor Fred Sinowatz of Austria paid an official visit to India in                    
 March 1984. There have also been several Ministerial level visits                         
 between India and the countries of Western Europe.                                        
                                                                                           
 Events in Punjab, and especially the Army operation in Amritsar in June                   
 1984 and subsequent developments, evoked keen interest in the West                        
 European media and amongst the ethnic Indian Community in these                           
 countries. In this connection, one area of concern to us has been the                     
 fact that Sikh extremists have found refuge in some West European                         
 countries, notably the UK. India has kept in constant touch with the                      
 concerned Governments, media and the ethnic community in these                            
 countries, and particularly so in Britain, with a view to ensure that                     
 appropriate action is taken to counter the anti-Indian activities of                      
 the extremists.                                                                           
                                                                                           
 The assassination of the late Prime Minister, Smt. Indira Gandhi, was                     
 unanimously condemned in all West European countries from where several                   
 Prime Ministers and other top level dignitaries came to Delhi to attend                   
 the funeral.                                                                              
 The kidnapping and murder, in February 1984, of Shri R. H. Mhatre,                        
 India's Assistant High Commissioner in Birmingham, was highlighted in                     
 the countries of West Europe as yet another instance of the danger of                     
 growing international terrorism.                                                          
 The Indian general elections held in December 1984 were very widely                       
 covered by the West European media and, in general, there was                             
 unstinting appreciation of the                                                            
 -25>                                                                                      
 manner in which the elections were conducted, and of the strength of                      
 democratic institutions in India. Messages have been sent by several                      
 West European leaders to the new Prime Minister on his resounding                         
 election victory.                                                                         
                                                                                           
 The UK is an important trading partner of India, and is significant as                    
 a source of foreign technology and investment in India. While India's                     
 trade turnover with UK has increased over the years, the trade balance                    
 remains adverse to India. Our efforts to redress this balance by                          
 encouraging the UK to buy more Indian goods are showing some results.                     
                                                                                           
 There was a feeling in the country that the British authorities had not                   
 been vigorous enough in curbing the anti- Indian activities of the                        
 extremist and militant sections of the ethnic Indian community in the                     
 UK. This matter had been raised on several occasions with the                             
 Government of the UK and it was hoped that the UK would show a greater                    
 understanding of Indian concerns.                                                         
                                                                                           
 The British Prime Minister, Mrs. Margaret Thatcher, attended the                          
 funeral of Smt. Indira Gandhi. The visit to India of Baroness Young,                      
 the British Minister of State in the Foreign and Commonwealth Office,                     
 in March 1984, as well as the talks of our Minister of State for                          
 External Affairs and the Foreign Secretary with the British Foreign                       
 Office, were occasions for frank and meaningful discussions between the                   
 two sides.                                                                                
                                                                                           
 Relations with the Government of France have continued to develop.                        
 Progress was made for holding of the "Festival of India'" in Paris in                     
 1984-85. Indo-French bilateral talks were held when the Foreign                           
 Minister visited Paris in April 1984. The Minister of Commerce also                       
 visited Paris in June the same year in order to review the overall                        
 economic relations between the two countries. The two Governments also                    
 agreed to mutually beneficial cooperation in agriculture and rural                        
 development. The New French Prime Minister, Mr. Laurent Fabius came to                    
 India to attend the late Prime Minister's funeral. Other important                        
 visits include that of the Speaker of the French National Assembly to                     
 India in February 1984, and the visit of our Vice-President to France                     
 in July 1984.                                                                             
                                                                                           
 During the period under review, there was a spate of visits from the                      
 Federal Republic of Germany (FRG) which is at present our most                            
 important trading partner in West Europe. This economic cooperation was                   
 highlighted when India presented its industrial skills at the Hanover                     
 Trade Fair, this being perhaps the biggest Indian participation in any                    
 foreign trade fair so far. India has also been participating in 3                         
 Ea/84-6                                                                                   
 -26>                                                                                      
 several other promotional specialised fairs in the FRG ever year. So                      
 far 1341 out of a total of about 7500 foreign collaboration projects                      
 approved by the Government of India have been with the FRG, which is a                    
 very important source for technology transfer into India. The annual                      
 financial assistance of the FRG to India is approximately Rs. 144                         
 crores.                                                                                   
                                                                                           
 In June 1984, the first Indo-German seminar was organised in Bonn in                      
 which several high-ranking thinkers and policy makers on both sides                       
 presented ideas on improving ties between the two countries. While                        
 relations have been friendly between the two countries, in the matter                     
 of Talwinder Singh, a criminal fugitive released unilaterally by the                      
 FRG Government, there was some degree of discord. Of late, however, the                   
 FRG has been more than forthcoming on our concerns concerning extremist                   
 activity.                                                                                 
                                                                                           
 With the Benelux countries, Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg,                      
 relations are friendly and have continued to show a steady growth. A                      
 Memorandum of Understanding in the field of agriculture was signed with                   
 Netherlands in June 1984, and bilateral economic relations were                           
 reviewed in a Joint Commission. The Cultural Agreement with the                           
 Netherlands is in the penultimate stage of finalisation.                                  
                                                                                           
 The visit of the Austrian Chancellor was the only official visit to                       
 India in 1984 from West Europe at the Head of Government level. The                       
 previous Chancellor, Mr. Bruno Kreisky, was nominated for the 1983                        
 Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding. The                               
 Vice-President of India visited Austria in August 1984.                                   
                                                                                           
 In terms of trade, the Austrian Scheme of Generalised Preference has                      
 boosted India's trade with that country. Austrian technological input                     
 in the engineering sector has been growing, and there are as many as 60                   
 Indo-Austrian collaborations in the field. Austria also provides a                        
 limited financial credit of about Rs. 6 crores on a two-yearly basis.                     
                                                                                           
 Indo-Italian co-operation, particularly in the economic and technical                     
 fields, is still modest. Italy has agreed to assist India in the field                    
 of agricultural development, a tuna fishing project, non-conventional                     
 energy projects, rural electrification and a design and training centre                   
 for leather. The Italians are also participating in the Thal                              
 Fertilizers Project, the Farakka Super Thermal Power Project and the                      
 Indo-Gulf Fertilizer Plant at Jagdishpur. Italy agreed to provide an                      
 export credit of 400 million US dollars to be used both as buyers and                     
 suppliers credit during the meeting.                                                      
 -27>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 Italy started offering large grants only recently as a supplement to                      
 its commercial export of equipment and consultancy services. These are                    
 mainly in the field of agriculture, fisheries, petro-chemicals and                        
 power production. In August 1984, agreements were signed for (i)                          
 integrated agricultural development in Madhya Pradesh, Orissa Haryana,                    
 and (ii) Temperate Climate Fruit Development in Jammu and Kashmir, UP                     
 and Himachal Pradesh.                                                                     
                                                                                           
 With the visit of the Italian Defence Minister to India in September                      
 1984, following upon the earlier visit of our Defence Minister to                         
 Italy, the possibilities of some defence purchases from Italy have also                   
 been examined.                                                                            
                                                                                           
 The Scandinavian countries continued to extend economic aid to India,                     
 especially for projects in the fields of social welfare, health and                       
 rural development. There is considerable scope for India to co-operate                    
 with these countries in high technology areas as well.                                    
                                                                                           
 The visit of our Minister of Energy to Sweden has seen a significant                      
 step up of co-operation in power and alternate sources of energy. A                       
 Working Group formed in early 1984 has already met twice during the                       
 year under review to work on the details. Sweden is collaborating in                      
 the Dhauliganga Project and has also shown interest in power                              
 transmission machines and drilling platforms. Negotiations are also                       
 under way for collaboration in the setting up of mini hydel power                         
 stations. The important visits from Sweden during 1984 have been that                     
 of their Foreign Trade Minister heading the Swedish delegation to Indo-                   
 Swedish Joint Commission, and that of the ten-member Swedish                              
 Parliamentary delegation led by their Speaker in February.                                
                                                                                           
 According to a White Paper presented by the Norwegian Government to its                   
 Parliament in 1984, India was named as one of the nine countries that                     
 would be the main beneficiaries of Norwegian bilateral assistance.                        
 According to an agreement signed in New Delhi in November 1984, Norway                    
 would give annual financial assistance of about Rs. 25 crores for four                    
 years from 1985. The money is to be spent on agricultural and rural                       
 development projects and for some commodity imports such as paper,                        
 fisheries equipment, etc. When our Deputy Minister of Electronics                         
 visited Norway, a Memorandum of Understanding was signed for                              
 co-operation in the field of electronics.                                                 
                                                                                           
 Denmark has been active in its aid projects for rural development and                     
 is now showing a greater interest in assisting projects in areas such                     
 as energy from nonconventional sources.                                                   
 -28>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 The Spanish Secretary of State for Trade, accompanied by a big                            
 delegation of businessmen, visited New Delhi in December 1984 to have                     
 bilateral talks on economic matters. His visit coincided with the                         
 inauguration of the Indo-Spanish Joint Business Council which held its                    
 first meeting in New Delhi. The next meeting of the official                              
 Indo-Spanish Joint Commission will meet in early 1985 in Madrid.                          
                                                                                           
 During the visit of the Finnish Foreign Minister in March 1984, apart                     
 from economic relations, cultural co-operation was specially reviewed.                    
 In fact, the first protocol under the Indo- Finnish Cultural Agreement                    
 was signed in February 1984. Once again, the Finnish ship "Finnpolaris"                   
 was chartered by India for our Antarctic Expedition in 1984.                              
 The people in the countries of West Europe are becoming increasingly                      
 interested in Indian culture, and this seems to have been noticed by                      
 West European governments, and reflected in their activities. The                         
 Portuguese Minister of Culture visited India in October 1984. The                         
 President of the Swiss Council of Arts-Pro- Helvetia, Professor Roland                    
 Ruffieux, led an important delegation to India to promote cultural                        
 interaction between India and Switzerland. The Scandinavian countries                     
 welcomed several Indian artists during the period under review. A                         
 ten-day Indian film festival was held in Stockholm. In Vienna our                         
 Embassy organised a cultural week of India, which was well-received.                      
                                                                                           
 The European Economic Community is collectively one of Indian's most                      
 important partners in trade. Our large adverse trade balance has                          
 continued to be a matter of concern to us, and at the third Indo-EEC                      
 Joint Commission held in May 1984, ways and means to redress this                         
 imbalance were considered. We have requested increased quotas for                         
 exports under the GSP in several commodities and lower preferential                       
 tariffs for others. A Conference on Investment and Technology Transfer                    
 was held in West Berlin in November 1984 under the aegis of Indo-EEC                      
 industrial co-operation in order to bring Indian and European                             
 entrepreneurs together and to facilitate investment and technology                        
 flows.                                                                                    
                                                                                           
 With the growth of economic relations, the need for political                             
 consultations with the EEC became evident. Accordingly, India and the                     
 EEC decided to institutionalise political co-operation and this was                       
 inaugurated by our then Foreign Minister, Shri Narasimha Rao, in April                    
 1984, during his visit to France (which held the Presidency of the EEC                    
 during January-June 1984). This was followed by a meeting in New York                     
 between our Minister of State and the Irish Foreign Minister in                           
 Soptember 1984. It has now been decided that this "political dialogue"                    
 will adopt the Troika formula                                                             
 -29>                                                                                      
 under which three countries would represent the EEC, namely the country                   
 currently holding the Community Presidency, and the previous and next                     
 Presidency countries.                                                                     
                                                                                           
 The Commonwealth Heads of Government Regional Meeting of the                              
 Asia-Pacific. countries was held in Port Moresby on 8 August 1984, The                    
 Indian delegation was led by Shri A. A. Rahim, the then Minister of                       
 State for External Affairs. The Meeting discussed political and                           
 economic issues of common concern to the Asia- Pacific region. The                        
 Meeting stressed the importance of paying particular attention to the                     
 needs and aspirations of small States which are especially vulnerable                     
 to the vagaries of the current international political, social and                        
 economic order. The Commonwealth Senior Officials Meeting was held in                     
 Barbados on 12- 14 December 1984. The Indian delegation was led by the                    
 then Secretary (ER) in the Ministry of External Affairs, Shri Romesh                      
 Bhandari. The Meeting reviewed the piogress in the implementation of                      
 decisions taken at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting held in                   
 New Delhi in November 1983, and discussed arrangements for the                            
 forthcoming CHOGM scheduled to be held in the Bahamas in October 1985.                    
                                                                                           
 THE USSR AND EASTERN EUROPE                                                               
 India's friendly and cordial relations with the Soviet Union and other                    
 socialist countries of Eastern Europe developed satisfactorily during                     
 the year under review. The principal high level visit from India was                      
 that of late Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi to the Soviet Union                   
 on the occasion of the funeral of the late President Andropov in                          
 February 1984. The other major visit to Eastern Europe was by the                         
 Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Shri Balram Jakhar, who led a Parliamentary                     
 Delegation in June 1984 to the USSR, Bulgaria and the GDR.                                
                                                                                           
 During her visit to the Soviet Union, Shrimati Indira Gandhi paid her                     
 respect to the memory of President Andropov, and also had discussions                     
 with the newly elected General Secretary of the CPSU Central Committee,                   
 Mr. K. U. Chernenko. The exchange of views on bilateral relations as                      
 well as important international issues were continued at other levels                     
 during the period under review.                                                           
                                                                                           
 Indo-Soviet trade and economic co-operation continued to grow during                      
 the period under review. There was a high turnover. of bilateral trade                    
 during 1984. The Trade Plan for 1985 provides for a 20 per cont                           
 increase in turnover. An important event in bilateral economic                            
 relations was the successful Indian National Exhibition in Moscow                         
 -30>                                                                                      
 organised by TFAI in Moscow in August-September 1984. The former                          
 Minister of Industry represented India at the exhibition, which gave a                    
 comprehensive view of the Indian industry and economy and also led to                     
 mutually beneficial commercial transactions. There was fruitful                           
 interaction in several other sectors of the economy in which India and                    
 the Soviet Union are co-operating. The Minister of State for Steel &                      
 Mines visited Moscow in July 1984 and had discussions with his Soviet                     
 counterpart. Working groups under the Joint Commission in the sectors                     
 of machine building, coal, petroleum and commerce met as scheduled                        
 during the year under review. Co-operation also extended to fields such                   
 as environment. A bilateral Convention on the Protection of Migratory                     
 Birds was signed in Moscow in October 1984. The 25th anniversary of the                   
 commissioning of the Bhilai Steel Plant was celebrated in February                        
 1984. A high level delegation led by Soviet Deputy Premier Mr. V. E.                      
 Dymshits and including Soviet Minister of Construction of Heavy                           
 Industry Enterprises, Mr. N. V. Goldin, and Chairman of the Soviet                        
 State Committee for Foreign Economic Relations, Mr. Ryabov, visited                       
 India on the occasion.                                                                    
                                                                                           
 Another notable event in Indo-Soviet co-operation was the Joint space                     
 venture which took place in April 1984.                                                   
 Other leading visitors from India to the Soviet Union during the period                   
 under review were the Minister of Defence, the Minister of State for                      
 External Affairs, the Minister of State for Commerce and Deputy                           
 Minister for Information and Broadcasting.                                                
 The Soviet Defence Minister, Marshal Ustinov, visited India in March                      
 1984. His programme included talks with the Minister of External                          
 Affairs.                                                                                  
                                                                                           
 India also hosted a delegation led by the Vice-President of the                           
 Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR and the President of the                      
 Estonian SSR, Mr. Arnold F. Ruitel, who came to attend our Independence                   
 Day Celebrations. This visit was in response to the invitation by the                     
 Friends of the Soviet Union.                                                              
 After the general elections and the formation of the new Government in                    
 India, the Soviet leadership sent a message of congratulations to the                     
 Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi. The message reiterated the Soviet                      
 desire to further strengthen Indo- Soviet friendship and co-operation.                    
                                                                                           
 The Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Shri Balram Jakhar, led an Indian                           
 Parliamentary Delegation to Bulgaria in June 1984. The 40th Anniversary                   
 of the Bulgarian People's Republic was attended by an official                            
 delegation from India led by the Minister of State for Energy, Shri                       
 Arif Mohammed Khan, in September 1984. The Seventh                                        
 -31>                                                                                      
 Indo-Bulgarian Joint Commission met in New Delhi in October 1984. The                     
 Bulgarian side was led by the Member of the Politbureau of the Central                    
 Committee of the Bulgarian Communist Party and Minister of Machine                        
 Building, Mr. O. Doinov. The leader of the Indian side was the Minister                   
 for Agriculture, Shri Rao Birendra Singh. The discussions during this                     
 meeting included a review of trade and economic co-operation and                          
 measures for growth.                                                                      
                                                                                           
 The Prime Minister of Czechoslovakia, Mr. L. S. Strougal, paid an                         
 official visit to India in February 1984. He had talks with the Prime                     
 Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi on bilateral relations and the                           
 international situation. The visit also provided an opportune occasion                    
 for a review of bilateral economic relations, including measures to                       
 facilitate their expansion. The 11th meeting of the Indo-Czechoslovak                     
 Joint Commission for Economic, Scientific and Technical Co-operation                      
 was held in May 1984 in New Delhi. The Czechoslovak side was led by                       
 their Minister of Foreign Trade, Mr. Bohumil Urban. The Minister of                       
 Commerce, Shri V. P. Singh, led the Indian side.                                          
                                                                                           
 The Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Shri Balram Jakhar, led an Indian                           
 Parliamentary Delegation to the GDR in June 1984. Regular exchanges                       
 with the GDR in the economic field also continued to take place during                    
 the year under review. The Trade Plan for 1985 was signed in Berlin in                    
 December 1984.                                                                            
                                                                                           
 The Deputy Prime Minister of Hungary, Mr. Istvan Sarlos, visited India                    
 in April 1984. His visit coincided with the bicentenary celebrations of                   
 the Hungarian scholar, Alexander Korosi Csoma. Mr. Sarlos called on the                   
 President and the Prime Minister of India during his visit, and                           
 exchanged views on bilateral relations and the international situation.                   
 Indo- Hungarian trade and economic co-operation was also the subject of                   
 discussions between experts and officials of the two countries.                           
                                                                                           
 A Polish Parliamentary Delegation, led by Marshal of the Polish Sejm                      
 (Parliament), Mr. Stanislaw Gucwa, visited India in March 1984. The                       
 visit coincided with the 30th Anniversary of the establishment of                         
 diplomatic relations between India and Poland. Measures for identifying                   
 and expanding Indo-Polish trade and economic co-operation were also                       
 discussed at different levels. The meeting of the Indo-Polish Working                     
 Group on Coal held in November 1984 contributed to this objective. The                    
 Indo-Polish Trade Plan for 1985 was signed in Warsaw in November 1984.                    
 An agreement for co-operation in Health was concluded.                                    
 -32>                                                                                      
 An official Indian delegation led by the then Minister of State in the                    
 Ministry of External Affairs, Shri A.A. Rahim, visited Romania in                         
 August 1984 to participate in the 40th Anniversary celebrations of the                    
 founding of the Romanian Socialist Republic. During the visit, the                        
 delegation was received by the Romanian President, Mr. Ceausescu. The                     
 Indo-Romanian Joint Commission for Economic, Scientific and Technical                     
 Co-operation held its 7th meeting in Bucharest in February 1984. The                      
 Indian delegation was led by the Minister of Commerce, Shri V. P.                         
 Singh. The Minister for Metallurgy, Mr. Nicolai Agachi led the Romanian                   
 side. The session provided an opportunity for an indepth review of                        
 economic co-operation in diverse fields and for examining means of                        
 increasing co-operation.                                                                  
                                                                                           
 The President of the Presidency of Yugoslavia, Mr. Veselin Djuranovic,                    
 along with a high-level delegation, paid a State visit to India in                        
 August 1984. In his meetings with President Giani Zail Singh and the                      
 Prime Minister Shrimati Indira Gandhi, the Yugoslav President had                         
 extensive discussions on bilateral issues as well as on the activity of                   
 India and Yugoslavia in the Non-Aligned Movement. The visit also                          
 provided a suitable occasion for an indepth review of Indo-Yugoslav                       
 economic co-operation and trade. Concrete measures to ensure growth in                    
 Indo-Yugoslav economic relations were identified.                                         
                                                                                           
 The Soviet Union and other socialist countries of Eastern Europe                          
 expressed their grief and shock at the tragic assassination of Shrimati                   
 Indira Gandhi. Messages of condolence were received from the leaders of                   
 all these countries. Tributes were paid to Shrimati Indira Gandhi's                       
 achievements as an outstanding national leader and international                          
 figure, her role as Chairperson of the Non-Aligned Movement, and her                      
 great contributions to peace and international Co-operation. The Soviet                   
 delegation was led by Prime Minister, N. Tikhonov who also called on                      
 our President and the Prime Minister. The Presidents of Bulgaria,                         
 Poland and Yugoslavia also visited India on this occasion and had talks                   
 with our leaders. The GDR was represented by President of the People's                    
 Chamber and Member of the Politburo, Mr. Horst Sinderman, and                             
 Czechoslovakia by Prime Minister Strougal. The Vice-Presidents of                         
 Hungary and Romania represented their countries at the funeral                            
 ceremony. During the discussions held between the visiting dignitaries                    
 and our leaders, there was a reaffirmation of mutual commitment to                        
 friendship and co- operation.                                                             
 -33>                                                                                      
 THE AMERICAS NORTH AMERICA                                                                
                                                                     Top                   
 During the year under review, India made efforts for better relations                     
 with the USA; high-level bilateral contacts were maintained, although                     
 the perception of the two countries on various issues remained                            
 different.                                                                                
                                                                                           
 The single most important factor which generated friction between the                     
 two countries was the continued supply of sophisticated arms by the USA                   
 to Pakistan. India repeatedly impressed upon the US Government                            
 officials that the supply of sophisticated arms to Pakistan would have                    
 an adverse effect upon Indo-US relations. The USA also tended to                          
 encourage an arms race on the sub-continent which created tension and                     
 thereby jeopardised the normalisation of relations between Pakistan and                   
 India.                                                                                    
                                                                                           
 Many extremist leaders operating from the United States supported the                     
 so-called "Khalistan Movement" in India. Such extremist elements                          
 disturbed the Indian Independence Day celebrations in the United States                   
 and also harassed and hurled abuse on the Indian team during the Los                      
 Angeles Olympic Games. India's repeated insistence that such activity                     
 was detrimental to Indo-US relations had little effect, although it was                   
 noted that the proposed Congressional hearings on Punjab to be held by                    
 the Sub-Committee for Asia and Pacific Affairs and the Human Rights                       
 Committee of the US Congress were first postponed and later cancelled.                    
 The Government of India also deeply appreciated the role of the US                        
 Government in the termination of the hijacking of an Indian Airlines                      
 Boeing-737 at Dubai. The Prime Minister conveyed our appreciation to                      
 President Reagan.                                                                         
                                                                                           
 The Bhopal gas tragedy, involving an American multinational firm Union                    
 Carbide, created controversy, and the legal and other ramifications of                    
 the tragedy are presently under study.                                                    
                                                                                           
 Indo-US economic and commercial relations grew during 1984. The third                     
 Indo-US Sub-Commission meeting on Agriculture was held in January 1984                    
 and the 9th meeting of Indo-US Business Council took place in November                    
 1984. India also accepted the invitation of NASA to include an Indian                     
 scientist in the US space shuttle mission.                                                
 -34>                                                                                      
 Negotiations for the conclusion of a Memorandum on the transfer of high                   
 technology between the two countries were also undertaken. A Memorandum                   
 of Understanding has been initialled and is awaiting further processing                   
 by the two sides.                                                                         
                                                                                           
 During the period under review, a number of visits took place between                     
 the two countries. The Chairman of the Policy Planning Committee, Shri                    
 G. Parthasarathi, the Foreign Secretary as well as other officials of                     
 the Government of India visited the USA. Among the visitors from the                      
 USA were Vice-President, George Bush, a 5-member Congressional                            
 delegation, as also five Senators in November 1984. The US Secretary of                   
 State, Mr. George Shultz, led a high-powered delegation from the United                   
 States to attend the funeral of Shrimati Gandhi. Towards the end of the                   
 year, the Chairman of the Congressional Sub-Committee on Asia,                            
 Congressman Stephen Solarz, visited India to see for himself the                          
 effects of the Bhopal gas tragedy.                                                        
 The President of the United States sent a warm message of                                 
 congratulations to the Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, on his                          
 assuming the Prime Ministership and for the election victory. The US                      
 President said that the recent free and vigorous elections in India and                   
 the United States have re-affirmed the shared commitment to democratic                    
 institutions and traditions between the two countries.                                    
                                                                                           
 Relations between India and Canada continued to be cordial. However, in                   
 the wake of the army's entry into the Golden Temple, "Khalistani"                         
 activities have been on the increase in Canada. There have been                           
 numerous cases of demonstrations, forced entry of the Missions'                           
 premises and cases of violence. These have taken place mostly in                          
 Ottawa, Toronto and Vancouver, where Indian Missions are located. The                     
 activities of these "Khalistanis" finally culminated in an attempt on                     
 our Acting High Commissioner on 18 July 1984 at Winnipeg. The Canadian                    
 Government rather belatedly issued a statement regretting attacks                         
 against Indian property and diplomats.                                                    
                                                                                           
 The news of Smt. Indira Gandhi's death was received with widespread                       
 grief in Canada. The Canadian delegation was led by their Secretary of                    
 State for External Affairs and included the Chief Justice of Canada and                   
 representatives from various provinces, including some provincial                         
 Ministers. The Canadian Prime Minister, Mr. Brian Mulroney, conveyed                      
 his deepest sympathy to Shri Rajiv Gandhi and other family members and                    
 reaffirmed that "Canada is determined to maintain close and cordial                       
 relations with the world's most populous democracy."                                      
                                                                                           
 Indo-Canadian Air Talks were held in New Delhi in May-June 1984.                          
 Discussions focused on the exchange of additional traffic rights,                         
 capacity provision and related matters. The Indian side expressed its                     
 interest in access to Toronto and intermediate and beyond rights for                      
 its designated airline. At the Bilateral Air Talks held in Ottawa on 15                   
 October 1984, these rights were conferred on Air India.                                   
 -35>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 An index of the Canadian interest in India as a market has been the                       
 growth in the exchange of visits both of an official and of a                             
 commercial nature. In February 1984 the Minister of International Trade                   
 of Canada, Mr. Gerald Reagan, paid a visit to India to support the                        
 efforts of an increasing number of Canadian industries seeking new                        
 opportunities for industrial co-operation with India. An eleven member                    
 Canadian industrial delegation arrived in New Delhi for the                               
 Canada-India Joint Business Council meeting under the auspices of FICCI                   
 on 22 May 1984. Premier Pawley of Canada's Manitoba province led an                       
 Economic Mission to India from 24 to 28 October 1984. The delegation                      
 sought to promote awareness of investment opportunities in Manitoba                       
 focussing on the development of its energy and potash reserves and the                    
 potential for various components of proposed aluminium projects.                          
                                                                                           
 A Canadian Parliamentary delegation led by the Chairman of the Canadian                   
 branch of Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, the Hon'ble Minister                    
 Mr. Louis Desmaranis, MP, visited India in April 1984. The Commonwealth                   
 Finance Ministers met in Toronto from 18 to 20 September 1984 and the                     
 Indian delegation was led by the Finance Minister. Major-General R. S.                    
 Sparrow visited Vancouver on 9 October 1984 and briefed Canadian                          
 officials and MPs about developments in Punjab.                                           
                                                                                           
 CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN                                               
 India's relations with the countries of Central and South America and                     
 the Caribbean were marked by greater interest to increased                                
 co-operation. A number of visits took place and several agreements were                   
 signed during the period under review.                                                    
                                                                                           
 The major event was the State visit of the Indian President to Mexico                     
 and Argentina in April 1984, the first visit by an Indian Head of State                   
 to Latin America. The President also met the President of Peru during a                   
 re-fuelling halt in Lima.                                                                 
 It was agreed that the six-nation disarmament summit to be held in                        
 January 1985 in New Delhi would be attended by the Presidents of                          
 Argentina and Mexico, who would also be paying State visits to India at                   
 the end of that month.                                                                    
                                                                                           
 During the visit of the President of India to Mexico, letters were                        
 exchanged for the renewal of the bilateral Agreement on Co- operation                     
 in Science and Technology and to extend the current Cultural Exchange                     
 Programme till the signing of the new programme in 1985.                                  
                                                                                           
 A six-member delegation led by the Health Minister, Shri B.                               
 Shankaranand, attended the International Population Conference in                         
 Mexico in August 1984.                                                                    
 -36>                                                                                      
 In September 1984, a delegation led by the Secretary (East) Shri K.                       
 Natwar Singh, visited Mexico for the first Indo-Mexican Joint                             
 Commission meeting. The Joint Commission discussed recent developments                    
 and economic prospects in the context of the present world economic                       
 situation, steps for establishment of a new international economic                        
 order and for increased bilateral trade and closer co-operation in the                    
 areas of industry, energy, finance, transport and tourism.                                
                                                                                           
 Dr. Octavio Paz, a poet of international stature and a former                             
 Ambassador of Mexico to India, who was invited to deliver the Nehru                       
 Memorial Lecture, visited India.                                                          
                                                                                           
 Argentina's Vice Foreign Minister, Mr. Oscar Yuinovsky, visited India                     
 in March 1984 as a Special Envoy of the Argentine President.                              
                                                                                           
 The Economic Adviser to the President of Argentina, Dr. Raul Prebisch,                    
 visited India in September 1984 in connection with the first meeting of                   
 the Indo-Argentine Joint Trade Committee. A wide range of subjects                        
 including trade, commerce, shipping and co- operation in various fields                   
 were reviewed.                                                                            
                                                                                           
 An Agreement on Economic Co-operation between India and Argentina was                     
 initialled by the Secretary (ER), Shri Romesh Bhandari, and Dr. Raul                      
 Prebisch, and signed during President Alfonsin's visit to India in                        
 January 1985. Earlier an Agreement between the Shipping Corporation of                    
 India and the National Shipping Lines (ELMA) of Argentina providing for                   
 shipping services between the two countries was signed during our                         
 President's visit to Argentina. This Agreement is likely to overcome                      
 the major obstacle to trade between India and South America.                              
                                                                                           
 The Deputy Minister of Education and Culture and Social Welfare, Shri                     
 P. K. Thungon, visited Venezuela for the signing of the first Cultural                    
 Agreement between the two countries.                                                      
                                                                                           
 The Foreign Minister of Brazil, Mr. Ramiro Saraiva Guerreiro, paid an                     
 official visit to India in March 1984, the first high- level bilateral                    
 visit by a Brazilian dignitary since India's Independence.                                
                                                                                           
 Jamaica's Minister for Youth and Community Development, Mr. Edmund                        
 Bartlett, visited India in February 1984 to attend the International                      
 Exposition of Rural Development.                                                          
 -37>                                                                                      
 A 30-member Colombian Industrial Delegation visited India in May 1984.                    
 Justice (Mrs.) Jean Permanand of the Supreme Court of Trinidad and                        
 Tobago visited India in September 1984.                                                   
 The Deputy Foreign Minister of Cuba, Dr. Pelegrin Torras, visited India                   
 in November 1984 for official discussions on international and                            
 bilateral matters.                                                                        
                                                                                           
 Representatives from Argentina, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Cuba,                          
 Dominica, Guyana, Mexico, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago visited                        
 India for the funeral of the late Prime Minister, Smt. Indira Gandhi.                     
 Among the dignitaries were, de facto President of Suriname, Mr. Ramdat                    
 Misier, the Vice-President of Argentina, Dr. Victor Martinez, the Prime                   
 Minister and first Vice-President of Guyana, Mr. H. D. Hoyte, the                         
 Foreign Minister of Barbados, Mr. Louis Tull, Senator and former Deputy                   
 Prime Minister of Belize, Mr. C. L. B. Rogers, Politburo Member of                        
 Cuba, Mr. Juan Almeide Bosque, the Minister for Culture of Nicaragua,                     
 Mr. Ernestro Cardenal, the Minister of Agriculture of Trinidad and                        
 Tobago, Mr. Kamaluddin Mohammad and the Minister of State for                             
 International Economic Relations of Venezula, Mr. Manuel Perez                            
 Guerrero. Bahamas, Jamaica and Mexico were represented by their                           
 Ambassadors to the United Nations, USA, and UN respectively. Brazil,                      
 Chile, Colombia and Peru were represented by their Ambassadors in New                     
 Delhi.                                                                                    
                                                                                           
 Uncertainty and tension continued to exist in the region of Central                       
 America and the threat to peace in the area, particularly in Nicaragua,                   
 was the subject of discussion in international fora.                                      
                                                                                           
 The Prime Minister and Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement, Shri Rajiv                   
 Gandhi, issued on 14 November 1984, a statement on the Central American                   
 crisis, viewing with great concern the escalating tensions and threats                    
 of armed conflicts in the region, especially in and around Nicaragua.                     
 -38>                                                                                      
 UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES                                              
                                                                     Top                   
 During the period under review India continued to play its                                
 traditionally active and important role in multilateral fora,                             
 particularly at the United Nations. The significance of this role was                     
 enhanced further by virtue of India's Chairmanship of the Movement of                     
 Non-Aligned countries and its membership, since 1 January 1984, of the                    
 Security Council. Also during the period under review, India was once                     
 again elected a member of the Economic and Social Council. Thus, India                    
 was represented on each of the important principal organs of the                          
 Organisation. In addition, it remained a member of and participated                       
 actively in a number of subsidiary bodies of the General Assembly and                     
 the Economic and Social Council. A number of distinguished Indians were                   
 elected or remained members, in their individual capacity, of important                   
 UN bodies. Shri M. C. Bhandare, MP, was elected to the Sub-Committee                      
 for a 3-year term by the Human Rights Committee. Smt. Shanti Sadiq Ali                    
 was elected to the UN Committee on Elimination of All Forms of Racial                     
 Discrimination for another term of 4 years.                                               
                                                                                           
 The year 1985 will mark the 40th anniversary of the establishment of                      
 the United Nations, an event which will be commemorated at the United                     
 Nations and around the world, including India. Consistent with its own                    
 firm and abiding faith in the United Nations, of which it is a founder                    
 member, as also in its capacity as Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement                   
 (NAM), the Government of India felt that it would be appropriate for                      
 the Non-Aligned countries to take the lead in the preparations for and                    
 the actual observance of the anniversary. It would be recalled that, at                   
 their Seventh Summit held in New Delhi in March 1983, the late Prime                      
 Minister, Smt. Indira Gandhi had also reiterated that "firm faith in                      
 the United Nations is central to the Non-Aligned." Following India's                      
 active efforts to mobilise the NAM into playing a leading role with                       
 regard to the 40th anniversary of the UN, the Non-Aligned countries                       
 presented a draft resolution on the question in the Preparatory                           
 Committee established by the General Assembly for the purpose. For                        
 several weeks, the Indian delegation made intensive efforts to secure                     
 global consensus on the text. However, owing to the negative attitude                     
 adopted by certain countries outside the Movement, no consensus could                     
 be reached on the Non-Aligned draft and the Assembly could do no better                   
 than adopt a resolution of a procedural nature. However, the                              
 constructive role of the Non- Aligned countries, and of India as its                      
 Chairman in particular, was widely acknowledged. India and other                          
 Non-Aligned countries intend to take active part in the actual                            
 commemoration of the anniversary in 1985.                                                 
 -39>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 On 1 January 1984, India became a member of the Security Council,                         
 having been elected to a non-permanent seat in the body at the 38th                       
 session of the General Assembly. India has been a member of the Council                   
 in 1950-51, 1967-68, 1972-73, 1977-78 and is now a member for the fifth                   
 time, for the 1984-85 term. The importance of India's membership of the                   
 Council is enhanced by its concurrent Chairmanship of the Movement of                     
 Non-Aligned countries. During the period under review India                               
 participated constructively in the deliberations of the Security                          
 Council on the various issues of which the Council was seized. Apart                      
 from making a number of formal statements, India has been active in                       
 negotiating draft resolutions and in the continuous process of informal                   
 consultations with other members of the Council as well as the member                     
 States concerned with particular issues.                                                  
                                                                                           
 Political Issues                                                                          
 In all the three main fora dealing with disarmament issues, namely, the                   
 Conference on Disarmament, the UN Disarmament Commission, and the First                   
 Committee of the UN General Assembly, India continued to play an                          
 important role during the year under review. India firmly believes that                   
 in this nuclear age, disarmament is indispensable not only for world                      
 peace but for the very survival of mankind.                                               
                                                                                           
 Unfortunately, 1984 was characterised by little or no progress on                         
 disarmament issues and the prospects of a major break-through appeared                    
 to be bleak with accentuated distrust and increasing military                             
 competition particularly between the two major powers. Talks between                      
 the USA and USSR for limiting or reducing their nuclear arsenals,                         
 strategic as well as medium range, broke down and there was a stalemate                   
 at the Vienna talks on force reductions in Central Europe. At the                         
 Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, the main multilateral negotiating                    
 forum on disarmament, there was no forward movement on issues of                          
 nuclear disarmament.                                                                      
                                                                                           
 Substantial re-armament programmes, particularly in the nuclear weapon                    
 field, were initiated and the new threshold technologies which are                        
 being developed, will increase the risk of a nuclear catastrophe. At                      
 the same time there was growing public awareness of the pressing need                     
 for nuclear disarmament. The measure of concern felt by people                            
 throughout the world was reflected in the growth of peace movements.                      
                                                                                           
 Towards the latter half of the year contacts between the USA and USSR                     
 opened up the possibility of a resumption of arms negotiations between                    
 the two major nuclear weapon powers. The USSR Foreign Minister, Mr.                       
 Andrei Gromyko and the U.S. Secretary of State, Mr. George Shultz met                     
 in Geneva on January 7 and 8, 1985. India welcomed their decision to                      
 commence negotiations on a "complex of issues concerning space and                        
 nuclear arms, both strategic and intermediate range, with all the                         
 questions considered and resolved in their inter-relationship". India                     
 specially welcomed                                                                        
 -40>                                                                                      
 the affirmation by both the US and USSR that the objective of the                         
 forthcoming negotiations will be to work out effective agreements aimed                   
 at preventing an arms race in space and terminating it on earth,                          
 ultimately leading to the complete elimination of nuclear weapons.                        
                                                                                           
 India took the initiative in arousing the world conscience on the                         
 urgent need for nuclear disarmament and a resumption of the dialogue                      
 between the nuclear weapon states. The late Prime Minister, Shrimati                      
 Indira Gandhi, along with five other Heads of State issued a Joint                        
 Appeal to all nuclear weapon states. The appeal issued on 22 May 1984,                    
 was signed, apart from Shrimati Indira Gandhi, by Mr. Olaf Palme Prime                    
 Minister of Sweden, Mr. Julius Nyerere, President of Tanzania, Mr.                        
 Miguel de la Madrid, President of Mexico, and Dr. Raul Alfonsin,                          
 President of Argentina. It stressed that though it was primarily the                      
 responsibility of the nuclear weapon states to prevent nuclear                            
 catastrophe, this issue was too important to be left to the nuclear                       
 weapon powers alone. The appeal called on the nuclear weapon states to                    
 halt the testing, production and deployment of nuclear weapons and                        
 their delivery systems to be followed by a programme of arms reduction,                   
 leading to General and Complete Disarmament. It also urged measures to                    
 strengthen the United Nations system and to ensure urgently needed                        
 transfer of substantial resources from the arms race to social and                        
 economic development.                                                                     
                                                                                           
 The Appeal received extensive international support, and was endorsed                     
 by several governments, though the governments of some nuclear weapon                     
 powers expressed reservations on the measures suggested by the six                        
 leaders. The leaders of these six countries decided to meet in New                        
 Delhi in January, 1985 to consider ways to further their efforts. The                     
 Delhi Declaration adopted on 28th January, 1985, re-affirmed the appeal                   
 of May 1984. It, further, called for urgent steps to prevent an arms                      
 race in outer space and for concluding a comprehensive treaty                             
 prohibiting the testing of nuclear weapons. The six leaders have also                     
 discussed various follow-up measures.                                                     
                                                                                           
 In the Conference on Disarmament, India contributed to the on- going                      
 negotiations on an International Convention prohibiting chemical                          
 weapons and underlined the dangers posed by the extension of the arms                     
 race into outer space. In the United Nations Disarmament Commission,                      
 India played an important role in forging a consensus on a proposal to                    
 hold an International Conference to renew relationship between                            
 Disarmament and Development in all its aspects.                                           
                                                                                           
 As in previous years, India took important initiatives in the First                       
 Committee of the 39th General Assembly to promote disarmament. Draft                      
 resolutions were tabled on the Convention on Prohibition of the Use of                    
 Nuclear Weapons and on a Freeze on Nuclear Weapons. Both these                            
 resolutions were adopted by an overwhelming majority of the UN General                    
 Assembly. Another significant initiative taken by India was a proposal                    
 that a study be undertaken by a Group of Governmental Experts on                          
 Nuclear Deterrence, which in our view, has helped to fuel the nuclear                     
 arms race and has provided a justification for attempts to acquire                        
 military superiority.                                                                     
 -41>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 In all, 64 resolutions dealing with various issues on disarmament came                    
 up for vote, reflecting increasing public concern in this important                       
 question before the First Committee. India cosponsored 16 and voted in                    
 favour of 31. As for resolutions pertaining to matters which, in the                      
 view of the Indian delegation, were not of immediate priority or which                    
 served to trivialise or defer the need to come to grips with the most                     
 essential question of nuclear disarmament, India held serious                             
 reservations. In explanation of its negative votes on two resolutions                     
 and abstentions on 21 others, India put forth the principled reasons                      
 behind its dissenting vote. In particular the recurrent initiative by                     
 Pakistan for setting up a Nuclear Weapon Free Zone in South Asia was                      
 opposed by India.                                                                         
                                                                                           
 Through active consultations with members of the. Non-Aligned group, it                   
 was possible to make a constructive contribution to the work of the                       
 First Committee.                                                                          
                                                                                           
 Apart from disarmament items, other political issues of continuing                        
 concern were South Africa, Namibia, Palestine, Central America, Cyprus                    
 and issues relating to Decolonisation. On the new items on the agenda,                    
 the important ones related to use of Outer Space exclusively for                          
 peaceful purposes for the benefit of mankind, and the inadmissibility                     
 of the policy of State Terrorism and any actions by States aimed at                       
 undermining the Socio- political systems in other sovereign States.                       
 Both these items were also inscribed at the request of the USSR.                          
                                                                                           
 The Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri R. N. Mirdha, made a                     
 comprehensive statement on 27 September 1984, during the general debate                   
 in the Plenary Session of the UN General Assembly, where he re-affirmed                   
 the undiminished faith of the Government and the people of India in the                   
 United Nations and its continued commitment to the purposes and                           
 principles enshrined in the UN Charter.                                                   
                                                                                           
 At the general debate which attracted 16 Heads of State/Government, in                    
 addition to Foreign Ministers and others, Disarmament and Development                     
 were recurring themes. The danger of a retreat from multilateralism,                      
 seen in the current US attitude towards international organisations,                      
 was strongly underlined by the delegations, which stressed the need to                    
 oppose such a trend.                                                                      
                                                                                           
 The situation in West Asia engaged the constant attention of the UN                       
 General Assembly and the Security Council during 1984. In pursuance of                    
 General Assembly resolution 38/58 C of the UN, the Secretary-General                      
 addressed communications to member States proposing a "Plan of Action",                   
 and ascertaining views on issues relevant to the organisation and                         
 convening of the International Peace Conference on the Middle East.                       
 While most States responded positively to the Secretary-General's                         
 communications, the response of the US and Israel was in the negative.                    
 Others like UK, France and Netherlands indicated that the time was not                    
 ripe for the convening of such a Conference. In its response to the                       
 Secretary-General's communication, the Government of India conveyed its                   
 broad agreement with the Plan of Action proposed by the 3 EA/84-8                         
 -42>                                                                                      
 Secretary-General. It was stressed that the situation in West Asia did                    
 not brook any delay and urgent preparatory measures should be                             
 undertaken so that the Conference could be convened at the earliest                       
 possible.                                                                                 
                                                                                           
 Formal meetings of the Security Council were held to consider the                         
 situation in Lebanon and in the occupied Palestinian and Arab                             
 territories. The Council approved the extension of the mandates of                        
 UNIFIL and UNDOF. In the Council's informal consultations on these                        
 varied issues, India played an active and important role to work out                      
 consensus and compromise formulations. Statements reflecting views of                     
 the Government of India, as well as the position of the Movement of                       
 Non-Nigned countries, were made by the Indian representative on several                   
 occasions.                                                                                
                                                                                           
 The General Assembly adopted seven resolutions on the two items : "the                    
 Question of Palestine," and the "Situation in the Middle East,"                           
 cosponsored by India and several other Non-Aligned countries. The                         
 resolutions were along the lines of previous resolutions on the subject                   
 adopted by the General Assembly.                                                          
                                                                                           
 As in the previous years, a number of Arab, and other Islamic and                         
 Socialist countries, sent a joint communication recording reservations                    
 on the credentials of the delegation of Israel and voicing indignation                    
 over Israels' flagrant and persistent violation of the principles of                      
 international law and the UN Charter. However, an Iranian amendment to                    
 the Report of the Credentials Committee seeking the rejection of the                      
 credentials of Israel was not accepted by the General Assembly. The                       
 Indian representative drew attention to the sense of indignation and                      
 outrage of the overwhelming majority of the member States of the UN and                   
 the international community in general, over the continued and defiant                    
 refusal of Israel, in violation of its Charter obligations, to comply                     
 with relevant UN resolutions. He placed on record India's historic and                    
 consistent support for the people of Palestine and the Arab cause.                        
                                                                                           
 The period under review saw no progress towards the attainment of                         
 independence by Namibia, which remains the last colonial territory on                     
 the African continent, occupied illegally by the racist regime of South                   
 Africa. As Vice-President and founder member of the United Nations                        
 Council for Namibia, the legal administering authority of the territory                   
 until Independence, India continued to participate actively in the work                   
 of the Council. A high-level mission of the Council, led by its                           
 President, visited New Delhi from 16 to 18 May 1984 for consultations                     
 with the Chairperson of the NAM. The Indian delegation also took an                       
 active part in drafting the resolutions on Namibia, for submission to                     
 the General Assembly at its 39th session.                                                 
                                                                                           
 During consideration of the question of Namibia in the General                            
 Assembly, specifically, of three of the five draft resolutions                            
 submitted by the Council for Namibia which made critical references to                    
 the US, the USA submitted eleven amendments seeking to delete such                        
 references. None of the US amendments secured the requisite majority                      
 and the original resolutions were adopted by large majorities.                            
 -43>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 The tumult within South Africa, stemming from attempts by the racist                      
 regime to consolidate the system of apartheid, found reflection at the                    
 United Nations throughout the year, both in the Security Council and                      
 the General Assembly, as well as in the Special Committee against                         
 Apartheid. The Indian delegation played a leading role in the Security                    
 Council, which met twice in August 1984 in the context of the                             
 fraudulent elections carried out by South Africa on the basis of                          
 so-called constitutional reforms. On these occasions, the Council                         
 adopted resolutions 554 and 556 respectively each cosponsored by India                    
 and the seven other Non- Aligned members of the Council. India                            
 similarly participated actively in the deliberations of the Security                      
 Council Committee, established under resolution 421 (1977) to monitor                     
 the arms embargo against South Africa, which had met to consider a                        
 Netherlands sponsored initiative to ban import of armaments from South                    
 Africa; through its constructive participation in the discussions on                      
 the item among the Non-Aligned caucus, the Indian delegation helped to                    
 ensure that the resolution adopted by the Security Council in December                    
 1984 on the subject served to reinforce, and not detract from, the                        
 original arms embargo imposed against South Africa in 1977.                               
                                                                                           
 The Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid paid an                           
 official visit to India from 27 to 30 August 1984 for consultations                       
 with the Government of India and Chairperson of NAM. A mission of Women                   
 leaders was also sent to India in September 1984 by the Special                           
 Committee upon the recommendation of the Task Force on Women and                          
 Children. During the year under review, the representative of India on                    
 the Committee continued to chair the Task Force on Political Prisoners.                   
 India is also a member of the Advisory Committee of the UN Educational                    
 and Training Programme for Southern Africa.                                               
 The debate on the question of Apartheid in the 39th Session of the                        
 General Assembly was based mainly on the Report of the Special                            
 Committee against Apartheid, in the preparation of which India played                     
 an active role. Seven resolutions were drafted by the Special Committee                   
 ; six of these were adopted by a large majority vote, with a number of                    
 Western countries either voting against or abstaining. India, which                       
 cosponsored most of the resolutions, voted in favour of all of them.                      
                                                                                           
 The tense and volatile situation in Central America continued to evoke                    
 serious concern world-wide during the period under review. The Security                   
 Council was called into session on three occasions in 1984 to take up a                   
 Nicaraguan complaint of interference and intervention from outside                        
 quarters. The mining of Nicaraguan ports and harbours was the subject                     
 of a provisional order by the International Court of Justice in May                       
 1984, a month after the United States had vetoed a draft resolution in                    
 the Security Council, which had sought to call for an immediate end to                    
 such mining of ports and to affirm the right of free navigation and                       
 commerce in international waters. In November 1984, there were renewed                    
 and repeated violations of Nicaraguan airspace and territorial waters,                    
 leading to a dramatic escalation in the level of tension, causing the                     
 Security Council to convene once again. The efforts of the Contadora                      
 Group of                                                                                  
 -44>                                                                                      
 countries (Columbia, Mexico, Panama and Venezuela) to find a negotiated                   
 settlement to the problems of the region initially made significant                       
 headway in the form of the revised Contadora Act on Peace and                             
 Co-operation in Central America of 8 September 1984. Nicaraguan agreed                    
 to accept the Act in its entirety, without reservations. The evolution                    
 of the attitude of some of the States of the region towards the                           
 Contadora Act and its subsequent results have caused some anxiety. In                     
 its deliberations on the question in October 1984, the General Assembly                   
 adopted by consensus a resolution expressing support to Contadora.                        
                                                                                           
 Throughout the period under review, India kept abreast of the situation                   
 and remained in close touch with the parties concerned, particularly as                   
 Chairman of NAM. In the Security Council and the General Assembly, the                    
 Indian delegation took an active interest in the deliberations on the                     
 situation in Central America and pressed for a political and negotiated                   
 solution, expressing full support for the Contadora Group.                                
                                                                                           
 International attention continued to focus on the question of Cyprus.                     
 The unilateral declaration of independence by the Turkish Cypriot                         
 community on 15 November 1983 had seriously affected prospects of a                       
 settlement of this issue. The exchange of "Ambassadors" between Turkey                    
 and the so-called Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus and the                             
 announcement of elections to a Turkish Cypriot "Assembly" only                            
 exacerbated tensions. At the United Nations, the Security Council met                     
 from 3 to 11 May 1984 to take stock of the situation created by the                       
 non-implementation of its earlier resolution 541 (1983). India                            
 participated actively in these deliberations, taking part in the debate                   
 on the question and cosponsoring the draft resolution ultimately                          
 adopted as SCR- 550 (1984).                                                               
                                                                                           
 Also during the period under review, the Commonwealth Action Group on                     
 Cyprus (consisting of Australia, Guyana, India, Nigeria and Zambia)                       
 held five meetings and took stock of the evolving situation.                              
                                                                                           
 The United Nations once again considered the question of Afghanistan                      
 and adopted a resolution similar to the one adopted in 1983, by 119                       
 votes in favour, 20 against and 14 abstentions. India, as in previous                     
 years, abstained. The Indian delegate once again stressed the need to                     
 prevent escalation of tensions in the region and to take effective                        
 action to defuse them. He urged all concerned to work for the evolution                   
 of a political solution based on a dialogue between the parties                           
 directly involved.                                                                        
                                                                                           
 The situation in Kampuchea also received attention in the General                         
 Assembly. While a number of delegations, including India, expressed                       
 their reservations on the credentials of "Democratic Kampuchea", there                    
 was a formal move in the General Assembly to challenge its credentials.                   
 Vietnam and the socialist countries, however, refrained from                              
 participating in a "unilateral" debate which would hamper efforts to                      
 bring about national reconciliation. The substantive resolution on                        
 Kampuchea was adopted by 110 votes in favour, 22 against and 18                           
 abstentions. India abstained on the ground that the adoption of a                         
 resolution that satisfied only one side, would obstruct                                   
 -45>                                                                                      
 rather than encourage constructive contacts. India advocated a                            
 comprehensive political solution, based on the principles and framework                   
 accepted by the Seventh Non-Aligned Summit in Delhi.                                      
                                                                                           
 The prospects for convening a Conference on the Indian Ocean receded                      
 further when the UN General Assembly adopted by consensus a resolution                    
 requesting the Ad hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean "to complete                          
 preparatory work relating to the Conference on the Indian Ocean in                        
 1985, in order to enable the opening of the Conference at Colombo                         
 thereafter at the earliest date in the first half of 1986 to be decided                   
 by the Committee in consultation with the host country". The Western                      
 powers maintained that there was no possibility of convening a                            
 Conference, unless there was an improvement in the political and                          
 security climate in the region. In addition, they wanted the Adhoc                        
 Committee to harmonise views with regard to the concept of the Zone of                    
 Peace, the objectives of the Conference and the remaining issues. The                     
 resolution, prepared after months of intensive negotiations, followed                     
 the pattern of the resolution adopted in 1983 since the Western Powers                    
 held on to their inflexible position. During the debate on this item at                   
 the 39th UN General Assembly, the Indian representative stated "India                     
 attaches great importance to the early convening of the Conference on                     
 the Indian Ocean as a necessary step for the implementation of the                        
 declaration adopted in 1971...."                                                          
                                                                                           
 For the second year in succession the General Assembly considered the                     
 question of Antarctica. The debate revealed widespread concern among                      
 the developing countries on the question. Some countries stressed that                    
 Antarctica was a common heritage of mankind and required a new regime.                    
 On the other hand, the Treaty powers highlighted the positive role of                     
 the Treaty and stressed that the Antarctica Treaty regime has preserved                   
 international peace and security, promoted peaceful co-operation and                      
 scientific research in the area, reconciled conflicting territorial                       
 claims and maintained the area as a nuclear free zone. The General                        
 Assembly adopted a procedural resolution by consensus which expressed                     
 appreciation to the Secretary-General for the study on "The Question of                   
 Antarctica" and decided to include in the provisional agenda of its                       
 40th session an item on Antarctica. The resolution was the result of                      
 intensive negotiations between Malaysia and the Antarctica Treaty                         
 Consultative Parties (ATCP). India, as Chairman of NAM and as an ATCP,                    
 played a constructive role in the deliberations and contributed                           
 significantly to the evolution of an acceptable consensus.                                
                                                                                           
 The debate on the agenda item dealing with the Iran-Iraq conflict was                     
 once again postponed to a resumed session, in consultation with the                       
 parties concerned. The on-going hostilities between Iran and Iraq,                        
 however, engaged the attention of the Security Council during 1984.                       
                                                                                           
 Upon a complaint by the Gulf States, the Security Council met to                          
 consider the situation arising from attacks on ships in the Gulf and                      
 adopted resolution 522 (1984) which condemned the attacks on commercial                   
 shipping en route to and from the ports                                                   
 -46>                                                                                      
 of Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, called upon all States to respect the right                   
 of free navigation. As a country with friendly relations with both Iran                   
 and Iraq, India played a key role in the Council's informal                               
 consultations in evolving balanced formulations.                                          
                                                                                           
 India has traditionally attached great importance to decolonisation,                      
 and has participated actively in the deliberations and activities of                      
 the United Nations with regard to decolonisation issues. Mention has                      
 already been made of India's role in promoting the Namibian cause.                        
 During the period under review, India took an active part in the                          
 deliberations of the Special Committee on Decolonisation, of which it                     
 is a member since the Committee's inception; the Committee has been                       
 entrusted by the General Assembly with the task of keeping under                          
 constant review thq situation in the non-self-governing-territories                       
 (the number of which has now dwindled to about a dozen) and of guiding                    
 the political and socio-economic evolution of their peoples towards                       
 selfdetermination. At the 39th session of the UN General Assembly,                        
 India cosponsored two resolutions on decolonisation.                                      
                                                                                           
 It is pertinent to mention in this context that 1985 will also mark the                   
 25th anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1514 (XV), containing                      
 the Historic Declaration on Decolonisation. India has participated                        
 actively in the process or planning for the commemoration of this                         
 event. During the consideration of the observance of the 40th                             
 anniversary of the UN in the General Assembly, at its 39th session,                       
 India tabled a draft resolution, on behalf of the NAM, which expressed                    
 the collective desire of the Assembly that 2he activities in connection                   
 with the 40th anniversary of the UN should also appropriately reflect                     
 the fact that the 25th anniversary of resolution 1514 would also fall                     
 in 1985; the resolution was adopted by a large majority.                                  
                                                                                           
 The meeting of the Board of Governors and the 28th Regular Session of                     
 the General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)                   
 were held in Vienna in June and September 1984 respectively. At this                      
 Session India was once again designated as one of the nine globally                       
 most advanced countries in nuclear technology for membership on IAEA's                    
 Board of Governors. The General Conferenc. unanimously approved a                         
 resolution amending Article VI.A. I of the Statute which enabled the                      
 provisional entry of the People's Republic of China into the Board of                     
 Governors as its tenth globally most advanced member, pending                             
 ratification of amendment. India's status as one of the nine globally                     
 most advanced countries remains unchanged. The General Conference also                    
 adopted with large majorities, important resolutions on South Africa's                    
 nuclear capabilities, the consequences of the Israeli military attack                     
 on the Iraqi Nuclear Research Reactor and the standing threat of a                        
 similar attack with its implications for the development of nuclear                       
 energy for peaceful purposes; the role and activities of the                              
 International Atomic Energy Agency, financing of safeguards etc. The                      
 Chairman of Department of Atomic Energy made a statement at the General                   
 Confereace, wherein he advocated the return of the Agency to its                          
 original purposes as envisaged in the Statute and highlighted the                         
 urgent need for increasing the promotional aspects of the work within                     
 the Agency and criticised the growing restrictions of various kinds                       
 -47>                                                                                      
 which were being successively introduced on the peaceful programmes for                   
 use of atomic energy by developing countries. His statement received                      
 wide appreciation. India continued to maintain its principled position                    
 on issues such as Nuclear Non- Proliferation Treaty and full scope                        
 safeguards.                                                                               
                                                                                           
 India played a major role in ensuring the final resolution of                             
 outstanding problems on the agenda for the UN Conference for the                          
 Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear                   
 Energy.                                                                                   
                                                                                           
 The work of the Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPUOS) had                    
 ended in a stalemate over the question of militarisation of outer                         
 space. The US and the Western Group have taken the position that COPUOS                   
 did not have the mandate to discuss this question. The differences of                     
 opinion on this subject prevented the Committee from arriving at a                        
 consensus. An achievement of the 39th UN General Assembly Session lay                     
 in that it was able to accept a resolution on this subject by                             
 consensus, with all sides agreeing to implement the unanimous decisions                   
 of UNISPACE 1982. However, the effective functioning of COPUOS in the                     
 coming year remains a matter of concern to us.                                            
                                                                                           
 Economic Issues                                                                           
 On economic and financial issues, developments in the UN Forums, during                   
 the year under review, clearly reflected the continuing lack of                           
 political will on the part of industrialised countries to provide any                     
 concrete content to the North-South dialogue. On all important issues                     
 of trade, money and finance related to development, there was a                           
 demonstrable lack of will to utilise the multilateral processes to                        
 achieve economic growth. This was amply illustrated in the exercise on                    
 Review and Appraisal of the IDS as well as at UNIDO-IV. The main thrust                   
 of the effort on the part of some of these industrialised countries had                   
 been to stress that there was no "global economic crisis," and that                       
 developing countries must adapt their economies towards more                              
 marketoriented policies to take advantage of the recovery in the                          
 economies of the United States and other industrialised countries.                        
                                                                                           
 Notwithstanding the adverse conditions for negotiations, the Indian                       
 delegation played a leading role during the 39th session in preparing                     
 resolutions tabled on behalf of the Group of 77. Particular efforts                       
 were made to see that they reflected the concern and suggestions which                    
 had already been expressed in. the Economic Declaration adopted by the                    
 New Delhi Non-Aligned Summit. Several important resolutions,                              
 particularly on food and agriculture, and trade and development" could                    
 be negotiated successfully and were adopted by consensus. Some others,                    
 such as on industrial development co-operation, could not be negotiated                   
 and had to be voted mainly on account of the financial implications                       
 which they contained. India was able to successfully negotiate                            
 -48>                                                                                      
 a resolution on Development of Energy Resources of Developing                             
 Countries, both with the OPEC members of the Group of 77 as well as                       
 industrialised countries and the resolution was adopted by consensus.                     
 This resolution would give further impetus to the UN system's work in                     
 this area. India also played an important role in the negotiation of                      
 the resolutions on economic co-operation among Developing Countries and                   
 Operational Activities of the UN system, both of which were adopted by                    
 consensus. Another significant resolution that was adopted by consensus                   
 was the resolution regarding conversion of UNIDO into a specialised                       
 agency. This would set into motion the calendar which has been drawn up                   
 for completion of the process of conversion.                                              
                                                                                           
 Negotiations were most difficult in the area of money and finance. The                    
 leading industrialised countries have increasingly taken the position                     
 that these questions should be discussed only in the IMF and the World                    
 Bank and that the normal approach for negotiations should be to                           
 consider issues on a case by case basis. After prolonged negotiations                     
 it was decided to defer a decision on the International Conference on                     
 Money and Finance for Development till the next session of the                            
 General"Assembly. The objective is to continue efforts towards creating                   
 an environment conducive to holding such a conference.                                    
                                                                                           
 One of the most noteworthy features of the 39th General Assembly was                      
 the emphasis on the Critical Economic Situation in Africa. A                              
 Declaration on the subject was adopted by consensus. Although the                         
 African countries were mainly responsible for the negotiations of this                    
 Declaration, the Indian delegation was able to offer constructive                         
 suggestions and advice during informal consultations.                                     
 India also made several important statements on behalf of the                             
 Non-Aligned Movement on issues such as (i) Commemoration of the 10th                      
 Anniversary of the Adoption of the Charter of Economic Rights and                         
 Duties of States and (ii) World Food Day. The statements made in the                      
 Committee on different agenda items by the Indian Delegation were                         
 appreciated for their balance and content                                                 
                                                                                           
 The Fourth General Conference of the United Nations Industrial                            
 Development Organisation (UNIDO-IV) was held in Vienna from 2 to 20                       
 August 1984. As Chairman of the Group of 77 during the year in Vienna                     
 and also as Chairman of the Drafting Committee of the Plenary, India                      
 played a major part in the drafting of Chapeau and in maintaining the                     
 unity of the Group of 77. The outcome of the Conference, however, fell                    
 far short of the expectations of the developing countries. No new                         
 activities were approved. Nor was any expansion of existing activities                    
 allowed. This was largely due to the unhelpful attitude on the part of                    
 the developed countries towards committing themselves towards increased                   
 international co-operation.                                                               
                                                                                           
 The International Population Conference was held in Mexico in August                      
 1984. This major conference adopted useful recommendations for the                        
 implementation of the World Population Action and also issued a                           
 declaration on population and development.                                                
 -49>                                                                                      
 The Indian delegation, which was led by Shri B. Shankaranand, the then                    
 Minister of Health, took a very active part in the proceedings of the                     
 conference.                                                                               
                                                                                           
 India also played a leading role in the extraordinary session of the                      
 ICAO General Assembly held in Montreal from 24 April to 12 May 1984,                      
 which was convened to consider proposals for the amendment of the                         
 Chicago Convention following the downing of the Korean Air Lines                          
 passenger aircraft over Soviet airspace in August 1983. Largely due to                    
 the efforts of our delegation, the final amendments that were adopted                     
 by the Assembly made it possible to preserve the essential balance in                     
 the Convention between the two major constitutional principles of the                     
 sovereignty of state and the security of civil aviation.                                  
                                                                                           
 Through concerted efforts it was possible to ensure the establishment                     
 of one of the component centres of the International Centre for Genetic                   
 Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB) in New Delhi. India actively                        
 participated in the various preparatory committee meetings and the                        
 plenipotentiary meeting of ICGEB during the year.                                         
                                                                                           
 The United States proceeded to withdraw from UNESCO, in accordance with                   
 the notice it had given the previous year. The United Kingdom also gave                   
 notice of its intention to withdraw from UNESCO at the end of 1985                        
 unless substantial reforms had been achieved by them. The Non-Aligned                     
 group at the UNESCO headquarters expressed regret at these decisions of                   
 the governments of USA and UK. The group continued to reaffirm its                        
 support to UNESCO and to its Director General in their efforts to                         
 fulfill the purpose of the organisation. Meanwhile, a number of reform                    
 proposals were decided upon in UNESCO and their implementation were                       
 underway.                                                                                 
                                                                                           
 Administrative and Financial Issues                                                       
 The 39th General Assembly marked the initial phase of a concerted                         
 attempt by the major contributors, from both West and East, to ensure                     
 further restrictions on the growth of the UN budget and to modify the                     
 UN Common System. Attacks were also made on the grounds that the UN was                   
 inefficient and ineffective in the use of resources, both human and                       
 financial. The nature in which programme budget implications of                           
 activities requested in draft resolutions were to be presented by the                     
 Secretariat in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 38/227 was the                    
 subject of lengthy discussions and negotiations. With a view to                           
 ensuring a zero real growth in the budget, the major donors insisted                      
 that all new activities be carried out from resources released by the                     
 reduction of existing low priority activities. Besides enforcing a                        
 freeze in level of expenditure, the approach of the major donors would                    
 place the group of 77 in a position where by difficult political                          
 decisions would have to be taken on the selection of activities to be                     
 reduced. The Group 3 EA/84-9                                                              
 -50>                                                                                      
 of 77, spearheaded by India and other like-minded countries had been in                   
 constant touch with the Secretariat during 1984 on this matter to                         
 counteract the pressure from the major donors. Consequently, at the                       
 39th General Assembly, the Secretariat was in a position to provide                       
 programme budget statements which were non-controversial and with no                      
 proposals for reduction in the current programme of the UN.                               
                                                                                           
 The major donors have, over the years, espoused the view that the                         
 international Civil Service was inefficient, ineffective and overpaid.                    
 Therefore, when the International Civil Service Commission (ICSC)                         
 reported its decision to raise the post adjustment, i.e. the cost of                      
 living allowance for New York, the ICSC came under heavy criticism.                       
 However, India, the major Latin American States and a few other                           
 developing countries, took the position that the ICSC's decision was                      
 based solely on technical considerations, that it had acted fully                         
 within its mandate and that, therefore, its decision must be supported.                   
 One part of this increase in post adjustment had been implemented on 1                    
 August 1984 and the other was due to take effect on 1 December 1984.                      
 The major donors supported the non-grant of the December instalment of                    
 the increase. This position was accepted by the majority of the Group                     
 of 77 under severe pressure from the major donors. Our delegation,                        
 supported by the major Latin American States, dissociated itself from                     
 this particular decision with an explanation of our position, without                     
 disturbing the consensus arrived at on the resolution as a whole.                         
                                                                                           
 Our delegation made some progress on the question of personnel in the                     
 UN. We succeeded in including in the resolution on personnel a request                    
 to the Secretary-General to study ways and means of applying the                          
 population factor, and to report to the General Assembly at its 40th                      
 session, taking into account the views expressed by member States. We                     
 succeeded in this effort by mustering support from a number of                            
 delegations that represented countries with large populations.                            
                                                                                           
 Social and Humanitarian Issues                                                            
 In conformity with the principles of justice, liberty and equality                        
 enshrined in the Indian Constitution to assure the dignity of the                         
 individual and the unity and integrity of the nation, and in keeping                      
 with the country's democratic temper and tradition and its faith in the                   
 Rule of Law, India continued its positive contribution to the                             
 functioning of all of the important Human Rights Bodies within the UN                     
 system.                                                                                   
                                                                                           
 During the 40th session of the Human Rights Commission held in                            
 February-March 1984 in Geneva, India once again highlighted the gravity                   
 of the Human Rights situation in Southern Africa, the practice of the                     
 abhorrent system of apartheid in South Africa, the continued                              
 colonisation of Namibia and the injuries and suffering inflicted upon                     
 the Arabs, especially Palestinians, in the territories occupied by                        
 Israel. The Indian representative stressed that in their magnitude and                    
 the scale of suffering, ththese                                                           
 -51>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 Human Rights issues were the most important of our times. In respect of                   
 the situation in South Africa, India called for a review of the                           
 so-called policy of "constructive engagement," particularly when the                      
 condition of the people of South Africa and Namibia had progressively                     
 deteriorated during the past few years this policy has been followed.                     
 India also pointed out the fallacy of the view that racism and racial                     
 discrimination was a universal phenomenon. India stressed that racism                     
 is not inherent in the nature of man and that concerted and vigorous                      
 action should be taken immediately against its most flagrant                              
 manifestations. Our delegation pressed the view that on vital issues                      
 concerning human rights and fundamental freedoms, considerations of                       
 justice, equality, fraternity and the universal concern for preserving                    
 the basic dignity of the human being should be of paramount importance                    
 and not considerations of tactical political advantage or of the                          
 preservation of strategic military interests.                                             
                                                                                           
 India played a positive role in the evolution of standards setting in                     
 securing human rights and fundamental freedoms universally by actively                    
 contributing to the finalisation of a Convention against Torture and to                   
 the on-going negotiations on measures to implement fully the provisions                   
 of the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of                      
 the Crime of Apartheid, the drafting of the conventions on the Right to                   
 Development, the Rights of the Child and the Promotion of the Rights of                   
 Migrant Workers.                                                                          
                                                                                           
 The situation of Tamils in Sri Lanka came up for discussion during the                    
 37th session of the Sub-Commission held in Geneva in August-September                     
 1984. The Human Rights Commission had already appealed in March 1983 to                   
 the parties concerned to continue to take necessary measures to                           
 strengthen and maintain peace and restore harmony and had welcomed the                    
 measures for reconciliation, including the All Parties Conference, and                    
 expressed the hope that they would succeed in achieving a lasting                         
 solution to the problem. Since the situation had further detriorated,                     
 the Indian expert in the Sub-Commission, together with experts from                       
 other countries sponsored a resolution on this issue. The resolution                      
 expressed deep concern about the violence in Sri Lanka, recognised the                    
 ultimate responsibility of the Sri Lankan Government for the protection                   
 of all sections of the community, and called upon Sri Lanka to submit                     
 information on the progress made in the investigation of the violent                      
 incidents and the efforts to promote communal harmony to the Human                        
 Rights Commission at its 41st session scheduled to be held in February-                   
 March 1985.                                                                               
                                                                                           
 In discharging its obligations as a signatory to the International                        
 Convention on Civil and Political Rights, India submitted its first                       
 report which was considered in the 21st session of the Human Rights                       
 Committee held in New York from 28 to 30 March 1984. The measures                         
 adopted by the Indian Government to give effect to the various rights                     
 recognised in the Convention were explained to the Committee by a                         
 delegation led by the Attorney General of India. The presentation made                    
 by the Indian delegation and the steps taken by the Indian Government                     
 to ensure the enjoyment of civil and political rights by its citizens                     
 were warmly appreciated by the Committee.                                                 
 -52>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 In the UN General Assembly, India actively participated in the work of                    
 the Third Committee wherein 57 resolutions were adopted. India played a                   
 moderating role in the adoption of many of these resolutions without a                    
 vote and cosponsored several important resolutions such as on the                         
 Declaration on the Control of Drug Trafficking and Drug Abuse, on the                     
 continuation of the Voluntary Fund for Women beyond the Decade in                         
 autonomous association with UNDP and on the International Youth Year.                     
 India initiated a resolution on the establishment of National                             
 Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights which was                   
 adopted by consensus. India also played a major role in the adoption by                   
 consensus of the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or                   
 Degrading Treatment or Punishment and contributed significantly to the                    
 work of the Working Group in completing the first reading of the                          
 Preamble and the articles of a Draft International Convention on the                      
 protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and their families.                       
                                                                                           
 Activities of the Non-Aligned Movement                                                    
 The year under review was marked by tragedy not merely for India but                      
 also for the Movement of Non-Aligned countries. In the untimely passing                   
 away of Smt. Indira Gandhi, India lost a beloved leader and the                           
 Movement a Chairperson of great stature and eminence, who won esteem                      
 the world over. The tragic loss of Smt. Gandhi put the NAM to a severe                    
 test, from which it emerged creditably with its unity and solidarity                      
 unscathed. The assumption of the Chairmanship by the Prime Minister                       
 Shri Rajiv Gandhi, was warmly welcomed by the Movement.                                   
 An Extra ordinary Plenary Meeting of the Non-Aligned countries was held                   
 in New York on 5 November 1984, to mourn the sad demise of Shrimati                       
 Indira Gandhi. At this meeting, warm and eloquent tributes were paid by                   
 members to the departed leader. At a subsequent meeting of the                            
 Coordinating Bureau on 19 November 1984, a message from the Prime                         
 Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, was read out in which, besides thanking                      
 members for the message of sympathy and condolence sent by the                            
 Movement, he expressed, as the new Chairperson, full faith in the unity                   
 of the Movement and in its ability to function as a positive, dynamic                     
 and significant force in international relations.                                         
                                                                                           
 At the helm of the Movement, India continued to play an active role                       
 during the year under review. The initiatives taken by India and the                      
 activities undertaken by the Coordinating Bureau enabled the Movement                     
 to closely follow international developments and to make a dynamic and                    
 constructive impact on world affairs, particularly at the United                          
 Nations.                                                                                  
                                                                                           
 A number of meetings of the Movement were held during the year, at                        
 United Nations Headquarters and elsewhere. Shri G. Parthasarathi,                         
 Chairman, Policy Planning, presided over the Annual Meeting of the                        
 Non-Aligned Ministers and Heads                                                           
 -53>                                                                                      
 of Delegation held in New York from 1 to 5 October 1984. Throughout the                   
 year, the Coordinating Bureau remained actively seized of pressing                        
 issues of global concern, and of particular concern to the NAM. The                       
 Non-Aligned caucus in the Security Council (consisting of eight                           
 Non-Aligned Members of the Council in 1984 including India) was also                      
 more active than in previous years and played a significant role in the                   
 deliberations of the Council on several issues. Through its activities                    
 in various fields, the Movement sought to promote its principled                          
 positions in important multilateral for a, such as the UN General                         
 Assembly and the Security Council. As in the previous year, the                           
 Movement took a number of measures as follow-up action to the decisions                   
 taken at the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of                        
 Non-Aligned countries, held at New Delhi in March 1983, in particular                     
 under the Action Plan for Economic Co-operation.                                          
                                                                                           
 During the period under review, the Movement of Non-Aligned countries                     
 remained actively seized of developments in various parts of the world.                   
 The Movement also remained involved along with the Group of 77, in                        
 activities relating to international economic co-operation for                            
 development. Some details are given in the following paragraphs.                          
                                                                                           
 The situation in and around Namibia, remained a matter of primary                         
 concern to NAM. The Annual Ministerial Meeting in New York once again                     
 considered the question and inter alia, reiterated an earlier decision                    
 to convene an Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating                       
 Bureau on Namibia not later than April 1985.                                              
                                                                                           
 A high level delegation of the UN Council for Namibia, led by its                         
 President, visited New Delhi from 16 to 18 May 1984, in order to                          
 acquaint the Chairperson of the Movement with the current situation in,                   
 and relating to, Namibia, and to hold consultations regarding the role                    
 that the Movement had played and could play in promoting the Namibian                     
 cause.                                                                                    
                                                                                           
 In the wake of the official visits by Prime Minister Botha of South                       
 Africa to several West European Countries, the Coordinating Bureau of                     
 the Non-Aligned countries met on 6 June 1984, and issued a communique                     
 which, inter alia, condemned these visits.                                                
                                                                                           
 The Non-Aligned caucus in the Security Council was instrumental in                        
 securing the adoption by the Security Council of Council Resolutions                      
 SCR 554 (1984) and 556 (1984) of August 1984, which rejected and                          
 declared as null and void the so-called elections in South Africa on                      
 the basis of the fraudulant "constitutional reforms" of the South                         
 African Government. Both resolutions were cosponsored by all the eight                    
 Non-Aligned members of the Council.                                                       
                                                                                           
 India as Chairman of NAM was represented at the extraordinary plenary                     
 meetings of the UN Council for Namibia held at Bangkok from 21 to 25                      
 May 1984, and at the                                                                      
 -54>                                                                                      
 solemn commemorative meetings organised at the United Nations on the                      
 occasion of International Day of Solidarity with the Struggle of People                   
 of South Africa (16 June 1984), International Day of Solidarity with                      
 the struggle of Women in South Africa and Namibia (9 August 1984),                        
 Namibia Day (27 August 1984) and the Symposium on a Century of Heroic                     
 Struggle of the People of Namibia against Colonial Occupation organised                   
 during the week of Solidarity with the People of Namibia and their                        
 Liberation Movement, SWAPO (31 October to 2 November 1984). Messages                      
 were sent by or on behalf of the Chairperson on all these occasions.                      
                                                                                           
 In response to the recommendations of the Non-Aligned Committee of                        
 Eight on Palestine, the Non-Aligned countries actively participated in                    
 the deliberations of the 39th UN General Assembly and cosponsored                         
 various resolutions on the subject. The Committee, at the level of                        
 Permanent Representatives in New York, followed the developments in                       
 West Asia very closely and met regularly to monitor the situation. The                    
 Committee also held meetings with the Permanent Representatives of                        
 several influential countries with a view to soliciting the                               
 co-operation of these countries for the convening of the International                    
 Peace Conference on West Asia. The Committee also actively supported                      
 the Secretary-General in his efforts to find a comprehensive peace in                     
 West Asia and urged him to expedite his consultations regarding the                       
 International Peace Conference on West Asia.                                              
                                                                                           
 A ministerial level meeting of the Non-Aligned Committee of Eight on                      
 Palestine was held in New York on 3 October 1984. The Ministers                           
 reviewed the situation particularly with regard to UN General Assembly                    
 Resolution 38/58 calling for the convening of an International Peace                      
 Conference on West Asia and decided to continue actively their                            
 collective and individual efforts to mobilise all means available to                      
 ensure the convening of such a conference.                                                
                                                                                           
 Within the Security Council, the Non-Aligned countries actively                           
 participated in the consideration of the situation in West Asia and                       
 expressed grave concern over the continuing Israeli policy of                             
 establishing illegal settlements in the occupied territories and the                      
 widespread and frequent violations by Israel of the rights of the                         
 Palestinian people in contravention of the relevant General Assembly                      
 and Security Council resolutions and well established norms of                            
 international law. The Non-Aligned countries also called for a just and                   
 comprehensive solution of West Asian problem in accordance with the                       
 approved guidelines. They further called for the withdrawal of Israel                     
 from Lebanon and for the restoration of Lebanese sovereignty,                             
 territorial integrity, independence and Non-Aligned status.                               
                                                                                           
 A message was sent by Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, the                              
 Chairperson of the Non-Aligned Movement, on the occasion of the                           
 International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People (29                           
 November 1984).                                                                           
                                                                                           
 The continuing war between Iran and Iraq engaged the attention of the                     
 Chairperson of the Movement, who sent several messages to the leaders                     
 of both countries                                                                         
 -55>                                                                                      
 urging them to bring about an immediate end to the conflict. Special                      
 emmissaries also visited both the countries. In the wake of the                           
 escalation infighting early in 1984, the Chairperson had made an appeal                   
 to the two countries to put an immediate end to the fighting and had                      
 also suggested that they avoid hitting civilian targets in the                            
 meanwhile. A statement was made on the question of use of chemical                        
 weapons on 15 March 1984. The Chairperson also remained in touch with                     
 leaders of several Non- Aligned countries and sought their suggestions                    
 and good offices in finding ways to end the four-year old war.                            
                                                                                           
 It will be recalled that the Seventh Summit had mandated the                              
 Coordinating Bureau "to closely monitor the events in the sub- region".                   
 In pursuance of that mandate, the Bureau met on several occasions                         
 during the year, beginning from 15 March 1984 to take stock of the                        
 latest situation in the area in the wake of reports of mining of                          
 Nicaraguan harbours. On that occasion, the Bureau heard statements by                     
 the representative of Nicaragua on the latest developments. The                           
 Non-Aligned caucus in the Security Council was also closely involved in                   
 the deliberations on the draft resolution submitted by Nicaragua which                    
 called for immediate halt to all hostile acts against Nicaragua. The                      
 resolution was vetoed by the United States.                                               
                                                                                           
 In addition to formal meetings of the Bureau, the Chairperson kept in                     
 close touch with the countries concerned with a view to keeping abreast                   
 of the situation. The Bureau constituted an informal group of 'Friends                    
 of the Chair', comprising 13 countries, to assist the Chairman in                         
 following the evolving situation in Central America.                                      
                                                                                           
 At another meeting of the Bureau on the situation in Central                              
 America,held on 19th November 1984, in the wake of renewed                                
 transgressions of Nicaraguan airspace and territorial waters and                          
 increase in tensions, the Bureau took note, with appreciation, of a                       
 statement made on behalf of the Prime Minister and Chairman of the                        
 Movement expressing concern over the deterioration in the situation in                    
 Central America. The communique reiterated the support of NAM for                         
 efforts of the Contadora Group.                                                           
                                                                                           
 The Third Conference of Labour Ministers of Non-Aligned and Other                         
 Developing Countries, held in Managua, Nicaragua, from 10 to 12 May                       
 1984, adopted, Inter alia, a resolution on Nicaragua.                                     
                                                                                           
 The President of Cyprus, Mr. Spyros Kyprianou, met the members of the                     
 Non-Aligned Contact Group on 11 January 1984, in New York, and                            
 indicated that he had presented to the UN Secretary-General a framework                   
 for a comprehensive and speedy solution to the Cyprus problem.                            
 President Kyprianou addressed a special plenary meeting of the                            
 Non-Aligned countries on 30 April 1984, in New York, on the eve of the                    
 Security Council's consideration of the situation in Cyprus.                              
 -56>                                                                                      
 There were many other political issues on which the Non- Aligned                          
 countries worked with great unity and solidarity. Notable amongst these                   
 was their active role in the Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean in                      
 which their joint efforts led them to submit a draft framework of an                      
 agenda for the proposed Indian Ocean Conference.                                          
                                                                                           
 During May 1984, the then Prime Minister of India, the late Shrimati                      
 Indira Gandhi, addressed personal letters and sent emissaries to the                      
 leaders of the London Summit of industrialised countries, reiterating                     
 the significance and continuing validity of the approach suggested by                     
 the New Delhi Summit on economic issues. The industrialised countries                     
 were called upon to take a more constructive attitude towards the                         
 problems of the developing countries as well as the structural problems                   
 facing the world economy.                                                                 
                                                                                           
 In her capacity as Chairperson of the NAM, the late Shrimati Indira                       
 Gandhi set up a Group of Experts to examine the functioning of the                        
 existing international monetary and financial system and to study the                     
 substantive and procedural aspects of the proposal, made by the Seventh                   
 Non-Aligned Summit, for an International Conference on Money and                          
 Finance for Development with Universal Participation. The panel                           
 consisted of leading economists from Algeria, India, Mexico, Tanzania                     
 and Yugoslavia. The group submitted a report analysing the present                        
 inadequacies in the international monetary and financial system. This                     
 report represented an important contribution towards clarifying ideas                     
 and making suggestions for resolving the present monetary, and                            
 financial problems facing the international economy, particularly the                     
 developing countries, and would provide a valuable basis for further                      
 discussions on the subject of the proposed conference.                                    
                                                                                           
 Prime Minister, Rajiv Gandhi made a statement on the famine in Africa,                    
 on 26 November 1984, in which he stated, inter alia, that as Chairman                     
 of the Non-Aligned Movement he was in touch with other Non-Aligned                        
 countries on the question of short-and long- term assistance which                        
 could be given to the African countries in overcoming the present                         
 crisis caused by famine and drought. At the end of the year,                              
 consultations with African and other States were continuing with a view                   
 to ascertaining how best the Non- Aligned countries could demonstrate                     
 solidarity with their African brothers and formulate concrete plans of                    
 assistance to affected countries in Africa.                                               
                                                                                           
 A number of meetings of the Non-Aligned countries were held in                            
 pursuance of the Action Programme on Economic Co-operation that was                       
 adopted at the New Delhi Summit.                                                          
                                                                                           
 The Non-Aligned countries held several meetings in New York with a view                   
 to finalising the Draft Statute of the Non-Aligned Centre for Science                     
 and Technology. The text of the Statute was finally agreed upon at the                    
 Non-Aligned Plenary Meeting held on 15 June 1984. A Conference of                         
 Plenipotentiaries will be held shortly to have the Statute adopted and                    
 opened for signature.                                                                     
 -57>                                                                                      
 A meeting of Irrigation Experts of Coordinators of Non-Aligned                            
 countries in the field of Food and Agriculture was held in Pyongyang,                     
 Democratic People's Republic of Korea, from 16 to 22 June 1984. The                       
 meeting, which was attended by the 14 Coordinators and 27 other                           
 Non-Aligned countries, discussed ways and means of further promoting                      
 technical co-operation among the Non-Aligned and other developing                         
 countries in the design, construction and management of large, medium                     
 and small scale irrigation projects as well as considering the                            
 possibilities of establishing joint ventures for the production of a                      
 complete range of irrigation equipment.                                                   
                                                                                           
 The Ministers of Health of Non-Aligned and other developing countries                     
 met in Geneva on the eve of the 37th World Health Assembly Session. In                    
 preparation for this Ministerial Meeting, a Coordinating Group meeting                    
 was also held in Brioni, Yugoslavia from 26 to 30 March 1984. The three                   
 major items, which received attention at these meetings, related to a                     
 review of the progress made in the implementation of the Strategy for                     
 Health for All by the year 2000, review of the programme in TCDC and                      
 discussions on the items on the agenda of the World Health Assembly.                      
                                                                                           
 The Third Conference of Ministers of Labour of Non-Aligned and other                      
 Developing Countries was held in Managua, Nicaragua, from 10 to 12 May                    
 1984. On substantive issues, the Conference adopted a number of                           
 recommendations for action on co-operation in the two areas of                            
 Vocational Training and Employment and Human Resources development in                     
 the Rural and Informal Sectors. The two other important and substantive                   
 resolutions that were adopted related to the participation of the                         
 Non-Aligned countries and coordination in ILO meetings, and follow-up                     
 action to the decisions taken by the two earlier Ministerial                              
 Conferences.                                                                              
                                                                                           
 In accordance with the New Delhi Summit Declaration, a general                            
 conference of Ministers of Information of Non-Aligned Countries                           
 (COMINAC) was held in Jakarta from 26 to 30 January 1984. Prior to the                    
 Conference, a meeting of the Inter-Governmental Council was also held                     
 on 23-24 January 1984. The Conference adopted a Declaration which,                        
 inter-alia, contained an Action Programme on Media Co-operation. The                      
 Conference also passed a resolution expressing solidarity with UNESCO's                   
 Director-General and rejected firmly threats and pressures directed                       
 against that organisation. The Conference also issued an appeal to the                    
 mass media all over the world to help in promoting the establishment of                   
 a New World Information Order. The Conference adopted revised criteria                    
 for a fresh constitution of the Inter-Governmental Council.                               
                                                                                           
 In accordance with the Jakarta Declaration, the Technical Committee of                    
 the Non-Aligned News Agencies Pool (NANAP) met in Cairo in March 1984.                    
 A joint meeting of the Ministers of Information and Ministers of                          
 Telecommunications of the countries hosting the redistribution centres                    
 of NANAP was also held in Cairo from 9 to 10 May 1984. This meeting                       
 made substantial progress towards agreement on reduction of                               
 telecommunication tariffs by member States to achieve more efficient                      
 and shared utilisation of telecommunictions facilities and network.                       
 -58>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 An International Sports Seminar on Training of Sports Cadres (NAMISS)                     
 was held at the Netaji Subhas National Institute of Sports, Patiala,                      
 India, from 3 to 14 April 1984, which was attended by 36 delegates                        
 drawn from 21 countries.                                                                  
                                                                                           
 The National Institution in India concerned with Research and                             
 Information Systems (RIS) of Non-Aligned and Other Developing                             
 Countries, which was set up in New Delhi in December 1983, became fully                   
 operational during the period under review. The activities of the                         
 Institution were financed by a budgetary grant from the Ministry of                       
 External Affairs of Rs. 5.2 lakhs for the year 1984- 85. Currently the                    
 RIS is undertaking preparations for the holding of the Second Meeting                     
 of the Institutions participating in the Research and Information                         
 Systems.                                                                                  
                                                                                           
 As recommended by the New Delhi Summit, the International Centre for                      
 Public Enterprises (ICPE), Ljubljana, commenced preparations for a                        
 study on the subject which could serve as a reference in the                              
 preparations for the World Conference on Women scheduled to be held in                    
 Nairobi in 1985. An outline of the proposed study submitted by ICPE was                   
 endorsed by the Coordinators in this field. Following this, consultants                   
 have been commissioned to work on various chapters of the study which                     
 is expected to be ready shortly.                                                          
                                                                                           
 Meanwhile, a Ministerial Meeting of the NAM Coordinating Group and                        
 other Developing Countries on the Role of Women in Development is                         
 proposed to be held in New Delhi in April 1985.                                           
                                                                                           
 The Fourth Coordinating Group Meeting of the Non-Aligned countries in                     
 the Sphere of Standardisation, Metrology and Quality Control was held                     
 in Belgrade from 10 to 13 July 1984, at which plans of action for each                    
 one of the four functional groups, established by the earlier                             
 Coordinating Group meetings, as also the time-frame for their                             
 execution, were approved. As usual, this meeting also discussed the                       
 question of coordination of position of Non-Aligned countries in the                      
 International Standards Organisation (ISO) Council meetings.                              
                                                                                           
 The Fifth meeting of the Coordinating Countries and Second Meeting of                     
 Experts and Four Functional Groups were scheduled to be held in New                       
 Delhi from 23 to 31 January 1985. India participated in the Meeting of                    
 Foreign Ministers of OIC as 'Observer' in its capacity as Chairman of                     
 the Non-Aligned Movement. The Indian delegation to the meeting, held in                   
 Sanaa, Yemen Arab Republic, from 18 to 22 December 1984, was led by the                   
 former Minister of State in the Ministry of External Affairs, Shri A.                     
 A. Rahim. In a brief statement at the Inaugural Session, the leader of                    
 the Indian delegation, inter-alia, outlined the activities of the                         
 Non-Aligned Movement.                                                                     
                                                                                           
 A list of the meetings held under the aegis of NAM, or where India                        
 participated in its capacity as Chairman of NAM, during the period                        
 under review, is given in Appendix I.                                                     
 -59>                                                                                      
 International Law : Developments and Activities During 1984, the                          
 Preparatory Commission (PREPCOM) for the International Sea-bed                            
 Authority and the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea                           
 continued its work. It held its second session in two parts viz., from                    
 19 March to 13 April 1984 at Kingston, Jamaica, and from 13 August to 5                   
 September 1984 in Geneva. India was represented at both these sessions.                   
                                                                                           
 In respect of the implementation of Resolution II of the Third United                     
 Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea governing Preparatory                            
 Investment in Pioneer Activities relating to Polymetallic Nodules, the                    
 PREPCOM considered draft Rules and Regulations for Registration of                        
 Pioneer Investors and draft Rules on Confidentiality prepared by the                      
 Secretariat. In general discussion, it became clear that there were                       
 sharp differences on rules relating to resolution of conflicts                            
 concerning overlapping areas, nature, composition and functions of the                    
 technical group and confidentiality of data and information. However,                     
 the Plenary took up the first reading of the rules and was able to                        
 provisionally adopt the rules which were non-controversial. On the                        
 issue of conflict of overlapping claims, the Chairman held extensive                      
 consultations with the concerned delegations. As a result of these                        
 consultations an understanding on Resolution of Conflicts among                           
 Applicants for Registration as Pioneer Investors was reached at the                       
 resumed session held in August-September 1984 in Geneva. Thereupon the                    
 representatives of the four applicants for registration as pioneer                        
 investors, namely, India, USSR, Japan and France met in Geneva on 17                      
 December 1984 and exchanged coordinates of the areas in respect of                        
 which they had made the applications. The coordinates of the                              
 application areas have been kept secret. Happily it has now been found,                   
 upon exchange of coordinates, that India's areas of application do not                    
 overlap with other pioneer investors. As a consequence of this                            
 development it is likely that the Rules for Registration of Pioneer                       
 Investors will be adopted at the Third Session of the PREPCOM scheduled                   
 to be held in Kingston in March-April 1985.                                               
                                                                                           
 The Plenary also examined a working document prepared by the                              
 Secretariat containing the draft rules of procedure for the Assembly of                   
 the Sea-bed Authority. It completed discussion on a majority of the 1 1                   
 1 rules contained in the working document.                                                
                                                                                           
 The four Special Commissions of the Preparatory Commission considered                     
 the subjects allocated to them. The discussions in the Special                            
 Commissions were based upon comprehensive studies prepared by the                         
 Secretariat.                                                                              
                                                                                           
 At its 39th Session. the United Nations General Assembly adopted a                        
 resolution on the Law of the Sea which, inter-alia, called upon all                       
 States to safeguard the unified character of the UN Convention on the                     
 Law of the Sea, 1982 and to desist from taking actions which undermine                    
 the Convention or defeat its object and purpose. India cosponsored the                    
 resolution.                                                                               
                                                                                           
 The Legal Sub-Committee of the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of                       
 Outer Space held its 23rd session in Geneva from 19 March to 6 April                      
 1984 and considered,                                                                      
 -60>                                                                                      
 inter-alia, three major items of the agenda, namely, the legal                            
 implications of remote sensing of the earth from space with the aim of                    
 formulating draft principles, the possibility of supplementing the                        
 norms of International Law relevant to the use of nuclear power                           
 resources in outer space, and matters relating to the definition and                      
 delimitation of outer space and to the character and utilization of the                   
 geostationary orbit, including elaboration of general principles to                       
 govern the rational and equitable use of the geostationary orbit, a                       
 limited national resource.                                                                
                                                                                           
 Regarding legal implications of remote sensing of earth from space with                   
 the aim of formulating draft principles, the Sub- Committee                               
 concentrated on three outstanding draft principles, i.e. XI, XII, XV                      
 dealing with the international responsibility, access to data and                         
 dissemination of data obtained from remote sensing activities on the                      
 basis of its previous work at the 21st and 22nd Sessions and the                          
 Working Papers submitted by member States particularly, the Working                       
 Paper submitted by Brazil in 1982 as a possible basis of compromise.                      
 Although there was an intensive discussion to bridge the differences of                   
 views, the Sub- Committee did not solve the central questions involved                    
 and the text of the draft principles remain unchanged.                                    
                                                                                           
 In regard to the use of nuclear power sources in outer space, the                         
 Sub-Committee discussed a wide range of topics relating to                                
 (i) information concerning the use of nuclear power sources, (ii)                         
 safety measures regarding radiological protection, (iii) notification                     
 prior to re-entry, (iv) assistance to States, and                                         
 (v) State responsibility.                                                                 
 Regarding definition and delimitation of outer space and utilization of                   
 geostationary orbit, the Sub-Committee considered the subject on a                        
 priority basis through a Working Group especially established for the                     
 first time in compliance with General Assembly Resolution 38/80. The                      
 intensive discussion conducted under two separate aspects of the item,                    
 i.e. the question of the definition and delimitation of outer space and                   
 the question of the geostationary orbit indicated that more time is                       
 needed before differences could be resolved.                                              
                                                                                           
 India has been a member of the United Nations Commission on                               
 International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), which is concerned with the                           
 development of international law, since its establishment in 1966.                        
 India is also a member of all its three Working Groups, namely,                           
 (a) Working Group on International Negotiable Instruments;                                
 (b) Working Group on International Contract Practices; and                                
 (c) Working Group on New International Economic Order. The 17th Annual                    
 Session of UNCITRAL devoted most of its time in discussing the Draft                      
 Convention on International Bills of Exchange and International                           
 Promissory Notes which was prepared by its Working Group on                               
 International Negotiable Instruments. The Commission also discussed the                   
 subjects of (1) electronics of funds transfer;                                            
 -61>                                                                                      
 (2) liability of operators of transport terminals;                                        
 (3) revision of the uniform customs and practices for documentary                         
 credits; and                                                                              
 (4) legal aspects of automatic data processing.                                           
                                                                                           
 India attaches great importance to the work of UNCITRAL in view of its                    
 national interest in the development of its share in the world trade.                     
 India's contribution in the field of international trade law has been                     
 recognized by all the members of the Commission, particularly the                         
 developing countries.                                                                     
                                                                                           
 Since India became a party to the International Covenant on Civil and                     
 Political Rights and Economic, Social and Cultural Rights of 1966, it                     
 is under an obligation to submit initial and periodic reports to the UN                   
 bodies under these two Covenants. During 1983-84 India fulfilled these                    
 reporting obligations by submitting its initial report under Civil and                    
 Political Rights Covenant and the second stage report under Economic,                     
 Social and Cultural Rights Covenant. Both these reports were considered                   
 by the respective UN bodies during the year under review.                                 
                                                                                           
 India's initial report on observance of the International Covenant on                     
 Civil and Political Rights was discussed by the Human Rights Committee                    
 at the UN Headquarters in New York between 29 March and 2 April 1984.                     
 The report highlights India's commitment to self-determination as well                    
 as observance of civil and political rights concerning rights to life                     
 and personal liberty, right to privacy, freedom of thought, conscience                    
 and religion, right to trade unions, right to participate in public                       
 affairs, elections and public services as well as protection and                          
 rehabilitation of destitute and unfortunate persons and prisoners                         
 without any discrimination as to race, religion, sex, place of birth,                     
 caste and equal protection of laws. The Attorney-General of India                         
 presented the report before the Human Rights Committee and also made                      
 available necessary clarifications as sought for by the members of the                    
 Committee. The Human Rights Committee unanimously commended India's                       
 efforts in preservation of democracy and civil and political rights of                    
 the individuals with particular reference to the social, economic and                     
 cultural setting of India and its people.                                                 
 India's report under the International Covenant on Economic, Social and                   
 Cultural Rights regarding Articles 10 to 12 was considered by the                         
 Sessional Working Group of Governmental Experts of the United Nations                     
 Economic and Social Council on 18 and 20 April 1984. The report                           
 provides information concerning the measures adopted by India for                         
 observance of the rights concerning protection of the family, free                        
 consent for marriage, maternity leave and social security benefits for                    
 mothers during leave, protection of children and young persons. The                       
 Report also highlighted the legislative and administrative measures                       
 adopted and the facilities available in India regarding food, clothing,                   
 housing within the framework of a developing economy and the                              
 traditional social set up in India. India's continuous endeavour to                       
 provide to everyone the right of physical and mental health and the                       
 measures undertaken in this regard have been emphasised in the report.                    
 While introducing the report it was pointed out that a Welfare                            
 -62>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 State is the pre-eminent goal of the Constitution of India which                          
 provides inspiration to social welfare activities as an organized part                    
 of national development with a view to ensuring social and economic                       
 justice to the citizens. A programme of development through the                           
 successive Five Year Plans has been launched to translate this ideal                      
 into reality. The Indian delegation also supplied additional                              
 information concerning the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes,                         
 status of women etc. The report and the replies were appreciated by the                   
 Group of Experts as a wealth of information that is reflective of                         
 India's earnest determination for the realization of economic and                         
 social justice to its citizens.                                                           
                                                                                           
 At the 39th Session of the General Assembly, the Sixth Committee                          
 considered the Report of the International Law Commission on the work                     
 of its 36th session. The second report of the Special Rapporteur, Jens                    
 Evensen (Norway), which contained a revised tentative draft of a                          
 convention on the law of the non- navigational uses of international                      
 watercourses, elicited extensive comments by both the upper and lower                     
 riparian States. However, there was no convergence of views on any                        
 point. In his statement, the Indian representative emphasized the need                    
 to conform to the drainage basin concept to protect the unity of the                      
 river along with its tributaries and other systems including the                          
 groundwater. He noted the steady erosion in the approach of the                           
 International Law Commission and opposed introducing new elements which                   
 were not already approved by international practice. He also made it                      
 clear that every State is entitled to equitable and reasonable use of                     
 waters in its own territory as a part of the exercise of its sovereign                    
 rights without veto or interference on such use or uses by other                          
 States, including the lower riparians. The Indian representative,                         
 however, mentioned that the upper riparian State should use its water                     
 in such a way that it does not cause substantial and adverse harm to                      
 others. As for the settlement of disputes in relation to the use of                       
 international rivers, he also advocated the need to exercise restraint                    
 and to resolve disputes through bilateral means freely and mutually                       
 agreed upon by the parties.                                                               
                                                                                           
 At the 39th Session of the General Assembly, although no progress was                     
 made on the question of Charter review, a working paper submitted by                      
 Belgium, the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Japan, New Zealand and                   
 Spain on preventive diplomacy was hailed as a useful contribution to                      
 the work of the Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on                     
 the Strengthening of the Role of the Organisation. The Indian                             
 representative welcomed this proposal in his statement but indicated                      
 that the problem of improving the effectiveness of the United Nations                     
 did not lie in any procedural or structural framework of the Charter.                     
 All the elements contained in the Working Paper were well known and                       
 accepted within the scheme of the Charter and the practice of the                         
 United Nations.                                                                           
                                                                                           
 There was uneasiness in the Sixth Committee about the implications of                     
 the working paper submitted earlier by Nigeria, the Philippines and                       
 Romania entitled "Establishment of a commission for good offices,                         
 mediation and conciliation". In his statement,                                            
 -63>                                                                                      
 the Indian representative exposed a number of deficiencies both                           
 conceptually and as a matter of policy with which the proposal                            
 suffered. Several representatives, including the sponsors, were                           
 impressed by the difficulties pointed out by India. The working paper                     
 will continue to be examined by the Charter Review Committee.                             
                                                                                           
 In the wake of the shooting down of the Korean Airlines Civil aircraft                    
 KAL-007 over Soviet airspace on 31 August/1 September 1983, resulting                     
 in the death of 269 passengers and crew members, the Council of ICAO                      
 decided at its 110th Session on 9 December 1983 to include in the                         
 Central Programme of the Legal Committee with a high priority the item                    
 entitled "Preparation of a Draft Instrument on the Interception of                        
 Civil Aircraft". At the same time, the Council requested the Chairman                     
 of the Legal Committee to establish a Special Sub-Committee for                           
 consideration of that item, taking into account the results of the work                   
 of the Extra- ordinary Session of the ICAO Assembly in April 1984 in                      
 relation to the amendment of the Chicago Convention and to convene the                    
 Sub-Committee at Montreal from 25 September to 5 October 1984. On 10                      
 May 1984, the 25th Session (Extra-ordinary) of the ICAO Assembly                          
 unanimously approved a proposed amendment to the Convention on                            
 International Civil Aviation. The amendment was set out in a new                          
 Article 3 bis in the form of a Protocol stipulating that States should                    
 refrain from the use of weapons against civil aircraft. This amendment                    
 had been sent to all contracting States urging them to ratify it as                       
 soon as practicable. Views of States were also solicited on the Draft                     
 Instrument on the Interception of Civil Aircraft presented by Canada.                     
                                                                                           
 The Chairman of the Legal Committee appointed the legal experts of 17                     
 States,including India, to serve as members of the Legal Sub-Committee.                   
 Besides representatives of 6 States were ex officio members of the                        
 Sub-Committee. Observers from 3 contracting States, IATA and IFALPA                       
 also attended as observers.                                                               
                                                                                           
 The Sub-Committee met at Montreal from 25 September to 3 October 1984.                    
 After completion of the general discussion, the Sub-Committee                             
 considered the draft Instruments on the Interception of Civil Aircraft                    
 presented by Canada and Argentina. During the discussion which                            
 followed, it was argued that judging from the replies from States, it                     
 appears that the preparation of a draft instrument on interception of                     
 civil aircraft was not supported by States. Since December 1983 much                      
 work had been accomplished with respect to interception of civil                          
 aircraft. A well balanced amendment (Article 3 bis) had been adopted by                   
 the 25th Session (Extra-ordinary) of the Assembly, a manual concerning                    
 interception of civil aircraft had been published and positive work had                   
 been achieved by the Air Navigation Commission in reviewing the Annexes                   
 to the Chicago Convention. The Instruments presented by Canada and                        
 Argentina contained provisions unrelated to Article 3 bis, such as                        
 State responsibility and sanction, which had been rejected by the ICAO                    
 Assembly in the absence of agreement. A study should be undertaken in                     
 order to clarify the international elements involved and question                         
 should be clearly identified before their incorporation in an                             
 international convention. The Canadian and Argentine drafts generate                      
 doubts about the possibility of harmonization                                             
 -64>                                                                                      
 with the principles in Article 3 bis. The preparation at this stage of                    
 an international instrument might harm, jeopardize or delay the                           
 ratification of Article 3 bis and its entry into force. There is no                       
 urgent need to elaborate an instrument on interception of civil                           
 aircraft. In view of the foregoing, the Legal Sub-Committee recommended                   
 that the ICAO Council should consider (a) taking appropriate steps to                     
 encourage the ratification of Article 3 bis by contracting States; and                    
 (b) the study by appropriate bodies of ICAO of whether provisions                         
 should be developed, either in the form of amendments to the Annexes to                   
 the Chicago Convention or in some other form, concerning matters with                     
 regard to the aftermath of the landing of an intercepted civil                            
 aircraft. The representative of India stated that after completion of                     
 the review of the existing procedures by ICAO's competent organs and                      
 identification of inadequacies, a decision could be taken on the                          
 question of framing new procedures and incorporating them in a new                        
 Annex along with already existing procedures. Well formulated                             
 procedures would go a long way in preventing misuse of civil aviation.                    
 In this connection, the Manual concerning Interception of Civil                           
 Aircraft, consolidating current ICAO provision and Special                                
 Recommendations (April 1984 ed.) could provide useful guidance.                           
                                                                                           
 During 1984, India concluded 94 (ninety-four) treaties and agreements                     
 of which a list is given at Appendix II.                                                  
                                                                                           
 Elections to UN bodies and other International Institutions                               
 India was elected to several UN bodies and other international                            
 organisations during the year under review. During the first regular                      
 session of the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) held in May 1984 in                   
 New York, India was elected to the six UN bodies, namely, Statistical                     
 Commission; Commission on Human Settlements; Commission on                                
 Trans-national Corporations; Committee on Natural Resources; UNICEF                       
 Executive Board; and Commission on the Status of Women. During the 39th                   
 session of UN General Assembly held in September-December 1984, India                     
 was elected member of ECOSOC for a period of 3 years beginning 1                          
 January 1985. At the same session India was re-elected member of the                      
 Governing Council of UNEP. Shri M.A. Vellodi, formerly Secretary in the                   
 Ministry of External Affairs, who had been a member of International                      
 Civil Service Commission (ICSC) for the last 2 years, was re-elected to                   
 the Commission for a 4-year term. Shri B.G. Deshmukh, Labour Secretary,                   
 was unanimously elected as Chairman of the Governing Body of the                          
 International Labour Organisation for the term 1984- 85 on 28 June 1984                   
 in Geneva. Shri M.C. Bhandare, MP, was elected as a member of the                         
 Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of                          
 Minorities, with an impressive majority, during the last session of the                   
 Human Rights Commission in March 1984. In January 1984 Smt. Shanti                        
 Sadiq Ali was elected to the UN Committee on Elimination of All Forms                     
 of Racial Discrimination (CERD) for another term of 4 years. The term                     
 of Shri C.P. Srivastava, Secretary-General of the International                           
 Maritime Organisation Council (IMOC) was extended for another                             
 -65>                                                                                      
 period of 4 years from 1 January 1986 onwards. India was elected to the                   
 Executive Council and the Consultative Council for Postal Studies of                      
 the Universal Postal Union at the UPU Congress, in June-July 1984.                        
                                                                                           
 A list of major international conferences/meetings/seminars organised                     
 by Intergovernmental/non-governmental organisations, in which India                       
 participated are at Appendices III, IV and V.                                             
 -66>                                                                                      
 FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS                                                                
                                                                     Top                   
 The economic crisis that has afflicted the world economy since the                        
 beginning of the 1980s continued to dominate the economic prospects of                    
 both developed and developing countries during the year under review.                     
 Some industrialised countries particularly in North America,                              
 experienced a degree of economic recovery; but the recovery is uneven                     
 and there are doubts about its durability. In any case, it has had                        
 little impact on developing countries. Unemployment has continued to                      
 rise in many industrialised countries in spite of the recovery and even                   
 in North America there are some indications that the recovery is                          
 weakening. It has led to only as small rise in the exports of most                        
 developing countries and real commodity prices have continued to                          
 stagnate at low levels while real interest rates have remained at                         
 historically high levels. The debt and development problems facing many                   
 developing countries have been left largely unresolved in this process.                   
 While the immediate danger which the debt crisis posed to the stability                   
 of the international banking system has been contained by emergency                       
 actions, the underlying causes remain unresolved and will continue to                     
 jeopardize growth in the concerned countries unless remedial action is                    
 taken. The world crisis has brought the process of development                            
 practically to a halt in countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. The situation                   
 in many of these countries is extremely critical. Developing countries                    
 as a whole continue to suffer from the inequitable and inefficient                        
 adjustment process aggravated by rising protectionism in industrialised                   
 countries and a failure to ensure an adequate transfer of resources for                   
 development. The impact has been particularly severe on the low-income                    
 countries due to the sharp decline in the availability of concessional                    
 finance.                                                                                  
                                                                                           
 The response of the international community to this continuing crisis                     
 has proved to be grossly inadequate. While the concept of                                 
 interdependence has been recognisedeven at Summits of industrialised                      
 countries-there has been little coherent or coordinated international                     
 action to provide an impetus to the process of development.                               
 Unfortunately, there has been a weakening of the existing mechanisms of                   
 international cooperation for development. This has manifested itself                     
 in a growing tendency on the part of major industrialised countries to                    
 seek unilateral or bilateral solutions for their immediate problems and                   
 a systematic effort to weaken the multilateral institutions in the                        
 fields of development, finance and trade. A major instance was the                        
 disappointing experience with the Seventh IDA replenishment. The level                    
 eventually agreed upon was 9 billion dollars, which was well below the                    
 level of 16 billion originally thought necessary and even below the                       
 level of 12 billion dollars for IDA VI. There has been a suggestion to                    
 establish a                                                                               
 -67>                                                                                      
 $ 3 billion supplementary fund for IDA VII; but this suggestion has so                    
 far not been accepted. Other multilateral financial agencies such as                      
 IFAD have also encountered similar problems. The experience of UNIDO IV                   
 which took place in August 1984 was another example of the failure to                     
 grasp an important opportunity to give a fresh impetus to international                   
 economic co-operation and coming after the experience of UNCTAD VI in                     
 the previous year, it led to considerable disappointment and                              
 frustration among the developing countries. A number of agencies in the                   
 UN system such as UNESCO, UNIDO, UNCTAD and FAO have been under attack                    
 by developed countries and there are moves which could undermine the                      
 multilateral trading regime under GATT. The Group of 77, in a                             
 declaration made in June 1984 marking the 20th anniversary of the                         
 Group's estabilshment, made a strong plea for intensifying multilateral                   
 co-operation, but there has been little positive response so far to                       
 this plea. The UN Secretary General as well as others have voiced their                   
 concern over this retreat from multilateralism.                                           
                                                                                           
 Non-Aligned and other developing countries have sought to reverse this                    
 trend and to strengthen international economic co- operation. Sustained                   
 efforts were made at the UN General Assembly to reach agreement on the                    
 launching of Global Negotiations on the basis of the two-phase approach                   
 proposed by the 7th Non-Aligned Summit. Unfortunately, these efforts                      
 did not lead to positive results. India took a number of important                        
 initiatives in pursuance of the NAM proposal for convening an                             
 International Conference on Money and Finance for Development. A                          
 high-level Group of Experts was established, comprising Algeria, India,                   
 Mexico, Tanzania and Yugoslavia for a thorough examination of the                         
 various aspects of the NAM proposal. The Group published its report in                    
 September 1984 and copies of the report were sent to the Heads of State                   
 or Government of developed as well as developing countries. The                           
 Ministerial Meetings of NAM and Group of 77 held in New York in                           
 September/October 1984 expressed their appreciation for this important                    
 initiative.                                                                               
                                                                                           
 It has been our endeavour to secure the initiation of a dialogue                          
 between the North and the South on ways of improving the international                    
 monetary and financial systems with a view to preparing for the                           
 proposed International Conference on Money and Finance for Development.                   
 The former Prime Minister had addressed letters on this subject to all                    
 the participants in the London Summit of major industrialised countries                   
 and had sent her personal emissaries to the capitals of these countries                   
 to explain our approach and to stress the urgency of initiating a                         
 dialogue. The British Prime Minister, who chaired the Summit,                             
 subsequently sent a Special Envoy to New Delhi for a briefing on the                      
 deliberations at the Summit.                                                              
                                                                                           
 The response to the initiatives described above has been quite                            
 disappointing. The London Summit did not build on the moves towards an                    
 International Monetary Conference which had figured at the preceding                      
 Summit at Williamsburg but took a somewhat complacent view of the debt                    
 and development crisis and in effect affirmed the adequacy of the                         
 existing financial institutions to deal with the situation. This was                      
 due partly to the pre- occupation of the major industrialised countries                   
 with their own problems and partly                                                        
 -68>                                                                                      
 due to a reluctance to envisage the type of structural changes which                      
 are widely believed even by many experts from developed countries-to be                   
 not only necessary but inevitable. While the participants in the Summit                   
 indicated their willingness to enter into a dialogue, they insisted                       
 that the dialogue could only be held in the existing Bretton Woods                        
 institutions.                                                                             
                                                                                           
 The Commonwealth Consultative Group established by the CHOGM held in                      
 New Delhi in November 1983 submitted its report to the Meeting of                         
 Commonwealth Finance Ministers in Toronto in September 1984. The Group                    
 was not able to reach consensus on the substantive issues of monetary                     
 reform or the proposal for an International Conference but made a                         
 recommendation for holding a special meeting of the Development                           
 Committee to discuss the relevant issues. This recommendation was                         
 subsequently accepted at the annual meetings of the IMF/World Bank and                    
 special meetings of both the Development and Interim Committees are to                    
 be held in the spring of 1985.                                                            
                                                                                           
 The 39th Session of the UN General Assembly also failed to achieve any                    
 substantial results in the area of international economic co-operation.                   
 There was no consensus on the Mid-term Review and Appraisal of the                        
 International Development Strategy. Efforts to secure even a procedural                   
 resolution on the inter- linkages among monetary, financial and trade                     
 issues did not succeed and the resolution had to be voted upon, with                      
 the major industrialised countries voting against it.                                     
                                                                                           
 It is obvious that the current economic crisis will not disappear by                      
 being ignored. Nor would the development of developing countries come                     
 about as a "trickle-down" effect of the recovery in developed                             
 countries. Conscious action is needed to tackle the crisis and to bring                   
 about fundamental changes in international economic relations. It is,                     
 therefore, essential that developing countries for their part continue                    
 in a unified manner to coordinate their policies and to formulate and                     
 press realistic proposals to intensify international economic co-                         
 operation. They are in turn entitled to expect a positive response from                   
 developed countries in an effort to establish an international economic                   
 system which supports and reinforces, rather than obstructs, their own                    
 efforts to adjust and develop. They are determined to continue to press                   
 on with their efforts to strengthen the system of multilateral                            
 co-operation and to evolve a more effective and equitable international                   
 economic order.                                                                           
                                                                                           
 An important element of the New International Economic Order is greater                   
 cooperation among developing countries themselves. Intensive work                         
 continued during the year under review to promote such co-operation. A                    
 number of technical meetings were help under the Caracas Programme of                     
 Action for Economic Co-operation among Developing Countries (ECDC). The                   
 sectors covered by these meetings included trade in goods and services,                   
 financial co- operation, energy, food and agriculture and technical                       
 cooperation. The results of the meetings were reviewed by the                             
 Inter-governmental Followup and Coordination Committee (IFCC) at its                      
 meeting in Cartagena in September 1984.                                                   
 -69>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 One of the initiatives taken under the Caracas Programme in which the                     
 work at the technical level has reached a fairly advanced stage is the                    
 establishment of a Global System of Trade Preferences (GSTP) among                        
 developing countries. The negotiations for GSTP have already been                         
 formally launched and about 40 developing countries have so far                           
 signified their willingness to join the negotiations. In the initial                      
 stages, the progress was somewhat slow. The negotiations are being held                   
 in UNCTAD, which is a universal forum; and one of the inhibiting                          
 factors has been the negative attitude of some developed countries.                       
 During the period under review, progress was made at the techincal                        
 level on issues relating to the ground rules for the negotiations. At                     
 the IFCC meeting in Cartagena, there was recognition of the need for                      
 rapid progress in the negotiations and for further political impetus to                   
 this end.                                                                                 
                                                                                           
 Another important initiative in the area of ECDC is the proposal for                      
 the establishment of a Bank of Developing Countries (South Bank). A                       
 great deal of technical work has been done with regard to this                            
 proposal. However, some difficulties have been encountered at the                         
 political level largely due to the negative attitude of some major OPEC                   
 countries which have taken the stand that the functions of the proposed                   
 Bank can be more efficiently performed by existing financial                              
 institutions. Efforts are still continuing to reach a wider consensus                     
 and an "Initiative Group" has been set up to undertake further work.                      
                                                                                           
 Among the other elements of the Caracas Programme on which some                           
 progress has been made are the establishment of an Action Committee on                    
 Fossil Fuels and the setting up of Multi-Sectoral Information Network                     
 (MSIN) for technical co-operation among developing countries.                             
                                                                                           
 One of the concrete manifestations of ECDC is the agreement reached                       
 among the seven countries of South Asia to launch an Integrated                           
 Programme of Action for South Asian Regional Co- operation (SARC).                        
 After the adoption of the SARC Declaration at the meeting of the                          
 Foreign Ministers held in New Delhi in August 1983, intensive work has                    
 begun for the implementation of the agreed programmes of co-operation.                    
 The Standing Committee of Foreign Secretaries met in New Delhi at the                     
 end of February 1984 to review the Reports of the Technical Committees,                   
 which had met earlier. The Standing Committee also took a number of                       
 decisions aimed at improving the functioning of the Technical                             
 Committee.                                                                                
                                                                                           
 The Foreign Ministers of the seven countries held their second meeting                    
 in Male on 10-11 July, 1984. This was preceded by the meeting of the                      
 Standing Committee of Foreign Secretaries on 7-8 July, 1984. The main                     
 tasks before the Maldives meeting were a review of progress in the                        
 implementation of the SAARC programmes and the consideration of the                       
 date and venue of the SAARC Summit. It was decided to recommend the                       
 convening of the SARC Summit in Dhaka in the last quarter of 1985. It                     
 was also agreed that the next meeting of Foreign Ministers to be held                     
 in Thimpu in May 1985 would serve as the preparatory meeting for the                      
 Summit. It was felt that considerable progress                                            
 -70>                                                                                      
 had been achieved in implementing the SARC programmes in a relatively                     
 short time. It was stressed that increasing emphasis should be placed                     
 on operational activities and the formulation of specific projects. To                    
 this end, the meeting accepted India's suggestion that consideration                      
 should be given to the convening of meetings at the level of Ministers                    
 in some vital areas. A number of decisions were taken aimed at                            
 improving the monitoring and coordination of SARC programmes. A                           
 specific item on the agenda was the improvement of telecommunications                     
 and airlinks among the countries of the region. The Technical                             
 Committees on Telecommunications and Transport were asked to consider                     
 proposals in this regard and submit recommendations to the Standing                       
 Committee. The Foreign Ministers also had useful discussion on the                        
 World Economic situation. The meeting expressed concern at the                            
 deteriorating economic and social conditions in developing countries                      
 and urged that the proposals put forward by the Seventh Non-Aligned                       
 Summit and the Group of 77 be actively pursued. Special mention was                       
 made of the need for increasing IDA resources and the Chairman was                        
 requested to convey the concerns of the South Asian countries to the                      
 leaders of the industrialised countries.                                                  
                                                                                           
 After the Male meeting intensive work has started at the level of the                     
 Technical Committees. Some of them have already met and efforts have                      
 been made to formulate regional projects in some sectors. A meeting of                    
 civil aviation officials and airline experts was convened at Karachi to                   
 discuss the improvement of airlinks among SARC countries. The reports                     
 of these meetings will be reviewed by the Standing Committee of Foreign                   
 Secretaries which will be held in Male in February 1985.                                  
                                                                                           
 The implementation of the Indian Technical and Economic Co- operation                     
 (ITEC) Programme continued to be one of the major activities of the                       
 Ministry during the year under review. The financial allocation for                       
 promoting technical co-operation with other developing countries under                    
 this programme amounted to Rs. 65 million during the year. This is                        
 aside from specific individual programmes of co-operation with                            
 neighbouring countries such as Nepal, Bangladesh and Bhutan, and from                     
 technical assistance to other developing countries rendered through the                   
 Colombo Plan, SCAAP and through the provision for technical co-                           
 operation out of the amount earmarked for India by the UNDP. Compared                     
 with the initial budgetary allocation of Rs. 0.44 million in 1964 when                    
 the ITEC Programme was launched, the present outlay signifies a                           
 tremendous increase in India's technical co- operation with developing                    
 countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America over the years. It is also                    
 necessary to note that the amount earmarked by India for technical                        
 co-operation with other developing countries (TCDC) goes a much longer                    
 way than the nominal monetary figure would suggest, as against                            
 comparable allocations from developed countries for assistance to                         
 developing countries.                                                                     
                                                                                           
 The ITEC programme encompasses training facilities in India for                           
 nationals of other developing countries, deputation of Indian experts                     
 to those countries on short, medium and long-term assignments,                            
 feasibility studies and techno-economic surveys, consultancy services,                    
 execution of special projects and gifts of equipment. The programme has                   
 -71>                                                                                      
 also been used to assist visiting dignitaries and technical level                         
 delegations from other developing countries to acquaint themselves with                   
 Indian economic and technical institutions and to give them an exposure                   
 to the strides that India has taken in various fields over the years.                     
 During 1984-85, 820 ITEC slots were earmarked for nominees from                           
 developing countries for training courses in various specialised Indian                   
 institutions. Over 80 Indian experts were deputed to those countries                      
 during the year on assignments of varying durations and disciplines.                      
 Among the major beneficiaries were Mauritius, People's Democratic                         
 Republic of Yemen, Yemen Arab Republic, Zimbabwe and Zambia. ITEC                         
 activities during the year under review included feasibility studies                      
 for a water works project and an agricultural project in Tanzania as                      
 well as for a railway project in Cuba. A team of educational experts                      
 visited Kenya, Uganda and Ethiopia to assist in the academic fields in                    
 those countries. ITEC assistance during the year under review included                    
 gifting of electrical equipment to Fiji, artificial limbs to Burma,                       
 sports goods to Jamaica and mulberry cuttings to Colombia. Equipment                      
 was supplied to Kenya for the establishment of vocational training                        
 centre and assistance was given to hold an exposition of small scale                      
 industrial technologies in Nairobi. Technical books were presented to                     
 Tanzania and law books to Uganda and Gambia. Medicines were supplied to                   
 Ethiopia, Yemen Arab Republic and the People's Democratic Republic of                     
 Yemen. A substantial quantity of wheat was gifted to the Yemen Arab                       
 Republic and the supply of hand weaving machines (Charkhas) and fruit                     
 slicers to Sudan was processed.                                                           
                                                                                           
 India's relations with multilateral regional groupings such as the                        
 Economic Commission for Africa (ECA), African Development Bank (Af.                       
 D.B.), Economic Commission of West African States (ECOWAS), and the                       
 Southern African Development Coordination Conference (SADCC) were                         
 further strengthened during the year under review. Two Indian                             
 economists were deputed to the Af. D.B. and substantial equipment was                     
 supplied to the ECA under the ITEC programme. An agricultural                             
 implements unit was set up in Lesotho which forms part of the overall                     
 SADCC planning for the region. India participated prominently in the                      
 SADCC Annual Consultative Meeting in Lusaka.                                              
                                                                                           
 Indian technical assistance to Mauritius, which was finalised during                      
 the second session of the India-Mauritius Joint Commission held in 1984                   
 envisages an estimated expenditure of Mauritian rupees 40 million.                        
 Among other programmes for assistance were the setting up of two                          
 hospitals in Mauritius, the treatment of 20 cardiac patients from                         
 Mauritius annually in India, supply of equipment to Mauritius for an                      
 industrial estate and a basic school etc. Several ITEC experts were                       
 sent to Mauritius during the year under review. The number of ITEC                        
 experts currently in Mauritius on various assignments is over 30.                         
 Co-operative projects are also under implementation in Mauritius in                       
 spheres such as sericulture, pisciculture, handicrafts and in                             
 meteorology and health services.                                                          
 -72>                                                                                      
 Several delegations from developing countries visiting India were                         
 assisted during the year under review by the ITEC programme. These                        
 included delegations from Zambia, Zimbabwe, Mauritius, Ethiopia and                       
 Angola.                                                                                   
                                                                                           
 Aside from activities under the ITEC programme, the Ministry actively                     
 assisted foreign countries in the recruitment of experts in various                       
 fields from India.                                                                        
                                                                                           
 The Ministry continued to make a significant contribution to India's                      
 financial system geared to exports as well as to important bodies                         
 concerned with foreign trade. This was facilitated by the Ministry's                      
 representation on the Boards of such organisations as the EXIM Bank,                      
 ECGC, FIEO, TDA, IIFT etc. as well as a number of important public                        
 sector organisations which have dealings abroad.                                          
 -73>                                                                                      
 POLICY PLANNING                                                                           
                                                                     Top                   
 The Policy Planning and Review Division of the Ministry was expanded                      
 and strengthened. It consists of a corps of foreign service and                           
 research cadre officers with supporting staff and facilities including                    
 a modern library. The Division continued to function under the overall                    
 guidance of the Foreign Secretary and the supervision of an Additional                    
 Secretary.                                                                                
                                                                                           
 During the year under review, the Policy Planning and Review Division                     
 prepared a number of policy papers and background notes on various                        
 topics relating to the external relations of India. The Division                          
 interacted with other Divisions in the Ministry as well as with other                     
 Ministries and Departments in order to impart multiple perspectives to                    
 the studies. As in the past, several such studies were circulated to                      
 Missions abroad and Territorial Divisions of the Ministry as well as to                   
 other concerned departments and agencies of the Government.                               
                                                                                           
 A Conference of South Asian Heads of Missions was held in New Delhi                       
 from 2 to 5 April 1984. Heads of Missions from Afghanistan, Bangladesh,                   
 Bhutan, Burma, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka participated in                    
 the Conference. The Conference, which was inaugurated by the then                         
 Minister of State, Shri A.A. Rahim, was presided over by the Foreign                      
 Secretary. Senior officers of Ministry of External Affairs and other                      
 Ministries participated in the discussions. The Foreign Minister                          
 addressed the concluding session of the Conference. This was the second                   
 Conference of Heads of Missions from the South Asian region organised                     
 by the Ministry of External Affairs, the first having taken place in                      
 August 1983. Such periodic conferences are part of the continuing                         
 process of in-depth internal discussions and assessment of the evolving                   
 situation in our neighbourhood. Deliberations of such conferences                         
 constitute a valuable input for policy formulation by the Government.                     
                                                                                           
 The Division also continued to maintain contact with Area Studies                         
 Centres of various universities where scholars are involved in research                   
 and study of international affairs. The officers of the Division took                     
 part in various seminars relating to India's foreign policy as well as                    
 international affairs. Particular mention may be made of the Seminar on                   
 Indo-Pak relations organised by the Indian Centre for Regional Affairs,                   
 New Delhi, in April 1984; a Seminar Meeting of the Task Force on the                      
 Indian Ocean organised by the Institute for Defence Studies and                           
 Analysis, New Delhi, in November 1984; the Seminar on                                     
 -74>                                                                                      
 "Democratic India and its Impact on Regional Stability" organised by                      
 the Indian Centre for Regional Affairs in December 1984. Scholars and                     
 other experts were invited to the Ministry for discussions while                          
 visiting Indian Ambassadors were requested to hold discussions with                       
 officers of the Division.                                                                 
                                                                                           
 No studies were commissioned during 1984. The two earlier studies                         
 commissioned during 1982-83 namely, one on "India's Foreign Policy:                       
 Issues and Problems during 1980s" entrusted to the Centre for Policy                      
 Research, New Delhi, and the other on "India's Principal Concerns in                      
 International Negotiating Issues in 1980s" undertaken by ICRIER, New                      
 Delhi, are expected to be ready shortly.                                                  
                                                                                           
 In August 1984, the Policy Planning and Review Division was reorganised                   
 and the Historical Division was revived. As in earlier years, the                         
 Historical Division coordinated the work relating to the Annual Report                    
 of the Ministry.                                                                          
 -75>                                                                                      
 EXTERNAL PUBLICITY                                                                        
                                                                     Top                   
 During the period under review, events in Punjab posed a particular                       
 challenge for our external publicity effort, particularly in countries                    
 with large ethnic Indian populations originating from that state .                        
 National and international attention was focused on the Punjab                            
 situation and it became necessary to desseminatet correct information                     
 on a very wide scale. Hostile propaganda and misreporting had to be                       
 countered. We greatly stepped up our information activity and used new                    
 and more effective means such as video tapes. This activity is being                      
 maintained and broadened in scope to cover other aspects of national                      
 affairs. The External Publicity (XP) Division has been collaborating                      
 closely with the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in producing                    
 suitable material.                                                                        
                                                                                           
 The assassination of Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi was a                         
 tragedy of great magnitude. Over 600 foreign media personnel flooded                      
 into Delhi to cover the tragic event and its aftermath, including the                     
 swearing-in of the new Government. Many stayed on for the General                         
 Elections, which also evoked world-wide attention, as did the Bhopal                      
 disaster. The External Publicity Division collaborated with the Press                     
 Information Bureau (PIB) in giving logistical support to this large                       
 influx of journalists.                                                                    
                                                                                           
 The regular activities of the External Publicity Division included, in                    
 the context of India's Chairmanship of the Non- Aligned Movement (NAM),                   
 publicity for Indian initiatives within the framework of NAM. The                         
 External Publicity Division also continued to be involved in                              
 international meetings and conferences for the promotion of the New                       
 Information and Communications Order. Similarly, its work regarding                       
 coordination of activities relating to sports, arts and cultural                          
 exchanges among South Asian Regional Co-operation (SARC) countries                        
 continued.                                                                                
                                                                                           
 Situation in the Punjab                                                                   
 In order to disseminate the correct facts to the media and the Indian                     
 community abroad, the External Publicity Division's twice daily                           
 transmissions to Missions abroad carried all significant statements                       
 made by the President and the Prime Minister and authoritative official                   
 pronouncements by the official spokesman. The Missions were also                          
 supplied video and audio tapes covering topical developments in Punjab                    
 which were made available to Indian Associations, ethnic radio and TV                     
 stations and shown in the Chancery/                                                       
 -76>                                                                                      
 Embassy premises. Large quantities of printed material were supplied,                     
 including the White Paper in English and Gurmukhi, and specially                          
 designed pamphlets. Vigorous efforts were undertaken to activate the                      
 ethnic media abroad, which serves the Indian community, and to use it                     
 to put across correct information. In this context, our envoys made                       
 several appearances on television programmes and participated in group                    
 discussions. The Missions were also vigilant in trying to counter                         
 hostile propaganda.                                                                       
                                                                                           
 While consistent efforts were made to see that the correct facts were                     
 projected in the media abroad by taking the measures listed above, it                     
 was borne in mind that our publicity efforts should cover all aspects                     
 of Indian life and culture.                                                               
                                                                                           
 Indian initiatives within the framework of NAM                                            
 In the context of India's Chairmanship of NAM, many initiatives were                      
 taken by the late Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi, including                       
 summit level consultations at the UN, attempts to further the cause of                    
 disarmament, and efforts to resolve the situation in West Asia. A group                   
 of experts from Non- Aligned countries met several times to prepare a                     
 report on the NAM proposal for an international conference on money and                   
 finance for development. This report was sent by the late Prime                           
 Minister to Heads of State or Government of NAM and other developing                      
 countries as well as to the leaders of the developed countries. The                       
 External Publicity Division publicised these initiatives suitably both                    
 in India and abroad.                                                                      
                                                                                           
 India took part both in the Conference of the Ministers of Information                    
 of NAM countries at Jakarta from 26 to 30 January 1984 and the NAM                        
 conference of Ministers of Information and Telecommunications at Cairo.                   
 These meetings helped strengthen the Non-Aligned News Agencies Pool                       
 (NANAP) and the Broadcasting Organisation of the Non-Aligned Countries                    
 (BONAC) and led to the reduction of tariffs for communications between                    
 NAM countries.                                                                            
                                                                                           
 Some interesting meetings in the information field were held in Delhi,                    
 with the participation of the External Publicity Division. The Indian                     
 Institute of Mass Communications organised the Asia Pacific Regional                      
 Seminar on the Utilisation of Satellite Technology for Mass                               
 Communications from 10 to 12 April 1984. Participants came from several                   
 neighibouring countries. From 25 to 27 April 1984, the Press Trust of                     
 India (PTI) in co-operation with UNESCO and the Indian Institute of                       
 Mass Communication, organised a seminar on "Improving News Pool                           
 Performance". Delegates from abroad represented a number of news                          
 agencies from developing countries.                                                       
 SARC activity in Sports, Arts and Culture                                                 
                                                                                           
 Two meetings of the Technical Committee on Sports, Arts and Culture                       
 were convened on 13-14 January 1984 and 7-9 January 1985 respectively.                    
 Implementation of a number                                                                
 -77>                                                                                      
 of items in the comprehensive programme of action agreed upon at the                      
 first meeting has started. Pursuant to the recommendations of the                         
 Technical Committee, India sent a 95-member contingent to the South                       
 Asian Federation Games at Kathmandu. A Preparatory Committee meeting                      
 with SARC participation to work on the scheduled SARC Archaeological                      
 Congress took place in November 1984. The Archaeological Survey of                        
 India plans to hold a workshop on Arabic and Dravidian scripts with                       
 SARC participation in 1985. A committee of experts was set up by the                      
 Centre for Cultural Resources and Training, New Delhi, to finalise the                    
 details of projects for study of the eco-zones consisting of humid                        
 tropics of the western coast and the monsoon-fed North-Eastern Region                     
 of india which in some measure share common ecology and environment                       
 with other SARC countries. The research reports will be made available                    
 to other member countries of the SARC to enable them to have similar                      
 studies.                                                                                  
                                                                                           
 Publications                                                                              
 The following regular publications were brought out: Indian and Foreign                   
 Review, a fortnightly colour magazine and its French counterpart                          
 Courrier de I'Inde and the monthly Foreign Affairs Record. The                            
 important occasional publications included speeches by the late Prime                     
 Minister on "Islam's contribution to world culture with special                           
 reference to India," her appeal, along with five other world leaders,                     
 entitled "A common effort for peace," and her speeches during 1983 (in                    
 two parts); speeches by the former Minister for External Affairs                          
 entitled "Disarmament in the 80s" and "Reply to the Discussions on                        
 Demand for Grants for the Ministry of External Affairs," South-South                      
 Co-operation," and "Regional Studies"; the statement made by the                          
 Minister of State in the Ministry of External Affairs, Shri Ram Niwas                     
 Mirdha, at the 39th Session of the General Assembly; and the pamphlets                    
 entitled "The Sikhs in their Homeland India," "India's support for the                    
 Palestine's Struggle for a National Homeland" and "1984- India Goes to                    
 the Polls".                                                                               
                                                                                           
 Daily Bulletin to Missions                                                                
 The External Publicity Division continued to keep our Missions informed                   
 of matters of contemporary interest in India's relations with other                       
 countries as well as on important political, economic and scientific                      
 and technological developments in India through twicedaily                                
 transmissions. 26 Missions received these transmissions through the                       
 Overseas Communications Service (OCS); eight Missions in North and                        
 South America received them through satellite; 28 through PTI links                       
 with foreign news agencies; 45 Missions received bi-weekly telexes; six                   
 Missions were covered by bi-weekly press cables; and 30 Missions                          
 received cyclostyled copies of transmissions by diplomatic bag. The                       
 system is being upgraded so as to supply all Missions with daily                          
 bulletin.                                                                                 
 -78>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 Assistance to Foreign Media                                                               
 The Division continued to provide facilities for media representatives                    
 from abroad for doing their work. During the nine-month period ending                     
 31 December 1984 about 1000 members of foreign media were catered to.                     
 The External Publicity Division worked closely with the Press                             
 Information Bureau in handling the large influx of foreign media                          
 personnel at the time of the assassination of the late Prime Minister                     
 and later developments towards the close of 1984, including the Bhopal                    
 disaster. It also handled a large number of visiting journalists who                      
 accompanied important visitors from abroad.                                               
                                                                                           
 Audio-Visual Publicity                                                                    
 The Division purchased some feature and documentary films for                             
 circulation to Missions abroad. Film Weeks were organised in Mexico,                      
 Sweden and China as well as a Film Seminar in Bangladesh and a Film                       
 Festival in Jakarta. Our Missions continued to be supplied with                           
 photographs for publicity purposes. Exhibition size photographs were                      
 also sent to several Missions for holding photographic exhibitions.                       
                                                                                           
 Regular supply of video cassettes and audio cassettes covering topical                    
 developments and containing suitable entertainment programme on a                         
 frequency of twice to thrice per month to target Missions catering to                     
 Indian ethnic populations were organised. VCRs were also sanctioned to                    
 important Missions for appropriate use both in monitoring local                           
 coverage on India as well as the video cassettes from Delhi for                           
 placement locally abroad.                                                                 
                                                                                           
 News Agencies and Feature Agencies                                                        
 The Division continued to subscribe to the feature news services of                       
 news agencies and to commission special feature articles on the                           
 occasions of Republic and Independence Day for dissemination abroad.                      
 The publication of special supplements on India on national occasions                     
 were facilitated.                                                                         
 -79>                                                                                      
 CULTURAL RELATIONS                                                                        
                                                                     Top                   
 The Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) which functions under                    
 the administrative control of the Ministry of External Affairs                            
 continued to play an important role as the principal agency for                           
 promoting India's cultural relations with other nations.                                  
                                                                                           
 During the period under review, the Council received over 100                             
 distinguished scholars, artists, writers and intellectuals from various                   
 foreign countries which included Argentina, Bangladesh, Cuba, China,                      
 Denmark, Kenya, Hungary, Japan, Korea, Malagassy, Tanzania, Thailand,                     
 Mexico, Peru, Sweden, UK, USA, USSR and Zimbabwe. Among them were Dr.                     
 Jonas Salk, the Nobel Laureate and Philip Glass, the Composer from USA,                   
 Mr. Wu Xiaoda, Director of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences,                        
 Prof. Ren Jiyu of the Institute of Research on World Religions of the                     
 Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, H.E. Judge M. Bedjoui of the                          
 International Court of Justice, Dr. Alfonso Garcia Robles, the Nobel                      
 Laureate from Mexico, Dr. Leopold Senghor from Senegal, and Prof.                         
 Hajima Nakamura, Prof. Emeritus of the University of Tokyo.                               
                                                                                           
 About 30 foreign performing troupes including the New York Philharmonic                   
 Orchestra led by Zubin Mehta, the Paris Opera ballet with Rudolf                          
 Nureyev, the Bolshoi Ballet, the Merce Cunningham Dance Company, Stars                    
 of the Metropolitan and La Scala Operas, the Watermill Theatre Company,                   
 the National Dance Company of Zimbabwe, Buyo and Gagaku troupes from                      
 Japan, performed in New Delhi and other major cities of India under                       
 ICCR sponsorship making the year under review an unprecedented year as                    
 far as the visits of important foreign cultural troupes are concerned.                    
                                                                                           
 Over 55 individual artists and scholars and forty performing                              
 delegations were sent abroad, some of the latter going for the first                      
 time to countries such as Niger, Upper Volta, Ivory Coast, Liberia and                    
 Costa Rica. Outgoing individual artists and scholars included Shri M.F.                   
 Hussain to China, Shri Satish Alekar, Playwright, to the Nordic Theatre                   
 Festival at Oslo, Shri K.S. Srinivasan, Music Critic, to Kenya,                           
 Tanzania, Malawi and Zimbabwe and Qari Mohd. Ali Khan to Kuala Lumpur                     
 to participate in the International Quran Reading. Among the performing                   
 arts troupes sent out were 45 musicians and dancers for a Festival of                     
 Himalayan Cultures which was presented in 22 cities of Europe in                          
 April/May 1984, Ustad Imrat Khan and Yamini Krishnamurti who performed                    
 in a number of places in, Greece, Padma Subramanyam who performed in                      
 Madrid                                                                                    
 -80>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 and Vienna, Malavika Sarukai to Moscow for performance at the                             
 felicitation ceremony for the Indian Astronauts on their return from                      
 space, an Odissi troupe to 8 West-African countries, A Kuchipudi troupe                   
 to 8 East and South East Asian countries, and a Kathakali troupe to                       
 Australia and New Zealand. The important exhibitions presented or                         
 co-sponsored by the Council are : (1) In India : British Figurative                       
 Art-"The Proper Study"; Contemporary Turkish Art; Photo Korea;                            
 Budhist-Art Objects; American Porcelain;Portuguese Trade Routes to the                    
 Indies; Retrospective of Krishna Reddy's Works.(2) Abroad : Indian Arts                   
 & Crafts in Beijing; Indian Contemporary Art, Traditional Textiles,                       
 Masks & Musical Instruments at Delphi and Athens during the Indo-Greek                    
 Symposium there; Works of India's leading Cartoonists in Vienna;                          
 Madhubani Paintings in Mexico; and Indian Contemporary Art in Moscow                      
 and Vienna                                                                                
                                                                                           
 The Council organised an Indo-Greek Symposium in Greece in                                
 collaboration with the European Cultural Centre there, and the First                      
 International Conference on Buddhism & National Cultures in                               
 collaboration with other National Councils. Over 350 scholars from 40                     
 different countries participated in this conference. The Council                          
 collaborated with the Jawaharlal Nehru University in organising an                        
 International Conference on Literature in Translation.                                    
                                                                                           
 The 1984 annual Azad Memorial Lecture was delivered by H.E. Dr. Alfonso                   
 Garcia Robles, Nobel Peace Laureate, on "Nuclear Disarmament : A                          
 Crucial Issue for the Survival of Mankind."                                               
                                                                                           
 The Council's publications during the year included Gandhi-A Life                         
 Revisited (in Arabic, Spanish and French); a Hindi translation of                         
 Bolivar : A Continent & its Destiny by Jose Luis Salcadeo Bastardo;                       
 India and Egypt : Modern Relations Between Two Ancient Nations (Azad                      
 Memorial Lecture, 1983) by Mohammed Hassan EI-Zayyat; and Nuclear                         
 Disarmament : A Crucial Issue for the Survival of Mankind (Azad                           
 Memorial Lecture, 1984) by Alfonso Garcia Robles. The quarterly                           
 journals of the Council, namely Indian Horizons, Africa Quarterly,                        
 Rencontre Avec i'Inde (French), Papeles de la India (Spanish),                            
 Thaqafatual Hind (Arabic), and Gagananchal (Hindi) were regularly                         
 published.                                                                                
                                                                                           
 The Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding                                
 (administered by the ICCR) for the year 1982 was presented to Dr.                         
 Leopold Sedar Senghor, Eminent Poet and former President of Senegal, by                   
 the President of India, Giani Zail Singh, at a formal ceremony at Teen                    
 Murti House on 12 December 1984.                                                          
                                                                                           
 Under ICCR's Presentation Programme, books, art objects, musical                          
 instruments, etc., were sent to Cultural & Educational Institutions in                    
 various countries which included Denmark, Greece, Korea, China, Cuba,                     
 Bangladesh, Finland, UK and USA.                                                          
                                                                                           
 Important days celebrated by the Council included South Africa Freedom                    
 Day, UN Day, African Day, and Foreign Students Day. -81>                                  
                                                                                           
 Orientation Courses, Summer Camps, Study Tours and Social Get-                            
 togethers were arranged by the Council, as in past years, for foreign                     
 students. A number of scholarships were awarded to foreign students to                    
 study Indian Visual and Performing Arts. Around 3000 travel concessions                   
 were issued, and information on University admission, accommodation,                      
 travel, etc., made available to many foreign students. A meeting of                       
 Foreign Students Advisers in Northern India was chaired by Smt.                           
 Margaret Alva MP, Chairman, ICCR's Foreign Students' Welfare Committee,                   
 in April 1984.                                                                            
                                                                                           
 ICCR's weekly programmes of Indian music, dance, drama and films in the                   
 Saturday Evening Recital series were regularly presented in Delhi and                     
 Bangalore for the benefit of foreign students.                                            
                                                                                           
 As part of the ICCR programme of maintaining of Chairs/Centres of                         
 Indian Studies abroad, the Council deputed Indian teachers to a number                    
 of institutions abroad.                                                                   
                                                                                           
 The ICCR's Cultural Centres in Fiji, Guyana and Suriname continued to                     
 function well and expanded their activities. A Cultural Window was                        
 opened in Bonn and will be presenting regular exhibitions of Indian                       
 Fine Arts & Crafts there, as also organising Workshops, Seminars, etc.,                   
 on various aspects of Indian culture.                                                     
                                                                                           
 The Council continued to oversee the activities of foreign Cultural                       
 Centres in India and during the year under review new regulations were                    
 introduced for better regulation and monitoring of these activities.                      
 -82>                                                                                      
 PROTOCOL                                                                                  
                                                                     Top                   
 During 1984, Heads of Missions of the following 22 countries left India                   
 on the completion of their assignment: Japan, Democratic People's                         
 Republic of Korea, Nigeria, Kenya, Algeria, Portugal, Jordan, Trinidad                    
 and Tobago, Bhutan, Republic of Korea, Venezuela, Pakistan, Australia,                    
 Greece, Switzerland, Finland, China, Tanzania, German Democratic                          
 Republic (GDR), Federal Republic of Germany (FRG), Somalia and Belgium.                   
                                                                                           
 In the same period, Heads of Missions of the following 31 countries                       
 presented their credentials to the President of India : Turkey, Ghana,                    
 Arab Republic of Egypt, Japan, Iceland, Chile, Kenya, Democratic                          
 People's Republic of Korea, Bhutan, Seychelles (Resident in Mahe),                        
 Trinidad and Tobago, Portugal, Zimbabwe, Republic of Korea, Pakistan,                     
 Nigeria, Greece, Panama, Australia, Peru, Algeria, Tanzania, GDR,                         
 Finland, Switzerland, Singapore, Jordan, Iran, FRG, China and Uruguay                     
 (Resident in Tokyo).                                                                      
                                                                                           
 The New Zealand Government closed its Mission in New Delhi in early                       
 1982. Later, they decided to have concurrent accreditation. Their High                    
 Commissioner stationed at Wellington presented his credentials on 19                      
 April 1983 to the President of India. However, the New Zealand                            
 Government have now proposed the appointment of Sir Edmund Hillary as                     
 their new High Commissioner to India with residence in India. Their                       
 Acting High Commissioner, Mr. D.F.L. Markes, arrived in India on 25                       
 October 1984.                                                                             
                                                                                           
 Ecuador opened its Mission in New Delhi in April 1984 and Dr. Adolfo                      
 Alvarez assumed charge as Charge d' Affaires, on 11 April 1984. The                       
 Government of India have accorded agreement to the appointment of Mr.                     
 Lucindo Almaide Teran as Ambassador Extra- ordinary & Plenipotentiary                     
 (designate) of the Republic of Ecuador to India, with residence in                        
 Cairo.                                                                                    
 -83>                                                                                      
 PASSPORT, EMIGRATION AND CONSULAR SERVICES                                                
                                                                     Top                   
 There are 21 Passport Offices under the control of the Ministry of                        
 External Affairs. These offices are spread all over India covering                        
 almost all the States. A full-fledged Passport Office at Vijayawada, an                   
 important town of Andhra Pradesh, and a Liaison Office at Trivandrum,                     
 capital of Kerala, were opened during the year under review. These                        
 offices earned a revenue of Rs. 9.05 crores through passport fees                         
 during 1984 and incurred an expenditure of Rs. 2.69 crores towards                        
 office establishment, resulting in a saving of Rs. 6.36 crores. A                         
 statement showing revenue and expenditure in respect of Passport                          
 Offices in India during the period January to December 1984 is given at                   
 Appendix VI.                                                                              
                                                                                           
 Applications for fresh passports and other miscellaneous services                         
 recorded a reduction of 2 lakhs as compared to 1983 mainly due to the                     
 recession in the employment market for our workers in West Asian                          
 countries. However, there was an appreciable increase in consular work                    
 performed by this Ministry and the Missions abroad. All passport                          
 services were, generally, rendered within a reasonable time-bound                         
 framework. The passport procedures were streamlined with a view to                        
 rendering quick services. Our Missions abroad also rendered reasonably                    
 prompt and courteous consular services to Indian nationals abroad.                        
                                                                                           
 Over 14.41 lakh applications for issue of fresh passports were received                   
 in Passport Offices in India during 1984. The Passport Office in Bombay                   
 received the maximum number of applications followed by Tiruchirapalli,                   
 Cochin and Delhi. A statement showing the number of passport                              
 miscellaneous services applications received and the number of                            
 passports issued/miscellaneous services rendered by each Passport                         
 Office in India during the period January to December 1984 is given at                    
 Appendix VII.                                                                             
                                                                                           
 A number of steps were taken with a view to improving the quality of                      
 passport services rendered. Certain essential data required for issue                     
 of passports has been computerised and the first phase of                                 
 computerisation of passport activities has been completed with                            
 installation of terminals at the Regional Passport Office, Delhi,                         
 connected with the computer located at the National Informatics Centre                    
 of the Electronics Commission, Pushpa Bhawan, New Delhi. Another                          
 proposal to instal an inhouse mini computer at each of our Passport                       
 Offices with a possible link to five Regional                                             
 -84>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 Computer Centres is also presently being processed in consultation with                   
 the National Informatics Centre. It has also been decided, in                             
 principle, to introduce computerisation in our Missions in the Gulf and                   
 North America, which will start with the computerisation of their work                    
 relating to passports and consular services. Our Missions in Washington                   
 and Kuwait would become the nodal points and would be linked with other                   
 Missions in their respective regions. Computerisation in other Missions                   
 handling a large number of visa cases is also being proposed.                             
                                                                                           
 With a view to issuing passports in a time-bound framework and to                         
 supplementing the resources of the State Governments, who conduct                         
 security and identity verification in respect of passport applicants,                     
 it was decided to make incentive payment to meet the expenditure on                       
 deployment of additional staff by local police authorities. It was,                       
 therefore, decided that reimbursement would be made up to a maximum of                    
 Rs. 3/- per passport application verified on a clear understanding that                   
 verification reports are received within a specified time-bound                           
 framework.                                                                                
                                                                                           
 Action has been initiated during the year under review to give a neater                   
 appearance to the Passport Offices, and to provide more facilities to                     
 the members of the public, who are required to wait for passports.                        
 Action in this respect has already been completed in the Regional                         
 Passport Office, Delhi, which has also resulted in greater efficiency.                    
 Efforts to bring about improvement in working conditions of other                         
 Passport Offices are being continued.                                                     
                                                                                           
 During the year under review, 715 cases of complaints regarding delay                     
 in the issue/renewal of passports were received against the Passport                      
 Offices in India. It was, however, found that the reasons for delay                       
 were generally non-compliance of formalities by the applicants or late                    
 receipt of police reports. However, immediate necessary action was                        
 taken to get these complaints investigated and passports issued to                        
 complainants, if otherwise entitled under the Passports Act.                              
                                                                                           
 Though the work relating to emigration clearance to intending emigrants                   
 has already been transferred to the Ministry of Labour, under whose                       
 control the Protector of Emigrants at Delhi, Bombay, Cochin,                              
 Trivandrum, Chandigarh, Calcutta were dealt with, the Protector of                        
 Emigrants at Madras, however, continues to be an official of the                          
 Regional Passport Office, Madras, who works under the administrative                      
 control of the Ministry. For emigration clearance work, he is guided by                   
 the instructions of the Ministry of Labour. In addition, all our                          
 Passport Offices continue to perform the function of determining the                      
 status of a passport applicant from emigration angle by suitably                          
 affixing their passports with stamps "Emigration check required" or                       
 "Emigration clearance not required". In this connection, it is relevant                   
 to mention that with a view to helping our intending emigrants,                           
 necessary instructions have been issued to our Passport Officers that                     
 applications for change of profession should be disposed of by the next                   
 working day.                                                                              
 -85>                                                                                      
 In June 1984, a Visa system was introduced for all Commonwealth                           
 countries. Visa Abolition Agreements with these countries were                            
 suspended. A minimum visa fee of Rs. 50/- has been fixed for                              
 Commonwealth nationals. On the basis of reciprocity, the following                        
 countries have also introduced visas for Indian nationals : (a)                           
 Yugoslavia; (b) Bulgaria; (c) Malaysia; (d) Kenya; (e) Norway; (f)                        
 Sweden; (g) Denmark; and (h) Finland. Additional staff was provided to                    
 the Missions concerned to cope with the increase in work, so that visas                   
 could be issued expeditiously.                                                            
                                                                                           
 During the period under review, 1269 cases of deportation of Indian                       
 nationals came to the notice of the Ministry. Of these, as many as 1053                   
 were from UAE. Indian Missions/Posts abroad repatriated 286 persons,                      
 who were in distress in foreign countries, and also extended financial                    
 assistance, wherever necessary. Cases of 206 Indian nationals arrested                    
 in various countries were reported to the Government. All possible                        
 consular assistance was given to them, and where possible, their                          
 release and return to India was facilitated by the Missions concerned.                    
 264 cases of death of foreign nationals in India were also handled.                       
 710 cases of death of Indian nationals abroad came to the notice of the                   
 Ministry and action was initiated to claim wage dues and death                            
 compensation for the heirs of of the deceased through respective Indian                   
 Missions. The procedure of making payments of compensation through                        
 various State Governments in India, which was introduced in the                           
 previous years, is working reasonably satisfactorily.                                     
 1,23,978 documents submitted by the public for production to the                          
 foreign autboritics in connection with the employment abroad, admission                   
 to educational institutio,-,s abroad etc., were attested/authenticated                    
 by the Consular Section. The procedure authentication of documents was                    
 streamlined, so as to enable the persons concerned to get back all the                    
 documents the same day.                                                                   
 Efforts to further streamline the working of our Consular Sections in                     
 Missions abroad are continuing.                                                           
 -86>                                                                                      
 ADMINISTRATION AND ORGANISATION                                                           
                                                                     Top                   
 Shri P.V. Narasimha Rao relinquished charge as Minister for External                      
 Affairs, on his becoming the Minister for Home Affairs on 19 July 1984.                   
 From the same date, Shri S. B. Chavan took charge as Minister without                     
 portfolio, to assist the late Prime Minister who assumed charge as the                    
 Minister for External Affairs. On 2 August 1984, on being appointed                       
 Minister for Defence, Shri S. B. Chavan relinquished charge. Shri Ram                     
 Niwas Mirdha took over as Minister of State from the same date. Shri G.                   
 Parthasarathi was appointed Chairman of the Policy Planning Committee,                    
 with the rank of Cabinet Minister, from 6 August 1984. After the                          
 General Elections 1984, the Prime Minister has retained the portfolio                     
 of External Affairs. Shri Khurshid Alam Khan took over as Minister of                     
 State on 31 December 1984, and Shri R. N. Mirdha and Shri A. A. Rahim                     
 relinquished charge as Ministers of State.                                                
                                                                                           
 Consequent upon the voluntary retirement of Shri K. Natwar Singh,                         
 Secretary, with effect from 9 November 1984, Dr. J. S. Teja was                           
 appointed as Secretary. Shri M. Rasgotra retired on 31 January 1985,                      
 and Shri Romesh Bhandari, Secretary, took over as Foreign Secretary                       
 from 1 February 1985. Shri A. P. Venkateswaraa took over as Secretary                     
 in the Ministry from the same date. At the level of Additional                            
 Secretaries, Shri S. K. Bhutani and Shri I. S. Chadha continued as                        
 Additional Secretaries. Shri Prem Shunker assumed charge as Additional                    
 Secretary, consequent to the promotion of Dr. J. S. Teia on 16 November                   
 1984.                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 To total strength of the IFS and IFS(B) Cadres both at Headquarters and                   
 in Missions/Posts abroad was 3716. This included 34 officers of the                       
 Combined Research Cadre and 31 officers in the Interpreters Cadre as                      
 also locally-recruitcd staff of 1517 in our Missions/Posts abroad. The                    
 total staff strength is given in Appendix VIII.                                           
                                                                                           
 To project India's views abroad, safeguard its national interests and                     
 implement national policies, there are 136 Missions and Posts abroad                      
 manned by 794 diplomatic officers and 1209 non- diplomatic India-based                    
 officials, apart from locally-recruited staff.                                            
                                                                                           
 Consequent upon the Cadre Review of the IFS, the total strength of the                    
 Cadre would be raised from 568 to 589 for 1985 to enable the IFS, which                   
 is incharge of all aspects of India's representation abroad, to                           
 shoulder its growing responsibilities. Details of the Cadre Review are                    
 given in Appendix IX.                                                                     
 -87>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 Missions and Posts in areas which assumed priority from the viewpoint                     
 of our national interests and international obligations were further                      
 strengthened. At the same time, action continued to be taken to                           
 streamline the staffing pattern of several Missions especially our                        
 Missions in Washington and London, by accelerating the removal of                         
 transferable items of work relating to supply work from these two                         
 Missions to offices in India.                                                             
 A list detailing the number of officers who have qualified in various                     
 foreign languages is given at Appendix X.                                                 
                                                                                           
 On the instructions of the late Prime Minister, an Indian Missions                        
 Review Committee was appointed to examine the functioning of Indian                       
 Missions abroad. The Committee consisted of Shri Samar Sen as Chairman                    
 and S/Shri P.K. Kaul, Abid Hussain, K.S. Bajpai as Members and Shri                       
 J.R. Hiremath, Additional Secretary and Shri Lalit Mansingh, Joint                        
 Secretary, as Member Secretaries. The Committee has submitted its                         
 report. The recommendations of the Committee are being examined in the                    
 Ministry for further implementation.                                                      
                                                                                           
 The Ministry continued the task of review and updating of rules.                          
 Compilation of all External Affairs Instructions upto 1984 was                            
 initiated., Enhanced delegation of financial powers to Missions to                        
 enable expeditious clearance of administrative and establishment                          
 matters was undertaken.                                                                   
 The Foreign Service Inspectors inspected our Missions in London,                          
 Belgrade, Madrid, Warsaw, Moscow, Colombo, Male and Thimpu.                               
 On the directive from the late Prime Minister, a Committee headed by                      
 Foreign Secretary was set up for the purpose of selecting and                             
 purchasing objects d'art and objects d'decor for display at the Embassy                   
 Residences and Chanceries.                                                                
 The Ministry continued to pursue its policy of acquiring and                              
 constructing properties abroad to house Indian Missions abroad and                        
 their personnel.                                                                          
                                                                                           
 During the year under review, land was acquired in Abu Dhabi, Dubai and                   
 Kuala Lumpur. The Architect Selection Committee under the Chairmanship                    
 of the Foreign Secretary finalised the selection of Indian architects                     
 for 11 new projects for construction of Chanceries and/or residences in                   
 Abu Dhabi, Aden, Bangkok, Bonn, Brasilia, Doha, Dubai, Kuala Lumpur,                      
 Kuwait, New York and Riyadh. Project reports have already been prepared                   
 in the case of construction projects at Kuwait, New York, and Riyadh                      
 and are under consideration of the Ministry. Sanction has also been                       
 accorded for the construction of a Chancery building at Port of Spain                     
 where a local architect hag been appointed. The construction projects                     
 at Islamabad, Lusaka and Ankara are making steady progress.                               
 Construction of a Chancery and residential complex was started in                         
 Colombo in early 1984.                                                                    
 -88>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 The projects of Chancery buildings at Cairo and Tunis were finalised                      
 during the year. Residences were also purchased at Canberra and Harare.                   
                                                                                           
 The Welfare Unit of the Ministry, as in previous years, looked after                      
 the general welfare of the officials serving both at Headquarters and                     
 in the Missions abroad. The Unit also provided Grants-in-aid on an ad                     
 hoc basis for recreational facilities to officers and staff at                            
 Headquarters and in the Missions abroad. Financial help was also                          
 extended to bereaved families and other deserving cases. For the                          
 unfortunate victims of civil disturbances in October/November, 1984, a                    
 Special Committee was set up and financial help was given to the                          
 affected officials of the Ministry to the maximum extent possible. The                    
 Welfare Unit also assisted the children of the officials of the                           
 Ministry in getting seats in Central Schools, Engineering and Medical                     
 Colleges. As usual, employment was provided to deserving dependents of                    
 deceased officials.                                                                       
                                                                                           
 India's contribution to international organisations was Rs. 2.93                          
 crores. Its economic and technical assistance to Third World countries                    
 amounted to Rs. 86.51 crores.                                                             
                                                                                           
 On account of inflationary tendencies, the expenditure at Headquarters                    
 has risen to Rs. 11.22 crores while the total expenditure on Missions                     
 was about Rs. 62.80 crores. Details are given in Appendices XI and XII.                   
                                                                                           
 The Ministry took particular care to implement the Government directive                   
 on the welfare of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe employees. A                        
 special Cell to look after their welfare continued to function                            
 smoothly. During 1984, of the 12 officers directly recruited for the                      
 Indian Foreign Service, two belonged to the Scheduled Castes and one to                   
 the Scheduled Tribe. Details are given in Appendices XIII and XIV.                        
                                                                                           
 The Conference Cell of this Ministry set up in June 1982 made                             
 logistical arrangements for various international                                         
 conferences/delegations during the year under review. A list of such                      
 conferences is given at Appendix XV. The arrangements made by this Cell                   
 included inter alia arrangements at the venue of the meeting, covering                    
 interpretation, simultaneous translation, document distribution and                       
 arrangements for reception/seeing off of all the delegates.                               
                                                                                           
 The efforts made by the Conference Cell were also made available to                       
 other Ministries and resulted in cutting down expenses of those offices                   
 in the Organisation of such conferences.                                                  
                                                                                           
 In coordination with the other concerned Governmental agencies, the                       
 Ministry made arrangements, at the time of the tragic and sudden demise                   
 of the late Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi, for the record                        
 number of delegations and foreign dignitaries who visited India in the                    
 first week of November 1984. The Ministry operated control rooms                          
 round-the-clock at various points from 31 October till 5 November 1984                    
 -89>                                                                                      
 for looking after the reception, accommodation, transportation,                           
 communications, appointments, seeing off etc. of the various                              
 dignitaries and delegations.                                                              
                                                                                           
 To enable the Ministry to discharge its increased responsibilities                        
 consequent upon India's assuming the Chairmanship of the Non-Aligned                      
 Movement, a new Division called NAM Division was created in the                           
 Ministry. The Division has been set up to maintain close liaison with                     
 the UN Division as well as the Permanent Mission of India to the United                   
 Nations, New York.                                                                        
 -90>                                                                                      
 USE OF HINDI IN OFFICIAL WORK                                                             
                                                                     Top                   
 During the year under review, the Ministry made further advancement                       
 towards the use of Hindi in official work in accordance with the                          
 Official Languves Policy of the Government of India and in pursuance of                   
 the Official Language Act and Rules made thereunder. In the                               
 Headquarters of the Ministry as well as in the Regional Passport                          
 Offices and Missions and Posts abroad, use of Hindi was further                           
 encouraged. Efforts were made for propagation of Hindi abroad,                            
 particularly in countries which have a significant number of people of                    
 Indian origin.                                                                            
                                                                                           
 To ensure the progressive use of Hindi in the Ministry, meetings of the                   
 Official Languages Implementation Committee were held wherein                             
 modalities for progress of Hindi in the Ministry were discussed.                          
 Official Languages Implementation Committees have also been constituted                   
 or are being constituted in major Passport Offices. Quarterly Progress                    
 Reports regarding progressive use of Hindi were called for and reviewed                   
 regularly from the various Sections of the Ministry and Passport                          
 Offices as also from the Indian Missions abroad.                                          
                                                                                           
 In the meeting of the Sub-Committee of Central Hindi Committee in this                    
 Ministry held on 16 May 1984, under the Chairmanship of the Foreign                       
 Minister, it was decided that the monthly publication Foreign.Affairs                     
 Record should be published in Hindi also. The establishment of a Hindi                    
 Unit at the Permanent Mission of India, New York, was also considered.                    
 It was decided to send Hindi books to the Indian Missions/Posts abroad                    
 for the libraries of the Missions and for donating these to the                           
 Universities, Institutions or the individuals teaching or learning                        
 Hindi.                                                                                    
                                                                                           
 In pursuance of the discussions in the Sub-committee meeting regarding                    
 the establishment of a Hindi Unit in the Permanent Mission of India to                    
 the United Nations, the OSD (Hindi) was sent with the Indian delegation                   
 to the United Nations, New York, to assist the members of delegation in                   
 case they needed assistance in Hindi. While on his way back from New                      
 York, OSD (Hindi) also inspected the working of Hindi in the High                         
 Commission of India, London,                                                              
                                                                                           
 With the publication of the Foreign Affairs Record in Hindi from August                   
 1984, the activities of the Ministry of External Affairs would receive                    
 attention regularly and the                                                               
 -91>                                                                                      
 various Universities and other institutions and people interested in                      
 foreign relations would get the material compiled one place.                              
                                                                                           
 In pursuance of the decision taken in meetings of the Official                            
 Languages Implementation Committee of this Minisstry, which are                           
 presided over by the Additional Secretary (AD), OSD (Hindi) visited the                   
 Passport Offices located at Jaipur and Lucknow to monitor the                             
 progressive use of Hindi in those offices.                                                
                                                                                           
 A scheme was formulated earlier to apoint Hindi Officers for the                          
 propagation of Hindi Abroad, Particularly in those countries where                        
 there is a sizeable number of people of Indian origin and where Indian                    
 culture has taken root. Under this scheme, Hindi Officers have been                       
 sent to Georgetown, London and Paramaribo during the year under review.                   
 Senior Hindi Officers were earlier sent to Indian Missions located at                     
 Port Louis, Port of Spain and Suva. One Senior Hindi Translator is                        
 already working in Nepal. Efforts are also being made to provide                          
 supporting staff to these Hindi Officers to facilitate their work. An                     
 immediate outcome of the postings of Hindi Officers is that our                           
 Missions in Georgetown and Port of Spain have started bringing out                        
 Bharat Samachar. The Bharat Samachar brought out from Nepal and                           
 Suriname also carries material in Hindi.                                                  
                                                                                           
 Arrangements for teaching of Hindi exist in several countries abroad.                     
 Under the Centre of Indian Studies, the Government have appointed                         
 visiting Professors of Hindi in Havana University, Cuba; Humboldt                         
 University, German Democratic Republic; Bucharest University, Romania,                    
 and Sofia University, Bulgaria. Under the aegis of the Indian Cultural                    
 Centre, Hindi is being taught in Fiji, Guyana and Suriname. The Indian                    
 Council for Cultural Relations have sent one Hindi teacher each to Port                   
 of Spain, Georgetown and Suriname on behalf of the Ministry of                            
 Education and Culture. A part-time Hindi teacher teaches Hindi in the                     
 High Commission of India in Sri Lanka also. Hindi text-books,                             
 children's books, dictionaries, linguaphone records, cassettes etc.                       
 have been sent to Missions abroad for gifting to those who are                            
 interested in learning Hind. The Ministry have been considering                           
 requests on merit for Hindi typewriters, Hindi text- books and other                      
 Hindi teaching aid material from several other Missions. Under the                        
 Newspapers Exchange Programme, Hindi newspapers were exchanged                            
 regularly. On the occasion of the completion of the 150th year of the                     
 arrival of Indians in Mauritius, which was celebrated extensively in                      
 Mauritius, about 200 Hindi-English, English-Hindi and Hidni-Hindi                         
 dictionaries were donated to the Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Mauritius                    
 through our Mission in Port Louis.                                                        
                                                                                           
 The scheme of Hindi classes for children in Missions abroad continues                     
 as before. A significant step in this direction was made when at the                      
 request of the Mission the amount of honorarium was raised from Rs. 250                   
 to Rs. 400 P.M.                                                                           
                                                                                           
 A large number of books have been sent to Colombo and Rangoon for the                     
 students appearing in examinations conducted by the Dakshin Bharat                        
 Hindi Prachar Sabha.                                                                      
 -92>                                                                                      
 Madras, and Rashtra Bhasha Prachar Samiti, Wardha, and Hindi Sahitya                      
 Sammelan, Prayag. The scheme of equipping Indian Missions abroad with                     
 at least one Hindi typewriter each has been implemented.                                  
                                                                                           
 Consequent upon the inspection of Missions abroad by the committee of                     
 Parliament on Official Languages, the position of Official Languages                      
 implementation has improved. As a result, sign-boards, name-plates and                    
 rubber-stamps in all of our Missions are now in bilingual form.                           
 Official Languages Implementation Committees have also been constituted                   
 in some of the Missions abroad to review the progress of Hindi in their                   
 work and to give it necessary direction. Other Missions have also been                    
 asked to constitute Official Languages Implementation Committees.                         
 Instructions have been given to issue the documents mentioned in                          
 Section 3(3) of the Official Languages Act, 1963, bilingually and for                     
 establishing check-points to ensure its proper implementation.                            
                                                                                           
 Officials posted in Indian Embassies/Missions abroad make use of Hindi.                   
 Messages from the President and the Prime Minister at the occasion of                     
 Repubic Day and Independence Day are sent in Hindi to the Missions                        
 abroad.                                                                                   
                                                                                           
 The Ministry of External Affairs traditionally issues all the Letters                     
 of Appointment, Letters of Credence and Letters of Recall etc. to Heads                   
 of Missions posted abroad originally in Hindi.                                            
                                                                                           
 During the year under review, the Ministry prepared the Hindi texts of                    
 the Protocols'Agreements entered into with the Foreign Governments.                       
 Apart from this, the Hindi Section of the Ministry vetted the Hindi                       
 texts of the Protocols and Agreements prepared by various other                           
 Ministers.                                                                                
                                                                                           
 Two important manuals relating to the administration of the Ministry of                   
 External affairs have been translated into Hindi and these will be                        
 published in the near future.                                                             
 -95>                                                                                      
 APPENDIX I Meetings/Conferences held under the aegis of NAM                               
                                                                     Top                   
 Meetings/Conferences held under the aegis of Non-Aligned Movement or                      
 where India participated in its capacity as Chairman of Non- Aligned                      
 Movement                                                                                  
 S.Name of Meeting/Conference Venue   Date                                                 
 No.                                                                                       
                                                                                           
 (1)            (2)       (3)       (4)                                                    
                                                                                           
 1. Seminar of Non-Aligned Countries                                                       
    on training of Sports Cadres    Patiala   3 to 14 April 1984                           
 2. Special Plenary Meeting of                                                             
    Non-Aligned Movement on the                                                            
    situation in Cyprus                  New York    30 April 1984                         
 3. Meeting of Health Ministers of                                                         
    Non-Aligned Countries                Geneva      9 May 1984                            
 4. Joint Meeting of Ministers of                                                          
    Information and Telecommunications                                                     
    of countries hosting redistribution                                                    
    centres of NANAP (Non-Aligned News                                                     
    Agencies Pool)                       Cairo       9 to 10 May 1984                      
 5. Third Conference of Ministers of                                                       
    Labour of Non-Aligned countries .    Managua     10 to 12 May 1984                     
 6. Meeting of Non-Aligned Coordinating                                                    
    Bureau on South African Premier's                                                      
    visit to some West European                                                            
    countries .  .  .  .  .  .  .        New York    6 June 1984                           
 7. Plenary Meeting of Non-Aligned                                                         
    Movement to adopt the Draft                                                            
    Statute for the Centre for Science                                                     
    & Technology .  .  .  .  .  .   .    New York    15 June 1984                          
 8. Meeting of Irrigation Experts from                                                     
    Non-Aligned and Other Developing                                                       
    Countries           .  .  .  .  .    Pyongyang   16 to 22 June 1984                    
 9. Meeting of Non-Aligned Coordinating                                                    
    Bureau on the Observance of the 40th                                                   
    Anniversary of the United Nations .  New York    3 July 1984                           
 10. Meeting of Coordinating Group of                                                      
     Non-Aligned Countries in the                                                          
     sphere of Standardisation,                                                            
     Metrology and Quality Control  .    Belgrade    10 to 13 July 1984                    
 11. Ministerial level Meeting of                                                          
     Non-Aligned Mediterranean                                                             
     Members    .  .  .  .  .  .  .      Valletta    10 to 11 September                    
                                         (Malta)     1984                                  
 12. Plenary Meeting of the Non-                                                           
     Aligned Movement to Observe                                                           
     the Day of Non-Alignment . .        New York    13 September 1984                     
 -96>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 13. Meeting of Non-Aligned                                                                
     Coordinating Bureau on the                                                            
     Observance of the 40th                                                                
     Anniversary of the United Nations   New York    19 September 1984                     
 14. Meeting of Ministers and Heads                                                        
     Of Delegation of the Non-Aligned                                                      
     Countries to the 39th Session of                                                      
     the General Assembly.  .  .  .  .   New York   1 to 5 October 1984                    
 15. Meeting of Non-Aligned Committee                                                      
     of Eight on Palestine at                                                              
     Ministerial level .  .  .  .  .  .  New York    3 October 1984                        
 16. Plenary Condolence Meeting of the                                                     
     Non-Aligned Countries to pay                                                          
     tributes to Shrimati Indira Gandhi  New York    5 November 1984                       
 17. Meeting of Non-Aligned Coordinating                                                   
     Bureau on the situation in Central                                                    
     America .   .   .    .    .    .    New York    19 November 1984                      
 18. Meeting of Non-Aligned Coordinating                                                   
     Bureau on the Observance of the                                                       
     40th Anniversary of the United                                                        
     Nations   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    New York    6 December 1984                       
 19. Meeting of Foreign Ministers of                                                       
     Organisation of Islamic Conference                                                    
     (India participated as an Observer                                                    
     in its capacity as Chairman of the                                                    
     Non-Aligned Movement).  .  .  .  .  Sanaa       18 to 22 December                     
                                                              1984                         
 20. Meeting of the Coordinating                                                           
     Countries in the field of                                                             
     Standardization, Metrology and                                                        
     Quality Control .                   New Delhi   23 to 31 January                      
                                                              1985                         
 21. Six Nations Summit of India,                                                          
     Argentina, Greece, Mexico, Sweden                                                     
     and Tanzania on Nuclear                                                               
     Disarmament .  .  .  .  .  .  .     New Delhi   28 January 1985                       
 -97>                                                                                      
 APPENDIX II Treaties/Conventions/Agreements                                               
 Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or renewed by India with                        
 other Countries in 1984*                                                                  
 Sl.   Title of Convention/       Date of       Date of         Date on                    
 No.   Treaty/Agreement         Signature     Ratification,      which                     
                                              Accession or     entered                     
                                              Acceptance     into force                    
                                                                                           
 (1)           (2)               (3)              (4)           (5)                        
                                                                                           
 MULTILATERAL                                                                              
                                                                                           
 Berne Convention, Paris Act                                                               
                                                                                           
 1. Berne Convention for the                                                               
    Protection of Literary and                                                             
    Artistic Works of 9-9-1866,                                                            
    as revised at Paris on                                                                 
    24-7-1971     .    .    .      ..           1-2-1984     6-5-1984                      
                                                                                           
 European Economic Community                                                               
                                                                                           
 2. Financing Agreement between                                                            
    the Republic of India and the                                                          
    European Economic Community-                                                           
    Supply of Fertilizers (1983).                                                          
    (Agreement No. NA/83-26).  .   22-8-1984        ..       22-8-1984                     
                                                                                           
 International Bauxite Association                                                         
                                                                                           
 3. Agreement establishing the                                                             
    International Bauxite                                                                  
    Association. Done at Conakry                                                           
    on 8-3-1974.  .  .  .  .  .        ..       5-3-1984     5-3-1984                      
                                                                                           
 International Development                                                                 
 Association                                                                               
                                                                                           
 4. (i) Development Credit                                                                 
    Agreement (NCDC III Project)                                                           
    between India and the                                                                  
    International Development                                                              
    Association. (Credit No.                                                               
    1502 IN)             .  .      12-10-1984       ..       12-10-1984                    
    (ii) Project Agreement (NCDC                                                           
    III Project) between the                                                               
    International Development                                                              
    Association and the National                                                           
    Co-operative Development                                                               
    Corporation   .    .    .      12-10-1984       ..       12-10-1984                    
 -98>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 Pioneer Activities in the Sea-bed                                                         
                                                                                           
 5. Agreement on the Preservation                                                          
    of the Confidentiality of Data                                                         
    Concerning the Application                                                             
    Areas of the Deep Sea-bed .  . 17-12-1984        ..      17-12-1984                    
 6. Memorandum on the Procedure                                                            
    for the Exchange of Coordinates                                                        
    of Application Areas between                                                           
    the First Group of Applicants .17-12-1984        ..      17-12-1984                    
                                                                                           
 Restrictions on Excessively                                                               
 Injurious Weapons                                                                         
                                                                                           
 7. Convention on Prohibitions or                                                          
    Restrictions on the Use of                                                             
    Certain Conventional Weapons                                                           
    which may be deemed to be                                                              
    Excessively Injurious or to                                                            
    have Indiscriminate Effects.                                                           
    Done at Geneva on 10-10-1980 . 15-5-1981    1-3-1984     1-3-1984                      
                                                                                           
 United Nations Development                                                                
 Programme                                                                                 
                                                                                           
 8. Agreement between India and                                                            
    the United Nations Development                                                         
    Programme (UNDP) regarding                                                             
    Project No. IND/8/015/A/01/37-                                                         
    Demonstration Plant for                                                                
    Production of Synthetic Fibres,                                                        
    Sasmira, Bombay (Phase II)   .  9-1-1984        ..       9-1-1984                      
 9. Agreement between India and                                                            
    the United Nations Development                                                         
    Programme (UNDP) regarding                                                             
    Project No. IND/82/015/A/01/01-                                                        
    Training Support to the                                                                
    Geological Survey of India . . 12-1-1984        ..       12-1-1984                     
 10. Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United Nations Development                                                        
     Plogramme (UNDP) regarding                                                            
     Project No.IND/80/325/A/01/99-                                                        
     On-the-job training for English                                                       
     speaking officials of State                                                           
     Trading Organisation (STO's) of                                                       
     Asian and African countries . . 19-1-1984      ..       19-1-1984                     
 11. Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United Nations Development                                                        
     Programme (UNDP) regarding                                                            
     Project No.IND/83/017-Fatigue                                                         
     Laboratory for Automotive                                                             
     Industry, Pune .              30-1-1984        ..       30-1-1984                     
 12. Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United Nations Development                                                        
     Programme regarding Project                                                           
     No. IND/83/016-Establishment                                                          
     of a Central Institute of                                                             
     Educational Technology                                                                
     (INSAT for Technology)  .     21-2-1984        ..       21-2-1984                     
 13. Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United Nations Development                                                        
     Programme (UNDP) regarding                                                            
     Project No. IND/84/009-                                                               
     Process-cum-Project                                                                   
     Development Centre for Sports                                                         
     Goods Meerut (UP)   .  .      22-2-1984        ..       22-2-1984                     
 -99>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 14. Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United Nations Development                                                        
     Programme (UNDP) regarding                                                            
     Project No. IND/83/007/A/01/01-                                                       
     Training of Engineers in Recent                                                       
     Advances in Power Development                                                         
     (Phase-II)           .  .     23-2-1984        ..       23-2-1984                     
 15. Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United Nations Development                                                        
     Programme (UNDP) regarding                                                            
     Project No. IND/84/006-                                                               
     Development of Low Cost Canal                                                         
     Lining and Compaction of                                                              
     Embankments   .  .  .  .      14-3-1984        ..       14-3-1984                     
 16. Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United Nations Development                                                        
     Programme (UNDP) regarding                                                            
     Project No. IND/84/015/A/01/37-                                                       
     Semi-conductor Devices and                                                            
     Electronic Sub-systems for                                                            
     Transportation    .  .  .     16-4-1984        ..       16-4-1984                     
 17. Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United Nations Development                                                        
     Programme (UNDP) regarding                                                            
     Project No. IND/83/023/A/01/62-                                                       
     Strengthening of the Trade and                                                        
     Project Information System in                                                         
     the Engineering Export                                                                
     Promotion Council of India  . 27-4-1984        ..       27-4-1984                     
 18. Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United Nations Development                                                        
     Programme (UNDP) regarding                                                            
     Project No. IND/84/014/A/01/31-                                                       
     Transfer of Know-How through                                                          
     Expatriate Nationals (TOKTEN)                                                         
     India, Phase-II            .  21-5-1984        ..       21-5-1984                     
 19. Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United Nations Development                                                        
     Programme (UNDP) regarding                                                            
     Project No. IND/84/016/A/01/42-                                                       
     Feasibility Study based on                                                            
     Demonstration Schemes for                                                             
     Sanitary Latrines in Rural                                                            
     India                         22-5-1984        ..       22-5-1984                     
 20. Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United Nations Development                                                        
     Programme (UNDP) Project No.                                                          
     IND/84/021/A/01/11-Strengthening                                                      
     of Factory Inspection and                                                             
     Advice Services . .  .  .  .  18-7-1984        ..       18-7-1984                     
 21. Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United Nations Development                                                        
     Programme (UNDP) Project No.                                                          
     IND/84/004/A/01/37-Techno-                                                            
     Economic Study of Industrial                                                          
     Utiliasation of Red Mud Waste                                                         
     from Bauxite Processing in                                                            
     Korba .  .  .  .  .  .  .     9-8-1984         ..       9-8-1984                      
 22. Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United Nations Development                                                        
     Programme (UNDP) regarding                                                            
     Project No. IND/84/001/A/01/                                                          
     37-Performance Optimisation                                                           
     of Petrochemical Complex at                                                           
     Indian Petrochemicals                                                                 
     Corporation Limited, Baroda . 27-8-1984        ..       27-8-1984                     
 -100>                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 23. Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United Nations Development                                                        
     Programme (UNDP) regarding                                                            
     Project No. IND/84/013/A/01/                                                          
     37-Development of Micro-                                                              
     Precision Engineering                                                                 
     Technique, HMT Ltd. . . .  .  29-8-1984        ..       29-8-1984                     
 24. Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United Nations Development                                                        
     Programme (UNDP) regarding                                                            
     Project No. IND/84/011/A/01/                                                          
     01-Groundwater Studies in                                                             
     Kassai and Subarnarekha                                                               
     River Basins .  .  .  .  .    7-9-1984         ..       7-9-1984                      
 25. Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United Nations Development                                                        
     Programme (UNDP) regarding                                                            
     Project No. DP/IND/84/007/A/                                                          
     01/37-Assistance for                                                                  
     Production of Super Purity                                                            
     Aluminium  .  .  .  .  .  .   10-9-1984        ..       10-9-1984                     
 26. Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United Nations Development                                                        
     Programme (UNDP) regarding                                                            
     Project No. IND/84/005/A/01/                                                          
     37-Demonstration Unit of                                                              
     Alumina Calciner for Energy                                                           
     Conservation, Korba  .  .     10-9-1984        ..       10-9-1984                     
 27. Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United Nations Development                                                        
     Programme (UNDP) regarding                                                            
     Project No. IND/83/008-                                                               
     Pollution Control Research                                                            
     Institute   .  .  .  .        13-11-1984       ..       13-11-1984                    
 28. Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United Nations Development                                                        
     Programme (UNDP) regarding                                                            
     Project No. IND/84/030-                                                               
     Microprocessor Application                                                            
     Engineering Project      .    20-11-1984       ..       20-11-1984                    
                                                                                           
 United Nations Industrial                                                                 
 Development Organization (UNIDO)                                                          
                                                                                           
 29. Agreement between the                                                                 
     Government of India and                                                               
     the United Nations                                                                    
     Industrial Development                                                                
     Organization regarding the                                                            
     Arrangements for the United                                                           
     Nations Industrial Development                                                        
     Organization's Consultation on                                                        
     Fertiliser Industry .  .  .   18-1-1984        ..       18-1-1984                     
                                                                                           
 Wetlands of International                                                                 
 Importance as Waterfowl Habitat                                                           
                                                                                           
 30. Protocol to Amend the                                                                 
     Convention on Wetlands of                                                             
     International Importance,                                                             
     Especially on Waterfowl Habitat.                                                      
     Done at Paris on 3-12-1982    3-12-1982      8-3-1984   8-6-1984                      
 -101>                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 BILATERAL                                                                                 
                                                                                           
 Algeria                                                                                   
                                                                                           
 31. Minutes of the meeting held                                                           
     between the Union Ministry of                                                         
     Irrigation, Republic of India                                                         
     and the Algerian Delegation of                                                        
     the Ministry of Hydraulics,                                                           
     Environment and Forest of the                                                         
     People's Democratic Republic                                                          
     of Algeria .  .  .  .  .  .   15-5-1984        ..       15-5-1984                     
                                                                                           
 Bangladesh                                                                                
                                                                                           
 32. Exchange of Letters extending                                                         
     the Trade Agreement between                                                           
     the Government of India and                                                           
     the Government of the People's                                                        
     Republic of Bangladesh .  . . 27-7-1984        ..       27-7-1984                     
 33. Protocolon Inland Water                                                               
     Transit and Trade.            17-9-1984                 17-9-1984                     
                                                                                           
 Bhutan                                                                                    
                                                                                           
 34. Agreement between the                                                                 
     Government of India and the                                                           
     Royal Government of Bhutan on                                                         
     Telecommunication Services .  22-10-1984       ..       22-10-1984                    
                                                                                           
 Canada                                                                                    
                                                                                           
 35. Agreement between the                                                                 
     Government of India and                                                               
     Government of Canada through                                                          
     the Canadian International                                                            
     Development Agency for a line                                                         
     of Credit of Canadian Dollars                                                         
     44 million for Andhra Pradesh                                                         
     Social Forestry Project .  .  23-3-1984        ..       23-3-1984                     
 36. Loan Agreement between the                                                            
     Government of India and the                                                           
     Government of Canada regarding                                                        
     Chamera Hydroelectric                                                                 
     Project  .  .  .  .           3-8-1984         ..       3-8-1984                      
                                                                                           
 China                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 37. Trade Agreement between the                                                           
     Government of the Republic of                                                         
     India and the Government of                                                           
     the People's Republic of                                                              
     China            .     .      15-8-1984        ..       15-8-1984                     
                                                                                           
 Czechoslovakia                                                                            
                                                                                           
 38. Protocol of the Eleventh                                                              
     Meeting of the Indo-                                                                  
     Czechoslovak Joint Committee                                                          
     for Economic, Trade and                                                               
     Technical Co-operation        24-5-1984        ..       24-5-1984                     
 -102>                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 39. Exchange of Letters between                                                           
     India and Czechoslovakia                                                              
     extending the contracting date                                                        
     of the Third Agreement on                                                             
     Economic Collaboration, dated                                                         
     5th December, 1973  .      .  27-12-1984       ..       27-12-1984                    
                                                                                           
 Ethiopia                                                                                  
                                                                                           
 40. Cultural Agreement between                                                            
     the Government of the                                                                 
     Republic of India and the                                                             
     Provisional Military                                                                  
     Government of Socialist                                                               
     Ethiopia .  .  .  .  .  .     9-2-1983      6-2-1984    6-2-1984                      
                                                                                           
 Finland                                                                                   
                                                                                           
 41. Convention between the                                                                
     Republic of India and the                                                             
     Republic of Finland for the                                                           
     Avoidance of Double Taxation                                                          
     with respect to Taxes on                                                              
     Income and Capital .  .  .    10-6-1983        ..       18-11-1984                    
                                                                                           
 France                                                                                    
                                                                                           
 42. Financial Protocol between                                                            
     the Government of the                                                                 
     Republic of India and the                                                             
     Government of the Republic                                                            
     of France relating to French                                                          
     Credits and Grant meantto                                                             
     finance the Development Plan                                                          
     of India     .   .   .        24-2-1984        ..       24-2-1984                     
 43. Indo-French Protocol for Co-                                                          
     operation in the Field of                                                             
     Agriculture and Rural                                                                 
     Development .  . .  .  .  .   25-6-1984        ..       25-6-1984                     
 44. Financial Protocol between                                                            
     the Government of the                                                                 
     Republic of India and the                                                             
     Government of the Republic                                                            
     of France relating to French                                                          
     Credits meant to finance the                                                          
     Orissa Aluminium Plant .  .   11-9-1984        ..       11-9-1984                     
 45. Credit Agreement between the                                                          
     Republic of India and Banque                                                          
     Nationale de Paris and other                                                          
     Banks for French Francs 575                                                           
     million.                      10-10-1984       ..       10-10-1984                    
                                                                                           
 German Democratic Republic                                                                
                                                                                           
 46. Protocol of the First Session                                                         
     of the Inter-governmental                                                             
     Indo-GDR Joint Committee on                                                           
     Shipping held in Berlin and                                                           
     Rostock from 19-25 September,                                                         
     1984  .    .    .    .        25-9-1984        ..       25-9-1984                     
                                                                                           
 Iran                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 47. Agreed Minutes of the                                                                 
     Discussions between the                                                               
     Delegations of the Republic                                                           
     of India and the Islamic                                                              
     Republic of Iran  .      .    3-5-1984         ..       3-5-1984                      
 -103>                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 48. Exchange of Notes extending                                                           
     the Collaboration Agreement                                                           
     between India and Iran in                                                             
     the Field of Nuclear Energy                                                           
     for Peaceful Purposes of                                                              
     25-2-1977 .  .  .  .          9-11-1984        ..       9-11-1984                     
                                                                                           
 Italy                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 49. Agricultural Assistance                                                               
     Agreement between India and                                                           
     Italy-Agricultural Development                                                        
     Project in the States of                                                              
     Haryana, Orissa and Madhya                                                            
     Pradesh  .  .  .  .           8-8-1984         ..       8-8-1984                      
 50. Technical Assistance Agreement                                                        
     between India and Italy-                                                              
     Development of Temperate                                                              
     Climate Fruit Crops in the                                                            
     States of Jammu and Kashmir,                                                          
     Uttar Pradesh and Himachal                                                            
     Pradesh .  .  .  .  .  .  .   8-8-1984         ..       8-8-1984                      
                                                                                           
 Japan                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 51. Agreement between India and                                                           
     Japan regarding Loan of Yen                                                           
     34.73 billion (Thirty four                                                            
     billion, Seven hundred and                                                            
     thirty million).              11-5-1984        ..       11-5-1984                     
 52. Agreement between India and                                                           
     Japan regarding Grant Aid for                                                         
     1983-84 and 1984-85         . 11-5-1984        ..       11-5-1984                     
 53. Exchange of Notes between                                                             
     India and Japan regarding                                                             
     Japanes Project Aid for                                                               
     1984-85, Yen 37.36 billion,                                                           
     (Thirty-seven billion, three                                                          
     hundred and sixty million) .  7-8-1984         ..       7-8-1984                      
 54. Exchange of Notes between the                                                         
     Government of India and the                                                           
     Government of Japan regarding                                                         
     a Japanese Grant Aid of Yen                                                           
     1.948 billion (One billion,                                                           
     nine hundred and fortyeight                                                           
     million) Debt-Relief, during                                                          
     1982-83 .  .  .  .  .  .  .   23-2-1984        ..       23-2-1984                     
 55. Exchange of Notes between                                                             
     the Government of India and                                                           
     the Government of Japan                                                               
     regarding a Japanese Grant                                                            
     Aid of Yen 500 million (Five                                                          
     hundred million) to the                                                               
     University of Delhi for the                                                           
     year 1984-85  .         .     12-10-1984       ..       12-10-1984                    
 56. Exchange of Notes between                                                             
     the Government of India and                                                           
     the Government of Japan                                                               
     regarding a Japanese Grant                                                            
     Aid of Yen 410 million (Four                                                          
     hundred and ten million) for                                                          
     development of small scale                                                            
     fisheries-purchase of                                                                 
     equipment and machinery for                                                           
     producing fishing nets .  .   30-11-1984       ..       30-11-1984                    
 -104>                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 LIBYA                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 57. Agreed Minutes of the Fifth                                                           
     Session of the Indo-Libyan                                                            
     Joint Commission .  .  .      28-5-1984        ..       28-5-1984                     
                                                                                           
 MEXICO                                                                                    
                                                                                           
 58. Exchange of Letters between                                                           
     India and Mexico to extend                                                            
     the Agreement on Cooperation                                                          
     in the field of Science and                                                           
     Technology signed on                                                                  
     23-7-1975   .   .   .         23-4-1984        ..       23-4-1984                     
 59. Exchange of Letters between                                                           
     India and Mexico for setting                                                          
     up an Indo-Mexican Joint                                                              
     Commission on Economic                                                                
     Co-operation     .            5-9-1984         ..       5-9-1984                      
                                                                                           
 NEPAL                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 60. Exchange of Letters between                                                           
     India and Nepal regarding                                                             
     upgrading of Chandra Canal .  29-10-1984       ..       29-10-1984                    
 61. Exchange of Letters between                                                           
     India and Nepal regarding                                                             
     training in various                                                                   
     institutions and industrial                                                           
     establishments in India for                                                           
     28 entrepreneurs and officials                                                        
     of the Department of Industry                                                         
     of Nepal   .   .   .   .      29-10-1984       ..       29-10-1984                    
                                                                                           
 NORWAY                                                                                    
                                                                                           
 62. Agreed Minutes on Economic                                                            
     Co-operation Consultations,                                                           
     1985-88, between India and                                                            
     Norway  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   17-11-1984       ..       17-11-1984                    
                                                                                           
 PAKISTAN                                                                                  
                                                                                           
 63. Protocol on Group Tourism                                                             
     between the Republic of India                                                         
     and the Islamic Republic of                                                           
     Pakistan .  .  .  .  .  .     20-5-1984        ..       20-5-1984                     
                                                                                           
 QATAR                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 64. Agreement between the                                                                 
     Government of the Republic                                                            
     of India and the Government                                                           
     of the State of Qatar on                                                              
     Economic and Technical                                                                
     Co-operation   .  .  .  .     19-4-1984    12-8-1984    12-8-1984                     
                                                                                           
 SPAIN                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 65. Indo-Spanish Joint Statement                                                          
     on Tourism        .           1-6-1984         ..       1-6-1984                      
 -105>                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS                                                       
                                                                                           
 66. Protocol of the First Meeting                                                         
     of the Working Group on Oil                                                           
     Industry under the Inter-                                                             
     Governmental Indo-Soviet                                                              
     Commission on Economic,                                                               
     Scientific and Technical Co-                                                          
     operations                    9-2-1984         ..       9-2-1984                      
                                                                                           
 67. Exchange of Letters between                                                           
     the Government of India and                                                           
     the Government of the Union of                                                        
     Soviet Socialist Republics                                                            
     amending the Indo-Soviet                                                              
     Agreement on Economic and                                                             
     Technical Co-operation of                                                             
     10-12-1980                    24-2-1984        ..       24-2-1984                     
                                                                                           
 68. Protocol of the Fifth Session                                                         
     of the Indo-Soviet Working                                                            
     Group on Machine Building     27-4-1984        ..       27-4-1984                     
                                                                                           
 69. Protocol of the Sixth Session                                                         
     of the Inter-Governmental                                                             
     Indo-Soviet Joint Committee                                                           
     on Shipping                   22-5-1984        ..       22-5-1984                     
                                                                                           
 70. Memorandum of Understanding                                                           
     between the Representatives                                                           
     of the Telecommunication                                                              
     Administrations of India and                                                          
     the Union of Soviet Socialist                                                         
     Republic (Inter-system Co-                                                            
     ordination of Geostationary                                                           
     Satellite Networks)           25-5-1984        ..       25-5-1984                     
                                                                                           
 71. Agreement between the                                                                 
     Government of India and the                                                           
     Union of Soviet Socialist                                                             
     Republics-Modifying the                                                               
     Agreement on Merchant                                                                 
     Shipping                      12-4-1983        ..       31-5-1984                     
                                                                                           
 72. Protocol of the First Meeting                                                         
     of the Working Group on Trade                                                         
     within the framework of the                                                           
     Inter-Governmental Indo-Soviet                                                        
     Commission on Economic,                                                               
     Scientific and Technical Co-                                                          
     operation                     10-7-1984        ..       10-7-1984                     
                                                                                           
 73. Protocol of the Second Meeting                                                        
     of the Working Group on Oil                                                           
     Industry under the Indo-Soviet                                                        
     Inter-Governmental Commission                                                         
     on Economic, Scientific and                                                           
     Technical Co-operation        12-9-1984        ..       12-9-1984                     
                                                                                           
 74. Convention between the                                                                
     Government of the Republic of                                                         
     India and the Government of                                                           
     the Union of Soviet Socialist                                                         
     Republics on Protection of                                                            
     Migratory Birds               8-10-1984        ..       8-10-1984                     
                                                                                           
 UNITED KINGDOM                                                                            
                                                                                           
 75. Exchange of Notes between                                                             
     the Government of India and                                                           
     the Government of the United                                                          
     Kingdom regarding United                                                              
     Kingdom India BALCO Power                                                             
     Project, Aid Arrangement,                                                             
     1984                          20-9-1984        ..       20-9-1984                     
 -106>                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 76. Exchange of Notes between                                                             
     the Government of India and                                                           
     the Government of the United                                                          
     Kingdom regarding United                                                              
     Kingdom-India Local Costs                                                             
     Grant, 1984                   23-7-1984        ..       23-7-1984                     
                                                                                           
 77. Exchange of Notes between the                                                         
     Government of India and the                                                           
     Government of the United                                                              
     Kingdom regarding United                                                              
     Kingdom-India Industrial                                                              
     Credit and Investment                                                                 
     Corporation Grant, 1984       23-9-1984        ..       27-9-1984                     
                                                                                           
 UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                                                                  
                                                                                           
 78. First Amendatory Agreement                                                            
     to the Project Loan and                                                               
     Grant Agreement between India                                                         
     and the United State of                                                               
     America for Madhya Pradesh                                                            
     Minor Irrigation. (AID                                                                
     Loan No. 386-T-235)           9-3-1984         ..       9-3-1984                      
                                                                                           
 79. Third Amendatory Agreement                                                            
     to the Project Grant                                                                  
     Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United States of America                                                          
     for Development and Management                                                        
     Training. (AID Project No.                                                            
     386-0487)                     9-3-1984         ..       9-3-1984                      
                                                                                           
 80. First Amendatory Agreement to                                                         
     the Project Grant Agreement                                                           
     between India and the United                                                          
     States of America for                                                                 
     Agricultural Research. (AID                                                           
     Project No. 386-0470)         31-3-1984        ..       31-3-1984                     
                                                                                           
 81. Second Amendatory Agreement                                                           
     to the Project Loan and Grant                                                         
     Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United States of America                                                          
     for integrated Child                                                                  
     Development Services. (AID Loan                                                       
     No. 386-T-233, AID Project No.                                                        
     386-0476)                     31-3-1984        ..       31-3-1984                     
                                                                                           
 82. First Amendatory Agreement to                                                         
     the Project Loan and Grant                                                            
     Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United States of America                                                          
     for Irrigation Management and                                                         
     Training. (AID Loan No.                                                               
     386-T-236)                    31-3-1984        ..       31-3-1984                     
                                                                                           
 83. Amendment No. 1 to the 1978                                                           
     Memorandum of Understanding                                                           
     between Department of Space,                                                          
     India and NASA, United States                                                         
     of America                    25-4-1984        ..       31-7-1984                     
                                                                                           
 84. First Amendatory Agreement to                                                         
     the Project Grant Agreement                                                           
     between India and the United                                                          
     States of America for NCAER                                                           
     Rural Household Survey. (AID                                                          
     Project No. 386-0486)         19-5-1984        ..       19-5-1984                     
 -107>                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 85. Third Amendatory Agreement to                                                         
     the Project Loan and Grant                                                            
     Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United States of America                                                          
     for Integrated Child Development                                                      
     Services. (AID Loan No.                                                               
     386-T-233)                    19-5-1984        ..       19-5-1984                     
                                                                                           
 86. First Amendatory Agreement to                                                         
     the Project Loan and Grant                                                            
     Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United States of America                                                          
     for Family Planning,                                                                  
     Communications and Marketing                                                          
     (AID Loan No. 386-Q-237-A,                                                            
     AID Project No. 386-0485)     22-6-1984        ..       22-6-1984                     
                                                                                           
 87. Project Loan and Grant                                                                
     Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United States of America                                                          
     for Hill Areas Land and                                                               
     Water Development. (AID Loan                                                          
     No.386-T-238, AID Project No.                                                         
     386-0489)                     31-7-1984        ..       31-7-1984                     
                                                                                           
 88. Project Loan and Grant                                                                
     Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United States of America                                                          
     for Maharashtra Minor                                                                 
     Irrigation. (AID Loan No.                                                             
     386-T-239, AID Project No.                                                            
     386-0490)                     31-7-1984        ..       31-7-1984                     
                                                                                           
 89. First Amendatory Agreement                                                            
     to the Project Loan and Grant                                                         
     Agreement between India and                                                           
     the United States of America                                                          
     for Hill Areas Land and Water                                                         
     Development. (AID Loan No.                                                            
     386-T-238, AID Project No.                                                            
     386-0489)                     29-9-1984        ..       29-9-1984                     
                                                                                           
 VENEZUELA                                                                                 
                                                                                           
 90. Cultural Agreement between                                                            
     the Government of the Republic                                                        
     of India and the Government                                                           
     of the Republic of Venezuela  13-9-1984    18-12-1984   18-12-1984                    
                                                                                           
 YEMEN ARAB REPUBLIC                                                                       
                                                                                           
 91. Cultural Agreement between                                                            
     the Government of the Republic                                                        
     of India and the Government                                                           
     of the Yemen Arab Republic    15-12-1983   23-9-1984    23-9-1984                     
                                                                                           
 ZAIRE                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 92. Cultural Agreement between                                                            
     the Government of the Republic                                                        
     of India and the Republic of                                                          
     Zaire                         4-7-1978      6-2-1984    6-2-1984                      
                                                                                           
 ZAMBIA                                                                                    
                                                                                           
 93. Convention between the                                                                
     Government of the Republic                                                            
     of India and the Government of                                                        
     the Republic of Zambia for                                                            
     the Avoidance of Double                                                               
     Taxation and the Prevention                                                           
     of Fiscal Evasion with respect                                                        
     to Taxes on Income            5-6-1981         ..       3-1-1984                      
 -108>                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 ZIMBABWE                                                                                  
                                                                                           
 94. Agreement on Economic and                                                             
     Technical Co-operation between                                                        
     the Government of the Republic                                                        
     of India and the Government of                                                        
     the Republic of Zimbabwe      22-5-1981    3-2-1984     3-2-1984                      
 -109>                                                                                     
 APPENDIX III Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars                            
 Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars, etc. organised by                      
 Inter-Governmental Organisations at which Government of India was                         
 represented in 1984-85                                                                    
 S. No.Title of Conferences etc. Venue  Date                                               
                                                                                           
 (1)        (2)   (3)         (4)                                                          
                                                                                           
 1. Meeting of the Inter                                                                   
 Parliamentary Union (IPU) Geneva 1 to 7 April 1984                                        
                                                                                           
 2. Symposium on Remote Sensing China  4 to 11 April 1984                                  
                                                                                           
 3. Meeting of the Indian Scien-                                                           
 tists to discuss the possible                                                             
 programme of Indo-US collaboration                                                        
 on monsoon variability in relation                                                        
 to Ocean-atmosphere coupling  Bangalore 8 April 1984                                      
                                                                                           
 4. Meeting of the CGMW (Commission                                                        
 for Geological Map of the World)                                                          
 Sub-Commission for South & East                                                           
 Asia        Kuala Lumpur  9 to 13 April 1984                                              
                                                                                           
 5. Meeting of the Executive                                                               
 Council of the Asian Pacific                                                              
 Postal Union    Manila   11 to 17 April 1984                                              
                                                                                           
 6. 3rd Consultation on Leather                                                            
 & Leather Products Industry Innsbruck  16 to 20 April 1984                                
                              (Austria)                                                    
                                                                                           
 7. Seminar on the Activities of                                                           
 economic interest in the                                                                  
 exploration of Namibia's human                                                            
 and natural resources  Lubijana  16 to 20 April 1984                                      
                                   (Yugoslavia)                                            
                                                                                           
 8. 10th Regular Session of the                                                            
 UN Commission on TNC's  New York 17 to 27 April 1984                                      
                                                                                           
 9. International Conference on                                                            
 Safety of Dams   Coimbra   23 April to 2 May 1984                                         
                               (Portugal)                                                  
                                                                                           
 10. Meeting convened to discuss                                                           
 the Indo-US Collaborative                                                                 
 Programme on Monsoon Research   New Delhi   24 April 1984                                 
                                                                                           
 11. ILO/DANIDA Tripartite                                                                 
 Regional Seminar on upgrading                                                             
 of Labour Market Reporting                                                                
 Systems in Developing Countries                                                           
 in Asia     Bangkok   30 April to 4 May 1984                                              
                                                                                           
 12. 18th Session of the Industrial                                                        
 Development Board (IDB) of UNIDO Vienna  2 to 18 May 1984                                 
                                                                                           
 13. 37th Session of World Health                                                          
 Assembly          Geneva          7 to 19 May 1984                                        
                                                                                           
 14. 3rd Conference of Ministers                                                           
 of Labour of Countries of                                                                 
 Non-Aligned Movement and other                                                            
 developing countries  Managua    10 to 12 May 1984                                        
 -110>                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 15. Joint ICAA/AOCI Asian &                                                               
 Pacific Basin Regional Conference   Seoul   12 to 19 May 1984                             
                                                                                           
 16. Meetings of the UN Disar-                                                             
 mament Commission (UNDC)    New York   13 May to 2 June 1984                              
                                                                                           
 17. 6th Joint Meeting for Support                                                         
 to Special Public Works Programmes. Geneva  16 to 18 May 1984                             
                                                                                           
 18. ILO/ARPLA Inter-Country                                                               
 Symposium on Overseas                                                                     
 Employment Administration   Pattya    21 to 25 May 1984                                   
                              (Thailand)                                                   
                                                                                           
 19. Extra-ordinary Plenary                                                                
 meetings of the Council for                                                               
 Namibia       Bangkok        21 to 25 May 1984                                            
                                                                                           
 20. 12th International Congress                                                           
 of International Commission on                                                            
 Irrigation and Drainage  Collins, Colorado    21 May to 9                                 
                           (USA)    June 1984                                              
                                                                                           
 21. Meeting of Advisory Committee                                                         
 on Administrative and Budgetary                                                           
 Questions     Geneva, Addis  21 May to 29 June                                            
                Ababa, Bangkok  1984                                                       
                                                                                           
 22. 226th Session of the                                                                  
 Governing Body of ILO Geneva 28 May to 2 June 1984                                        
                                                                                           
 23. 52nd Meeting of the                                                                   
 Executive Council of                                                                      
 International Commission on                                                               
 Large Dams  Tokyo      29 May to 1 June 1984                                              
                                                                                           
 24. Meeting of the Indo-USSR                                                              
 Programme of Co-operation on                                                              
 Space Meteorology and Aeronomy                                                            
 (Theme No. 2)  New Delhi   30 May 1984                                                    
                                                                                           
 25. Asian Sub-Regional Workshop                                                           
 on Statistical Development   Manila  30 May to 2 June 1984                                
                                                                                           
 26. 36th Session of the WMO                                                               
 Executive Council   Geneva   6 to 23rd June 1984                                          
                                                                                           
 27. 70th Session of International                                                         
 Labour Conference and 227th                                                               
 Session of the Governing Body                                                             
 of ILO     Geneva 6 to 29 June 1984                                                       
                                                                                           
 28. Conference of Commonwealth                                                            
 Association of Town Planners St.                                                          
 Johas New 10 to 17 June 1984                                                              
                       foundland                                                           
                          (Canada)                                                         
                                                                                           
 29. conference of Irrigation                                                              
 Experts of Non-Aligned                                                                    
 Coordinating Group in the Field                                                           
 of Food and Agriculture  Pyongyang  16 to 22 June 1984                                    
                                                                                           
 30. 19th UPU Congress Hamburg 18 June to 27 July 1984                                     
                                                                                           
 31. Workshop on Water Resources                                                           
 of Suvale Islands sponsored by                                                            
 Commonwealth Geological Liaison                                                           
 Office, London   Fiji  28 June to 9 July 1984                                             
                                                                                           
 32. Meetings of the Working                                                               
 Group of Statistical Experts Bangkok 3 to 6 July 1984                                     
                                                                                           
 33. 2nd International                                                                     
 Conference on Assistance to                                                               
 Refugees in Africa (ICARA II) Geneva 9 to 11 July 1984                                    
 -111>                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 34. Regional Workshop on                                                                  
 Intergration of Women in                                                                  
 Industrial Planning and                                                                   
 Development Process for                                                                   
 Asian countries   Bangkok  9 to 17 July 1984                                              
                                                                                           
 35. 4th Meeting of Coordinating                                                           
 Countries of the Non-Aligned                                                              
 Movement in the Sphere of                                                                 
 Standardisation, Metrology                                                                
 and Quality Control   Belgrade   10 to 13 July 1984                                       
                                                                                           
 36. Meeting of the Commonwealth                                                           
 Consultative Group on the                                                                 
 Special Security Needs of Small                                                           
 States      London  18 to 20 July 1984                                                    
                                                                                           
 37. Meeting of the Organising                                                             
 Committee of Indo-US Wokrship   New Delhi   19 July 1984                                  
                                                                                           
 38. 8th World Conference on                                                               
 Earthquake Engineering   San                                                              
         Francisco     21 to 28 July 1984                                                  
                                                                                           
 39. Meeting of the Ad Hoc                                                                 
 Working Group of Experts on                                                               
 Southern Africa of the                                                                    
 Commission on Human Rights  London  2 to 8 August 1984                                    
                                                                                           
 40. 4th General conference on                                                             
 UNIDO      Vienna       2 to 20 August 1984                                               
                                                                                           
 41. International Geological                                                              
 Congress & CGMW Plenary                                                                   
 Assembly   Moscow 3 to 27 August 1984                                                     
                                                                                           
 42. Conference of Arab Solidarity                                                         
 with Struggle for Liberation                                                              
 in Southern Africa    Tunis  7 to 9 August 1984                                           
                                                                                           
 43. 2nd Meeting of the National                                                           
 Review Committee to recommend                                                             
 the project proposals under                                                               
 Indo-US Collaborative                                                                     
 Programme on Monsoon Research   New Delhi    11 August 1984                               
                                                                                           
 44. African and Asian Inter-                                                              
 regional Workshop on Strategies                                                           
 for Improving the Employment                                                              
 conditions of rural Women  Arusha                                                         
               (Tanzania) 20 to 4 2 August 1984                                            
                                                                                           
 45. 7th Session of WMO commi-                                                             
 ssion for Hydrology  Geneva   27 August to 7 September 1984                               
                                                                                           
 46. Meeting for Finalisation                                                              
 of an Oceanographic Experi-                                                               
 ment under task 2-4 of the Indo-                                                          
 US Programme on Monsoon Meterology. Bangalore                                             
   3 to 4 September 1984                                                                   
                                                                                           
 47. Meeting of ISO/TC-113                                                                 
 and its Sub-Committee   Berne  3 to 14 September 1984                                     
                                                                                           
 48. 5th Technical Meeting of                                                              
 Commonwealth Association                                                                  
 of Tax Administrators Western 5 to 12 September                                           
      Samoa          1984                                                                  
                                                                                           
 49. 4th Congress of Asian                                                                 
 and Pacific Regional Devision                                                             
 of International Association                                                              
 for Hydraulic Research Chiang Mai 10 to 14 Sepember                                       
                    (Thailand)     1984                                                    
                                                                                           
 50. 7th Session of the                                                                    
 Governing Council of the                                                                  
 ESCAP Regional Mineral                                                                    
 Resources Development Centre  New Delhi                                                   
 12 to 17 September 1984                                                                   
                                                                                           
 51. International Conference                                                              
 on Interannual Variability                                                                
 of the Tropical Ocean and Global                                                          
 Atmosphere (TOGA)  Paris 17 to 21 September 1984                                          
                                                                                           
 52. 37th Session of WHO Regional                                                          
 Committee for South-East Asia                                                             
 Region   New Delhi     18 to 24 September  1984                                           
 -112>                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 53. 39th Session of the UN                                                                
 General Assembly New York 18 September to 19 December 1984                                
                                                                                           
 54. 24th Session of the Joint                                                             
 Maritime Commission  Geneva  19 to 29 September 1984                                      
                                                                                           
 55. Global Preparatory Meeting                                                            
 for 1st Consultation on                                                                   
 Building Materials Industry  Vienna                                                       
 24 to 28 September  1984                                                                  
                                                                                           
 56. 4th Asian and Pacific                                                                 
 Regional Seminar on National                                                              
 and International Labour                                                                  
 Standards Manila   24 September to 5 October 1984                                         
                                                                                           
 57. WMO Technical Conference                                                              
 on Instruments and Cost-effective                                                         
 Meteorological Observatories                                                              
 (TECEMO)  Netherlands   27 to 28 September 1984                                           
                                                                                           
 58. Seminar in Industrial Safety                                                          
 and Health (under Colombo Plan)Japan                                                      
  30 September to 12   November 1984                                                       
                                                                                           
 59. (i) 7th International                                                                 
 confernece of Legal Metrology                                                             
 (ii) 20th Meeting of the                                                                  
 International Committee of                                                                
 Legal Metrology   Helsinki 1 to 5 October 1984                                            
                                                                                           
 60. Meeting of Heads of                                                                   
 Technology Transfer Registries  Beijing                                                   
  8 to 12 October 1984                                                                     
                                                                                           
 61. 11th Session of the Textile                                                           
 committee of ILO  Geneva   10 to 18 October 1984                                          
                                                                                           
 62. Workshop on Commercialization                                                         
 of Research Results  Bangkok    15 to 19 October 1984                                     
                                                                                           
 63. 29th Session of the                                                                   
 International Lead and Zinc                                                               
 Study Group  Geneva     11 to 19 October 1984                                             
                                                                                           
 64. 11th Session Of ESCAP                                                                 
 Committee on Natural Resources  Bangkok 16 to 22 October 1984                             
                                                                                           
 65. 2nd Meeting of Working                                                                
 Group of Theme 2 of ISRO-                                                                 
 SCHCNE Collaborative Programme                                                            
 on Aeronomy and Space                                                                     
 Meterology      Bangalore    18 October 1984                                              
                                                                                           
 66. ILO/ARPLA Seminar on                                                                  
 Training of Trainers in                                                                   
 Labour Administration    Bangkok   22 October to 16                                       
  November 1984                                                                            
                                                                                           
 67. Annual Meetings of the                                                                
 Consultative Council for                                                                  
 Postal Studies of the UPU  Berne    24 October to 2                                       
 November 1984                                                                             
                                                                                           
 68. Internatioal Association                                                              
 of Seismology and Physics of                                                              
 the Earth's Interior (IASPEI)                                                             
 Regional Assembly   Hyderabad   31 October to 7                                           
 November 1984                                                                             
                                                                                           
 69. 228th Session of the                                                                  
 Governing Body of ILO   Geneva  1 to 16 November 1984                                     
                                                                                           
 70. International Seminar                                                                 
 on Manpower Forecasting and                                                               
 Planning  Baku       2 to 11 November 1984                                                
 (USSR)                                                                                    
                                                                                           
 71. 8th Session of WMO                                                                    
 Regional Association-II (Asia)Geneva  5 to 16 November 1984                               
 -113>                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 72. Technical Committee                                                                   
 Meetings on Postal Services  Thimpu                                                       
 10 to 22 November 1984                                                                    
                                                                                           
 73. consultation Committee                                                                
 Meeting for Energy Produc-                                                                
 tion from Agro-Industries By-                                                             
 products and Wastes Lille                                                                 
  (France)  12 to 16 November 1984                                                         
                                                                                           
 74. Regional Seminar on                                                                   
 Systems Analysis for Water                                                                
 Resources Development  Bangkok                                                            
   12 to 28 November 1984                                                                  
                                                                                           
 75. Workshop on Mineral                                                                   
 Policy for Small Scale                                                                    
 Mining  New Delhi 15 to 17 November 1984                                                  
                                                                                           
 76. 5th Asian Conference                                                                  
 on Remote Sensing    Kathmandu 15 to 18 November 1984                                     
                                                                                           
 77. Regional Seminar on                                                                   
 Remote Sensing Applicatons                                                                
 for Land Resources Management  Kuala Lumpur                                               
 19 to 23 November  1984                                                                   
                                                                                           
 78. 21st Session of Permanent                                                             
 Committee of UNIDO  Vienna 19 to 23 November 1984                                         
                                                                                           
 79. International Conference                                                              
 on the Employment of the                                                                  
 Mentally Handicapped   Madrid  26 to 28 November 1984                                     
                                                                                           
 80. Meeting of the Policy                                                                 
 and Coordination Advisory                                                                 
 committee of the WHO's                                                                    
 Special Programme of Research,                                                            
 Development and Research                                                                  
 Training in Human Reproduction  Geneva  6 to 28 November 1984                             
                                                                                           
 81. 14th Session of the                                                                   
 Codex Committee on Methods                                                                
 of Analysis and Sampling  Budapest  26 To 30 November 1984                                
                                                                                           
 82. ILO/AIOE Seminar on                                                                   
 Working Conditions in                                                                     
 Small Industries     Bombay    November 1984                                              
                                                                                           
 83. UN Interntional                                                                       
 Seminar on the Encouragement                                                              
 of Understanding Tolerance                                                                
 and Respect in Matters relating                                                           
 to Freedom of Religion or Belief    Geneva                                                
  3 to 14 December 1984                                                                    
                                                                                           
 84. 1st Session of the food                                                               
 and Drink Industries Commi-                                                               
 ttee of ILO      Geneva     5 to 13 December 1984                                         
 -114>                                                                                     
 APPENDIX IV Major International Conferences /Meetings/Seminars                            
 Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars organised by                            
 Non-Governmental Organizations in which Indian experts participated in                    
 their personal capacity with Government assistance in 1984-85                             
 Sl. No.   Title of Conferences etc. Venue      Date                                       
 (1)                   (2)   (3)            (4)                                            
                                                                                           
 1. Meeting of Regional Liaison                                                            
 Officers (RLOs) (Abroad)Geneva   15 May 1984                                              
                                                                                           
 2. ISO workshop on Information,                                                           
 Publicity and Public Relations  Geneva  16 May 1984                                       
                                                                                           
 3. ISO Development Committee (DEVCO)  Geneva 17 to                                        
 18 May 1984                                                                               
                                                                                           
 4. ISO Committee on Certification                                                         
 (CERTICO) Geneva        21 to 22 May  1984                                                
                                                                                           
 5. Meeting of IEC Committee of                                                            
 Action and IEC Council Geneva 3 to 6 July 1984                                            
                                                                                           
 6. Meeting of the Parliamentarians                                                        
 for World Order Athens  18 to 19 July  1984                                               
                                                                                           
 7. International NGO Meeting on                                                           
 the Question of Palestine  Geneva  20 to                                                  
 22 August 1984                                                                            
                                                                                           
 8. Meeting of ISO Council   Geneva  19 to 21                                              
  September 1984                                                                           
 -115>                                                                                     
 APPENDIX V Miscellaneous Major International Conferences                                  
 Miscellaneous Major International Conferences etc. in 1984-85 at which                    
 Government of India was represented or in which Indian experts                            
 participated with Government of India's assistance in their personal                      
 capacity                                                                                  
 Sl.No.   Title of Conferences etc.    Venue          Date                                 
 (1)               (2)                  (3)            (4)                                 
                                                                                           
 1. International Conference on                                                            
    Palaeonthropology. . . . . . . .    New York     4 to 12 April 1984                    
                                                                                           
 2. IAU/Colloquium No. 79 "Very large                                                      
    telescopes, their Instrumentation                                                      
    and Programmes" . . . . . . . . .   Munich      9 to 12 April 1984                     
                                                                                           
 3. Meeting of the Advisory Council of                                                     
    the SIAP  . . . . . . . . . . . .   Tokyo      12 to 14 April 1984                     
                                                                                           
 4. Meeting of the UN Advisory Board                                                       
    on Disarmament  . . . . . . . . .   New York   30 April to 4 May                       
                                                    1984                                   
                                                                                           
 5. 4th European International Ultra-                                                      
    violet Explorer Conference . . . .  Rome       15 to 18 May 1984                       
                                                                                           
 6. Seminar on Social and Related                                                          
    Statistics  . . . . . . . . . . .   Seoul      22 to 28 May 1984                       
                                                                                           
 7. International Seminar on                                                               
    Himalayan Geology . . . . . . . .   Chongdu                                            
                                        (China)    5 to 26 June 1984                       
                                                                                           
 8. 7th Session of UN Expert Group for                                                     
    the preparation of a UN Study on                                                       
    Conventional Disarmament . . . . .  New York  11 to 22 June 1984                       
                                                                                           
 9. International Conference on Archi-                                                     
    tectural and Town Building . . . .  USSR      15 June to 14 July                       
                                                    1984                                   
                                                                                           
 10. 4th Session of the UN Study Group                                                     
     for the preparation of the Second                                                     
     Study on the Question of Nuclear                                                      
     Weapons Free Zones . . . . . . . .  New York  25 to 29 June 1984                      
                                                                                           
 11. XXV COSPAR Meeting . . . . . . .  . Graz                                              
                                         (Austria) 1 to 7 July 1984                        
                                                                                           
 12. COSPAR Symposium No. 9 . . . . .  . Graz                                              
                                         (Austria) 2 to 6 July 1984                        
                                                                                           
 13. Meeting of the Group on "Concept                                                      
     of Security" . . . . . . . . . .    New York   23 to 27 July                          
                                                  1984                                     
                                                                                           
 14. International Cloud Physics                                                           
     Conference . . . . . . . . . . .    Tallin                                            
                                         (USSR)    21 to 28 August                         
                                                   1984                                    
                                                                                           
 15. 18th International Cosmic Ray                                                         
     Conference . . . . . . . . . . .    Bangalore 22 August to                            
                                                   3 September 1984                        
                                                                                           
 16. Meeting of the UN Advisory Board                                                      
     on Disarmament  . . . . . . . . .   New York  10 to 14 Septe-                         
                                                  mber 1984                                
                                                                                           
 17. Inter-organization meeting on the                                                     
     ICP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   Bellago                                           
                                         (Italy)   24 to 26 Septe-                         
                                                   mber 1984                               
 -116>                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 18. Seminar on the Organization of                                                        
     Statistical Work in a Changing                                                        
     Environment . . . . . . . . . .     Moscow    26 September to                         
                                                   5 October 1984                          
                                                                                           
 19. 3rd Asian Pacific Regional Meet                                                       
     of the IAU . . . . . . . . . . .    Kyoto                                             
                                         (Japan)   30 September to                         
                                                   6 October 1984                          
                                                                                           
 20. Asia-Pacific Seminar on the Inte-                                                     
     rnatinal Comparison Project and                                                       
     Price Statistics. . . . . . . . .   Sapporo                                           
                                         (Japan)   16 to 22 Octo-                          
                                                   ber 1984                                
                                                                                           
 21. International Plant Engineering                                                       
     Confeence . . . . . . . . . . . .   Bombay    14 to 19 Nove-                          
                                                   mber 1984                               
                                                                                           
 22. 12th World Mining Congress . . .    New Delhi 19 to 23 Nove-                          
                                                   mber 1984                               
                                                                                           
 23. International Symposium on                                                            
     Theoretical Physics . . . . . .     Bangalore 19 November to                          
                                                  1 December 1984                          
                                                                                           
 24. International Middle Atmosphere                                                       
     Programme (MAP) Symposium . . . .   Kyoto     26 to 30                                
                                                   November 1984                           
 -117>                                                                                     
 APPENDIX VI Statement showing Revenue and Expenditure in respect of                       
 Passport                                                                                  
 Statement showing Revenue and Expenditure in respect of Passport                          
 Offices in India during the period January to December 1984                               
 Sl.  Station       Revenue         Expenditure                                            
 No.                Earned          Incurred                                               
                    (In rupees)     (In rupees)                                            
                                                                                           
 (1)   (2)          (3)               (4)                                                  
                                                                                           
 1. Ahmedabad        54,64,021         15,18,674                                           
                                                                                           
 2. Bangalore        49,25,076          9,92,071                                           
                                                                                           
 3. Bareilly         41,21,487         10,97,177                                           
                                                                                           
 4. Bhopal           10,47,300          4,46,543                                           
                                                                                           
 5. Bhubneshwar      2,79,274          2,39,852                                            
                                                                                           
 6. Bombay           1,82,62,807         45,09,923                                         
                                                                                           
 7. Calcutta         27,36,992          9,72,991                                           
                                                                                           
 8. Chandigarh       44,34,407         15,03,765                                           
                                                                                           
 9. Cochin           79,84,155         23,71,879                                           
                                                                                           
 10. Delhi           78,75,710         22,60,035                                           
                                                                                           
 11. Gauhati         2,17,286          1,97,530                                            
                                                                                           
 12. Hyderabad      44,34,608         19,96,597                                            
                                                                                           
 13. Jaipur          34,27,517         11,75,364                                           
                                                                                           
 14. Jallandhar      44,50,714         13,55,289                                           
                                                                                           
 15. Kozhikode       48,45,398         14,50,848                                           
                                                                                           
 16. Lucknow         25,91,434         10,91,558                                           
                                                                                           
 17. Madras          56,22,969         16,02,853                                           
                                                                                           
 18. Patna           11,16,976          4,25,589                                           
                                                                                           
 19. Srinagar        6,21,022          2,40,901                                            
                                                                                           
 20. Tiruchirapalli   59,53,691         14,14,581                                          
                                                                                           
 21. Vijayawada   1,73,610            71,452                                               
                -------------------------------                                            
          TOTAL     9,05,86,454       2,69,25,472                                          
      -------------------------------                                                      
 -118>                                                                                     
 APPENDIX VII Statement showing number of Passport/Miscellaneous                           
 services                                                                                  
 Statement showing number of Passport/Miscellaneous services                               
 applications received and number of Passports issued/Miscellaneous                        
 services rendered during the period January to December 1984                              
 Sl.Station   No. of        No. of      No. of         No. of                              
 No.         Passport      Passports   applications   Misc.                                
             applications  issued      for Misc.      services                             
             received                  services       rendered                             
                                              received                                     
                                                                                           
 (1)   (2) (3)        (4)         (5)             (6)                                      
                                                                                           
 1. Ahmedabad  85,545     90,028      26,697          35,886                               
                                                                                           
 2. Bangalore  74,777     67,913      17,187          17,241                               
                                                                                           
 3. Bareilly   78,072     80,729      11,430          11,344                               
                                                                                           
 4. Bhopal     16,865     15,642       6,151           6,127                               
                                                                                           
 5. Bhubaneshwar 4,866      4,493         633             599                              
                                                                                           
 6. Bombay     2,62,120   2,64,711    2,58,626        2,51,731                             
                                                                                           
 7. Calcutta    42,255     40,746      19,045          19,380                              
                                                                                           
 8. Chandigarh  73,455     64,260      31,035          31,229                              
                                                                                           
 9. Cochin       1,19,523   1,20,668      96,347          83,504                           
                                                                                           
 10. Delhi      1,11,649   1,12,268      61,897          64,736                            
                                                                                           
 11. Gauhati    3,500      3,113         858             814                               
                                                                                           
 12. Hyderabad   85,951     82,654      21,617          21,134                             
                                                                                           
 13. Jaipur      59,250     56,939      11,880          10,413                             
                                                                                           
 14. Jallandhar   65,185     55,663      26,332          27,349                            
                                                                                           
 15. Kozhikode    63,731     65,340      31,632          31,503                            
                                                                                           
 16. Lucknow     46,279     44,934      10,635          10,723                             
                                                                                           
 17. Madras    87,951     86,288      37,328          31,636                               
                                                                                           
 18. Patna       19,952     19,592       3,315           3,347                             
                                                                                           
 19. Srinagar    9,779     10,009       1,833           1,846                              
                                                                                           
 20. Tiruchirapalli  1,27,721   1,22,184      17,011  17,476                               
                                                                                           
 21. Vijayawada   4,322      4,549         513   476                                       
    ----------------------------------------------------                                   
    TOTAL 14,42,748  14,12,723    6,92,042        6,78,494                                 
   ----------------------------------------------------                                    
 -119>                                                                                     
 APPENDIX VIII Cadre Strength at Headquarters and 136 Missions and Posts                   
 Abroad                                                                                    
 Cadre Strength at Headquarters and 136 Missions and Posts Abroad during                   
 1984-85                                                                                   
 Sl.   Cadre/Post               Total number   Posts at       Posts at                     
 No.                              of posts     Headquarters    Missions                    
                                                               abroad                      
                                                                                           
 (1)   (2)                           (3)            (4)           (5)                      
                                                                                           
 IFS                                                                                       
                                                                                           
 1. Grade I                           21              3             18                     
                                                                                           
 2. Grade II                          28              3             25                     
                                                                                           
 3. Grade III                         95             16             79                     
                                                                                           
 4. Grade IV                          80             15             65                     
                                                                                           
 5. Sr. Scale                        256             56            200                     
                                                                                           
 6. Jr. Scale                         33              5             28                     
                                                                                           
 7. Training Reserve (Jr. Scale)      27             26              1                     
                                                                                           
 8. Training reserve                  10             10             ..                     
                                                                                           
 9. Leave reserve                     19             19             ..                     
                                                                                           
 10. Deputation reserve               20             20             ..                     
                                                                                           
 IFS (B)                                                                                   
                                                                                           
 1. Grade I                          124             65             59                     
                                                                                           
 2. Grade II/III                     325            172            153                     
                                                                                           
 3. Grade IV                         928            416            512                     
                                                                                           
 4. Grade V/VI                       688            492            196                     
                                                                                           
 5. Grade II of Cypher Sub Cadre     199             81            118                     
                                                                                           
 6. Selection Grade of Stenogra-                                                           
 phers' Cadre                         51             16             35                     
                                                                                           
 7. Grade I of SC                     96             31             65                     
                                                                                           
 8. Grade II of SC                   526            201            325                     
                                                                                           
 9. Grade III of SC                  120             42             78                     
                                                                                           
 10. Combined Research Cadre                                                               
     (including isolated Research                                                          
      posts)                          39             34              5                     
                                                                                           
 11. Interpreters' Cadre              31             23              8                     
                             ------------------------------------------                    
                        TOTAL       3716           1746            1970                    
                             ------------------------------------------                    
                                                                                           
 APPENDIX IX Cadre Strength of IFS                                                         
 Cadre Strength of IFS, 1983-1985                                                          
 Grades                    Prior to Cadre    Subsequent to Cadre Review                    
                           Review (1983)                                                   
                                                   1984           1985                     
                                                                                           
   (1)                            (2)               (3)            (4)                     
                                                                                           
 Grade I                           20                20             21                     
                                                                                           
 Grade II                          21                27             28                     
                                                                                           
 Grade III                         81                97             95                     
                                                                                           
 Grade IV                          68                72             80                     
                                                                                           
 Senior Scale                      98               243            256                     
                                                                                           
 Junior Scale                      70                33             33                     
                                                                                           
 Training Reserves                 50                27             27                     
 (Junior Scale)                                                                            
                                                                                           
 Training/Deputation/Leave                                                                 
 Reserve in all Grades**           58                49             49                     
                                                                                           
 **Training Reserve for all grades 10                                                      
 Leave Reserve                     19                                                      
 Deputation Reserve                20                                                      
 -121>                                                                                     
 APPENDIX X Foreign Language Chart                                                         
 Foreign Language Chart                                                                    
 Sl.    Language            Total Number                                                   
 No.                         of Officers                                                   
                             Passed/                                                       
                             Knows the                                                     
                            Language                                                       
                                                                                           
 (1)     (2)                 (3)                                                           
                                                                                           
 1.  Arabic                  83                                                            
                                                                                           
 2.  Burmese                  2                                                            
                                                                                           
 3.  Chinese                 44                                                            
                                                                                           
 4.  Czech                   1                                                             
                                                                                           
 5.  Dutch                   2                                                             
                                                                                           
 6.  French                157                                                             
                                                                                           
 7.  German                 78                                                             
                                                                                           
 8.  Gorkhali               10                                                             
                                                                                           
 9.  Hungarian               1                                                             
                                                                                           
 10. Bhasa (Bahasa) Indonesia 14                                                           
                                                                                           
 11. Italian                  8                                                            
                                                                                           
 12. Japanese                29                                                            
                                                                                           
 13. Kiswahili               14                                                            
                                                                                           
 14. Malay-Bahasa            3                                                             
                                                                                           
 15. Persian                31                                                             
                                                                                           
 16. Polish                 3                                                              
                                                                                           
 17. Portuguese            17                                                              
                                                                                           
 18. Pushtu                 1                                                              
                                                                                           
 19. Romanian               1                                                              
                                                                                           
 20. Russian               78                                                              
                                                                                           
 21. Serbe-Croatian        6                                                               
                                                                                           
 22. Spanish               71                                                              
                                                                                           
 23. Swedish               3                                                               
                                                                                           
 24. Thai                  4                                                               
                                                                                           
 25. Tibetan               3                                                               
                                                                                           
 26. Turkish               3                                                               
                                                                                           
 27. Vietnamese           3                                                                
 -122>                                                                                     
 APPENDIX XI Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry                                           
 Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry during the financial year 1984-85                     
 Revised                                                                                   
                                               Estimates                                   
                                               1984-85                                     
                                                                                           
                                              (Rs. in lakhs)                               
                                                                                           
 Headquarters                                  11,22.33                                    
                                                                                           
 Embassies/High Commissions and Missions                                                   
 abroad                                        60,44.31                                    
                                                                                           
 Supply Wings, London and Washington            2,36.15                                    
                                                                                           
 Other Items                                                                               
                                                                                           
 Contribution to UN, Commonwealth and other                                                
 International Institutions                     2,83.75                                    
                                                                                           
 Central Passport and Emigration                                                           
 Organisation                                   7,17.43                                    
                                                                                           
 Other Miscellaneous Items                     42,09.37                                    
                                                                                           
 Aid                                                                                       
                                                                                           
 Aid to Bangladesh                             2,97.00                                     
                                                                                           
 Aid to Bhutan                                 62,38.19                                    
                                                                                           
 Aid to Nepal                                 13,41.50                                     
                                                                                           
 Aid to Other Developing Countries under                                                   
 ITEC Programme                               6,50.00                                      
                                                                                           
 Aid to Sri Lanka                            1,25.00                                       
                                                                                           
                               TOTAL       2,12,65.03                                      
 -123>                                                                                     
 APPENDIX XII Expenditure on Headquarters and Indian Missions/Posts                        
 abroad                                                                                    
 Expenditure on Headquarters and Indian Missions/Posts abroad during                       
 1984-85                                                                                   
                                                                                           
 The estimated expenditure on the Headquarters of this Ministry is                         
 expected to be Rs. 1122.33 lakhs out of which Rs. 220.35 lakhs will be                    
 on publicity, Rs. 206.08 lakhs on travel expenses, Rs. 370.47 lakhs on                    
 salaries and wages of Establishmmet, Rs. 5.35 lakhs on account of                         
 subsidy to the Departmental Canteen, Rs. 15.30 lakhs on Foreign Service                   
 Training Institute, and Rs. 304.78 lakhs on other Mis-cellaneous items.                   
                                                                                           
 The total estimated expenditure on Indian Missions/Posts abroad                           
 including Supply Wings, Washing-ton and London, is expected to be Rs.                     
 6280.46 lakhs. This amount comprises Rs. 2510.83 lakhs on salaries,                       
 wages and allowances including foreign allowance, Rs. 786.82 lakhs on                     
 transfers/home leave passages and on local tours, Rs. 1608.69 lakhs on                    
 rents, rates and taxes as well as on maintenance and repairs of                           
 accommodation rented abroad, Rs. 1364.12 lakhs on other Miscellaneous                     
 items of contingent expenditure. The annual average expenditure per                       
 Mission comes to Rs. 46.86 lakhs.                                                         
                                                                                           
 The estimated expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad,                      
 which includes the ex-penditure on publicity abroad, works out to                         
 approximately 35.30 per cent of the total Revenue expendi-ture of this                    
 Ministry. The remaining 64.70% of the Revenue expenditure of this                         
 Ministry is being spent on various aid programmes including those to                      
 the neighbouring countries, contributions to UN and other international                   
 bodies, Passport Offices etc.                                                             
 -124>                                                                                     
 APPENDIX XIII Statement showing the total number of employes                              
 Statement showing the total number of employes (both permanent and                        
 temporary) in the Ministry of External Affairs under various groups and                   
 representation of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes therein                           
 (Position as on 31-12-84)                                                                 
 Group         Total    Scheduled   Percentage   Scheduled   Percentage                    
             Number of  Castes       of total      Tribes     of total                     
             employees               employees               employees                     
                                                                                           
 (1)           (2)        (3)           (4)           (5)       (6)                        
                                                                                           
 Group 'A'      648        88         13.58%           34       5.24%                      
 Group 'B'     1868       193         10.33%           28       1.49%                      
 Group 'C'     1504       196         13.03%           60       3.98%                      
 Group 'D'                                                                                 
 (excluding                                                                                
 Sweepers)      461        77         16.70%            8       1.73%                      
 Group 'D'                                                                                 
 (Sweepers)      29        29           100%           ..                                  
                                                                                           
 -125>                                                                                     
 APPENDIX XIV Statement showing the number of appointments                                 
 Statement showing the number of appointments (both by direct                              
 recruitment and by promotion) made in various groups of posts and                         
 reserve vacancies filled by Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes                         
 during the year 1984                                                                      
 Group     Total       Number of         Number of    Number of vacan-                     
          Number of    vacancies        Candidates    cies de-reserved                     
          vacancies    reserved         appointed     due to non-avai-                     
                                                      lability of res-                     
                                                      erved candidates                     
                                                                                           
                       Sched-  Sched-  Sched-  Sched-  Sched-  Sched-                      
                        uled    uled    uled    uled    uled    uled                       
                       Castes   Tribes  Castes  Tribes  Castes  Tribes                     
                                                                                           
 (1)           (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)     (6)     (7)     (8)                      
                                                                                           
 Group 'A'     133       5        3        14      2       ..      ..                      
                                                                                           
 Group 'B'     244      49       34        26      4       25      30                      
                                                                                           
 Group 'C'     375      72       38        61     21       11      17                      
                                                                                           
 Group 'D'      44       2        3        ..     ..        2       3                      
 (excluding                                                                                
 Sweepers)                                                                                 
                                                                                           
 NOTE:-5 Scheduled Caste and 3 Scheduled Tribe vacancies of Under                          
 Secretaries Grade I of General Cadre of IFS(B) are to be filled in                        
 through a Limited Departmental Examination which is held specially for                    
 Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe officers. The said examination is to be                   
 held some time in 1985 as intimated by the Union Public Service                           
 Commission.                                                                               
 -126>                                                                                     
 APPENDIX XV International Conferences/Meetings                                            
 International Conferences/Meetings hosted by the Ministries/Departments                   
 of the Government of India during 1984 for which logistical                               
 arrangements were made by the Conference Cell of the Ministry of                          
 External Affairs                                                                          
 Sl.     Title of Conference/Meeting   Date                                                
 No.                                                                                       
                                                                                           
 (1)              (2)            (3)                                                       
                                                                                           
 1. Technical Committee Meeting on Sports,                                                 
    Arts and Culture, hosted by Ministry of                                                
    External Affairs                       13 to 14 January 1984                           
                                                                                           
 2. Indo-Pak Sub-Commission, hosted by                                                     
    Ministry of External Affairs                                                           
                                          18 to 21 January 1984                            
                                                                                           
 3. 4th Consultation Meeting of UNIDO, hosted                                              
 by Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers                                                  
                                          23 to 27 January 1984                            
                                                                                           
 4. International Exposition of Rural Devel-                                               
    opment, hosted by Department of Rural                                                  
    Development                          5 to 15 February 1984                             
                                                                                           
 5. NAM Committee on Money and Finance hosted                                              
    by Ministry of External Affairs                                                        
                                          12 to 18 February 1984                           
                                                                                           
 6. 12th International Leprosy Conference                                                  
    hosted by Director General of Health                                                   
    Services                             20 to 25 February 1984                            
                                                                                           
 7. SARC Meeting of the Standing Committee of                                              
    the Foreign Secretaries, hosted by Ministry                                            
    of External Affairs                 27 to 29 February 1984                             
                                                                                           
 8. 3rd Internal Conference of Appellate Judges                                            
    and Conference of Commonwealth Chief Justices,                                         
    hosted by Supreme Court of India        5 to 10 March 1984                             
                                                                                           
 9. First International Conference on "Literat-                                            
    ure and Translation", hosted by Jawaharlal                                             
    Nehru University                      15 to 20 March 1984                              
                                                                                           
 10. Indo-Chinese Bhutanese Boundary Talks hosted                                          
     by Ministry of External Affairs        31st March 1984                                
                                                                                           
 11. Conference by the International Federation of                                         
     Agricultural Producers Organisation, hosted by                                        
     Ministry of Agriculture               2 to 12 May 1984                                
                                                                                           
 12. World Environment Conference, hosted by                                               
     Department of Environment             5 June 1984                                     
                                                                                           
 13. Film Festival, 1984 hosted by Ministry of                                             
     Information and Broadcasting              7 June 1984                                 
                                                                                           
 14. Indo-African Seminar of Trade, Economic and                                           
     Technical Cooperation (FIEO), hosted by Ministry                                      
     of External Affairs                 4 to 9 September 1984                             
                                                                                           
 -127>                                                                                     
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
 15. Electrical Industry Seminar on the Group of                                           
     77 countries, hosted by BHEL                                                          
                                         10 to 14 September  1984                          
                                                                                           
 16. Regional Mineral Resources Development centre                                         
     Meeting, hosted by Department of Mines                                                
                                         12 to 17 September 1984                           
                                                                                           
 17. 5th Meeting of the CHOGM Working Group of                                             
     Industry, hosted by Ministry of Industry                                              
                                            24 to 28 September 1984                        
                                                                                           
 18. 4th Meeting of Health Ministers of WHO                                                
     (South East Asia), hosted by Ministry of                                              
     Health and Family Welfare                                                             
                                           25 to 27 September 1984                         
                                                                                           
 19. International Conference on National Hazards                                          
     Mitigation Practices, hosted by Ministry of                                           
     Works and Housing                                                                     
                                           8 to 11 October  1984                           
                                                                                           
 20. International Conference on Buddhism and                                              
     National Cultures hosted by ICCR                                                      
                                          10 to 15 October                                 
                                                                                           
 21. ICRIER (Indian Council for Research on Intern-                                        
     ational Economic Relations-Indo-CCE round table                                       
     conference), hosted by Ministry of External                                           
     Affairs                            25 to 26 October 1984                              
                                                                                           
 22. World Mining Conference, hosted by Department                                         
     of Mines                          19 to 23 November 1984                              
                                                                                           
 23. Preparatory Meeting for SARC Archaeological                                           
     Congress, hosted by Ministry of External                                              
     Affairs                            19 to 20 November 1984                             
                                                                                           
 24. Conference of International Monetary and                                              
     Financial System and Issues, hosted by Ministry                                       
     of External Affairs                  17 to 19 December 1984                           
                                                                                           
 25. Seminar on 20th Anniversary of UNCTAD, hosted                                         
     by Research & Information System for the Non-                                         
     Aligned and other Developing Countries                                                
                                               28 December 1984                            
 -127>                                                                                     
                                                                                           
External website that  External website External website External website External website 
opens in a new window  that opens in a  that opens in a  that opens in a  that opens in a  
                       new window       new window       new window       new window       

    Address : Patiala House, Annexe - BNew Delhi                              
   -110001                                           Page last updated on: 09 
    Telephone: 23389073, 23382694, 23073685;                  December, 2013  
   Fax: 23386340, 23387700;Feedback :            Site designed and maintained 
   dirlibmea.gov.in                                  by: National Informatics 
    Officer In-charge:-                                         Centre (NIC), 
    (c)Content Owned by MEA Library Ministry of   DeitY, MoCIT, Government of 
   External Affairs, Government of India                               India. 
   Terms & Conditions | Privacy Policy |         Visitors:                    
   Copyright Policy | Hyperlinking Policy |      
   Accessibility Statement | Help                

   java script is required for this page
   MEAs App twitter Facebook Google plus YouTube flickr
   loading
