1948-49

Contents
Jan 01, 1948
REPORT OF MIN. E.A
& COMMONWEALTH
RELATIONS
1948-49
MINISTRY OF
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS AND
COMMONWEALTH RELATIONS
REPORT
OF THE
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
AND COMMONWEALTH RELATIONS
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS AND COMMONWEALTH
RELATIONS
This report falls into five parts
Part I describes the general set up of our diplomatic representation
abroad.
Part II deals with points of special interest in those countries where
India is represented.
Part III with India's part in international conferences; and
Part IV, with External Publicity.
2. The present designation of the Ministry of External Affairs and
Commonwealth Relations is a relic of past dualism when External affairs
and Commonwealth Relations were dealt with in two separate Departments of the Government of India. It is now proposed to call it the
Ministry of External Affairs.
INDIA

Jan 01, 1948

Part I
Jan 01, 1948
PART I
India's present diplomatic representation (including representation in
countries of the Commonwealth) is shown below by categories in alphabetical order:
A. Legations and Embassies:
(1)
(2)

Afghanistan
Belgium

(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

Brazil
Burma
China
Czechoslovakia
Egypt

(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)

France
Iran
Italy
Nepal
Siam
Sweden
Switzerland

(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)

Turkey
U.S.A.
U.S.S.R.
Germany
Japan

Embassy.
Embassy (In charge of a Charge d'Affaires who
is also accredited to Luxemburg.)
Embassy.
Embassy.
Embassy.
Embassy.
Embassy (Ambassador is also accredited to
Transjordan and Lebanon).
Embassy (In charge of a Charge d'Affaires
Embassy.
Embassy (In charge of a Charge d'Affaires).
Embassy (In charge of a Charge d'Affaires).
Legation.
Legation.
Legation (Minister is also being accredited to
the Holy See).
Embassy.
Embassy.
Embassy.
Military Mission.
Liaison Mission.
<pg1>
<pg2>

In addition it has been decided to send representatives at a convenient
time to the countries mentioned below:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

Argentine.
Chile.
Denmark.
Ethiopia.
Hungary.
Ireland.
Iraq.
Netherlands.
Norway.
Portugal.
Rumania.
Yugoslavia.

B. Consulates:
Consular establishments have been opened at the following places:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

New York.
San Francisco.
Shanghai.
Batavia.
Kashgar (China).
Pondicherry.
Saigon.
Songkhla (Siam)
Nova Goa.
Zahidan (Iran).
Medan (Sumatra).
Jedda (Saudi Arabia).

C. (i) High Commissioner etc.:
Australia.
Canada.
Ceylon.
Pakistan.
South Africa (In charge of a Secretary).
United Kingdom.
(ii) Commissioners:
British East Africa (consisting of Kenya, Tanganyika, Uganda and
Zanzibar).
Mauritius.
Fiji.
British West Indies (including British Guiana).
(iii) Representatives in Malaya with headquarters at Singapore.
There are two Deputy High Commissioners, one at Lahore and the other
at Dacca. Under the general supervision of the High Commissioner in
Karachi, the two Deputy High Commissioner deal with problems of
<pg3>
inter-provincial importance which have arisen between East and West
Punjab and West and East Bengal following the partition of the old
Provinces of Punjab and Bengal.
There are two offices of Agents one at Kandy in Ceylon and the other
at Kuala Lumpur in the Federation of Malaya. The Agents are under the
administrative control of the High Commissioner in Ceylon and the
Representative in Malaya respectively.
Of the Missions mentioned above those in the British East Africa,
Mauritius, Fiji and the British West Indies were opened during the year
and mark the successful conclusion of twelve years' negotiations with the
Government of the U.K.
The Indian Foreign Service.-The main administrative problem created
by the expansion of India's diplomatic relations is one of finding personnel.
Selection for Headships of Missions is made from men in public life and,
to some extent, from the Services. For lower posts to which persons
above the age of 25-the normal age for first appointment to Government
service-have to be appointed. Selections have been made with the

assistance of the F. P. S. C. and a special Selection Board. A total of 88
has been selected and, after some preliminary training in the Ministry,
selected candidates have been sent to posts abroad. Owing to the urgency
of completing the staff of each new Mission, such preliminary training has
not always been as full as the Ministry would have liked., but since each
appointment is made on probation of one year in the first instance, power
exists to dispense with candidates who do not prove their fitness for the
service. Normal recruitment is made through the F. P. S. C. by means of
and open competitive examination.
The securing of accommodation for Missions, bot for office and residential purposes, presents another problem. Other countries have found it
more economical in the end to house their Missions in properties which they
own. Consequently with our financial resources India has tried to pursue
a similar policy but, the majority of our Missions are accommodated in
rented buildings as the capital outlay involved in acquiring property is, at
the moment, beyond our resources.
INDIA
AFGHANISTAN BELGIUM BRAZIL BURMA CHINA NORWAY SLOVAKIA EGYPT JORDAN
LEBANON FRANCE IRAN ITALY NEPAL SWEDEN SWITZERLAND TURKEY USA GERMANY
JAPAN CHILE DENMARK ETHIOPIA HUNGARY IRELAND IRAQ PORTUGAL YUGOSLAVIA
INDONESIA SAUDI ARABIA AUSTRALIA CANADA PAKISTAN SOUTH AFRICA KENYA
UGANDA MAURITIUS FIJI REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE MALAYSIA UNITED KINGDOM
Jan 01, 1948

Part II

PART II
A. Middle East
India is represented in the Middle East by her Embassies at Cairo,
Teheran, Kabul and Ankara. Our Ambassador at Cairo is concurrently
accredited to Transjordan and Lebanon. Strategically, economically and
culturally, India has a vital interest in maintaining friendly relations with
<pg4>
these countries. With the establishment of our missions in the Middle
East, anti-Indian propaganda is being effectively countered. Possibilities
of expanding India's trade are being energetically explored. Indian's
resident there, for the most part for purposes of trade or as in the Persian
Gulf, as workers, are the object of special solicitude of our representatives.
Muslims of Indian nationality visit their sacred shrines in large numbers
every year in the Hedjaz, and in smaller numbers, in Iraq and Iran.
Their case also receives special attention.
Egypt.-The pre-eminent position of Egypt in the Arab World makes
our relations with that country of particular importance. Our Embassy

in Egypt was established in March, 1948. Our Ambassador has established contacts not only with the Government to which he is accredited
but also with the influential Arab League which has its headquarters in
Cairo. In June 1948 the Government of India sent a Trade Mission to
Egypt to negotiate for the purchase of cotton. For various reasons this
Mission was not able to effect an agreement. Recent indications from
Egypt, however, are more favourable and it is expected that negotiations
will be resumed in Delhi.
Iraq.-For commercial as well as political reasons, the Government
of India have considered it necessary to open a Legation in this country
and it is hoped to send a Minister to Baghdad in the near future.
Persian Gulf.-In the Persian Gulf where there are large numbers
of Indian employees of oil companies and with which India has been
doing considerable trade for centuries, there is no Indian representative
yet. An arrangement has however recently been reached to post a Trade
Agent at Bahrein, a Consul at Muscat and to authorise the Indian Consul
at Basra, when appointed, to look after the interests of Indians in
Kuwait.
Iran.-In Iran, our Ambassador has been engaged on negotiations
with the Iranian Government to redress the grievances of a large colony
of Indian traders settled in that country for a good many years. It has
been decided to open a Consulate in Khorramshahr to watch the interests
of Indian employees of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company at Abadan, and
a Consulate General at Meshed, which is an important place for Shia
pilgrimage from India. The Embassy in Iran has also been engaged on
negotiations with the Iranian Government for a bilateral air agreement,
a draft postal treaty, a draft treaty for direct wireless telegraphic communication and a proposal to conclude in anti-locust convention between
India and Iran.
<pg5>
Afghanistan.-A Trade Delegation from India visited Afghanistan
and Iran in October/November last year; and a Trade Delegation from
Afghanistan is now in India to negotiate an Indo-Afghan Trade Agreement. A Trade Delegation from Iraq also recently visited India. A
small mission was sent to the Persian Gulf last December to felicitate
the Sheikhs of Bahrein and Kuwait, and to consider ways and means
of strengthening the traditional commercial and financial links between
India and the Gulf. The Mission was also asked to report on the conditions of Indian skilled and unskilled labour working in the oil companies
in these places, and the Government of India are now considering the
Delegations's recommendations. The Government of India have under
consideration steps for the revision of the standard contract form to
provide better means of redress and ensure good living and working
conditions for Indian employees of the oil companies.
Ethiopia.-A Goodwill Mission headed by S. Sant Singh visited
Ethiopia last year and established close contacts with the Government as
well as non-official organizations. The visit was also instrumental in
obtaining information regarding the condition of nearly 500 Indians living
there as well as prospects of commercial and cultural relations between
the two countries. The Ethiopian Government have nominated their
Minister to India who is shortly expected to arrive. We have as yet
taken no decision regarding the appointment of our Minister to Ethiopia.
B. South East Asia and Far East

Burma.-Of five to six thousand Indians resident in areas which
have been the scene of conflict between Karens and Government forces,
4,000 were evacuated to Rangoon through the good offices of the Embassy
which is also giving them such relief as is possible with the assistance
of officials of the Burma Government and other non-official bodies. Funds
have been placed at the disposal of the Ambassador for relief and also
for the repatriation of those Indians who as are not likely to be reabsorbed in the economy of Burma in the near future. Shipping accommodation for Indians wishing to return to India because of disturbed
conditions in Burma has also been arranged.
(2) LAND NATIONALISATION ACT, 1948
Certain measures of agrarian reform introduced by the Government
of Burma during December 1947 and in the beginning of 1948, indicated
a policy of complete nationalisation of agricultural lands. On the May 26,
1948
the Hon'ble Thakin Nu, Premier of Burma, announced a
fifteen point programme which inter alia included abolition of private
<pg6>
ownership of agricultural lands and their resumption by Government for
distribution amongst agriculturists. After consulting representatives of
Indian interests in Burma, representations were made by the Government of India to the Government of Burma regarding the inadequacy of
the compensation proposed by the Burma Government. Adequate
representation of Indians on the Land Commission and on land committees
which were to be responsible for the distribution of the resumed lands
was also urged. The Bill, however, was passed last October with substantial modification. It was then decided to sent a delegation to Burma
under the leadership of the Indian National Congress. Owing to the
preoccupation of the Government of Burma with Karen rising, the visit
of the deputation has been postponed at their request.
(3) TERMINATION OF SERVICES OF INDIANS ON GROUNDS OF NATIONALITY
Soon after the inauguration of the Burmese Republic on the 4th
January 1948, the Government of Burma commenced serving notices of
discharge on Indian employees who were either not eligible to become
Burma citizens or unwilling to elect Burmese nationality. The Government of India have felt a special responsibility towards such employees
of the Government of Burma as were in that Government's service while
Burma was still a part of India and have sought (a) to secure adequate
benefits for discharged personnel in the shape of leave salary, pensions
and (b) find alternative employment for them in India. The possibilities
of (b) have been inevitably circumscribed by the obligations of relief
towards refugees who have come to this country as a result of the partition of India.
Indonesia.-India's sympathy with the people of Indonesia in their
struggle for freedom has been actively and persistently demonstrated ever
since India first brought up the dispute between the Dutch Government
and the Government of the Indonesian Republic before the Security
Council in 1947. The last move in the endeavour to bring about a
solution of this problem was the conference of 19 countries which took
place in New Delhi from the 20th to 24th January. The Conference unanimously passed a Resolution which demanded among other things

the withdrawal of Dutch troops, restoration of the Republican Government, release of Republican leaders and the lifting of the economic
blockade. It also recommended that an Interim Government be formed
by the 15th March 1949, that elections for a Constituent Assembly be
held by the 1st October, 1949, and that transfer of sovereignty should
be completed by the 1st January, 1950. The Security Council Resolution of the 28th January incorporated some of these recommendations
<pg7>
but was silent on the question of withdrawal of Dutch forces. The
Dutch Government have taken no action so far on the resolution of the
Security Council. The Government of India are in close touch, both with
the Governments which participated in the New Delhi conference and
the Indonesian representatives in New Delhi and are closely watching
developments.
Siam.-We are represented by a Minister at Bangkok and maintain a
Consulate at Songkhla. There are about 30,000 Indians in Siam. Siam
has many cultural affinities with us and is also of great importance to
us as a supplier of rice. Negotiations are under way for a Treaty of
Friendship, Commerce and Navigation between the two countries. At the
instance of the Indian Minister in Bangkok the Government of Siam permitted last year a large number of refugee Indians who had entered
Siam as temporary visitors, to reside in Siam permanently.
Indo China.-We have Consulate at Saigon. There are approximately
a thousand Indians in Indo-China mostly engaged in business or domestic
service. In 1948 as a result of representations made by the Consul, the
French Administration was induced to abolish a discriminatory tax
known as "IMPOT GRADUE". The numerous exchange Control restrictions which existed after the end of the War were a source of great
hardship to the Indian business community in Indo-China, who found
themselves unable to make any remittances to their dependents in India.
Remittance facilities on a limited scale, have now been allowed as a
result of negotiations between the Government of India and the French
Government.
The Philippines.-Proposals for a Treaty are being considered by both
Governments. There are approximately 1,300 Indians in the Republic
most of them carry on business on a small scale.
Japan.-Japan's future is of special interest to India and India
maintains a Liaison Mission there, partly to keep in touch with the
political development of Japan as a democratic pawn and partly for the
furtherance of India's economic interest. The Mission is particularly
useful in securing facilities for India businessmen visiting Japan and in
securing Japanese equipment and technicians for the development of Indian
industries.
China.-We have an Embassy in Nanking and Consulates General
in Shanghai and Kashgar. This Embassy has done a great deal to
promote the age-old friendship between India and China.
<pg8>
Arrangements have been made in co-operation with other diplomatic
representatives, to protect Indians in different cities during the current
hostilities. At the end of the World War we were faced with a major
problem in China; Indians in the employment of the Shanghai Municipal

Council as guards and menials were thrown out of employment when the
Municipal Council was taken over by the Chinese. Most of them were
destitute. At our instance a large number of them were repatriated to India.
Their claims on the Shanghai Municipal Council have not yet been met but
efforts to reach an early settlement continue. A Sino-Indian Treaty of
Friendship, Commerce and Navigation is under consideration. Pending
conclusion of a Sino-Indian Air Agreement temporary authorisation has
been given for a Chinese Service to India for a limited period.
Sinkiang (China).-On the 21st of December, 1948, an Indian ConsulateGeneral was, for the first time, established at Kashgar. It is our main
window into Central Asia. Moreover there are colonies of Indian residents in all the oases of Southern Sinkiang. Some time ago lands belonging to the Indian merchants were unjustly confiscated by the Chinese
authorities in Sinkiang. We have asked for the restoration of these
confiscated lands, or for the payment of compensation.
Nepal.-In Nepal we are represented by an Ambassador. Soon after
the attainment of independence negotiations were successfully carried out
with the Government of Nepal for the continued employment of Gurkha
troops in the Indian Army. During the past year necessary facilities
have been obtained from the Nepalese Government for work connected
with the Kosi dam which will be of immense benefit both to Nepal and
to Bihar. Proposals are now under consideration in the Ministry for a
new Treaty of Commerce and Friendship between the two countries.
Assam Tribal Areas.-The problems connected with these areas
impinge on India's foreign relations with the neighbouring countries China,
Burma. They are therefore administered by this Ministry through the
Governor of Assam. He is assisted by an Adviser chosen from the Civil
Service.
To improve the general condition of the tribal peoples and to stabilise
our administration in the tribal areas, a Five Year Development Plan has
been prepared. The Plan contains schemes for the construction of roads
and hospitals, buildings for administrative purposes, development of education, agriculture and forests and for the gradual extension of regular
administration to the tribal areas, and is being implemented by stages. A
recent proposal of the Standing Committee of the Ministry that welfare
<pg9>
work in these areas should be conducted with the aid of trained anthropoiogists who have a sympathetic understanding of the ways of the tribes
is being carefully examined.
Additional responsibilities devolved on the Assam as a result of
the partition of the India and the strength of this Force was increased by 13
additional platoons in 1947, and by another 20 additional platoons in
1948.
Tibet.-Our relations with Tibet are conducted through the Political
Officer is Sikkim and the Indian Mission in Lhasa. There is also a Trade
Agent in Gyantse.
Tribetan Trade Mission.-In December 1947 a Trade Mission from
Tibet visited India on their way to China, the U.S.A. and the U.K. in
order to explore the possibility of expanding Tibetan trade with these
countries. As a token of friendship India provided foreign exchange for
the expenses of the Mission. The Mission were asked to secure redress

for the grievances of Indian traders doing business in W. Tibet and to
allow access to Indian trader to one of their important wool marts.
With the assistance of the Political Officer in Sikkim a Syndicate has
been formed in Kalimpong composed of Indian merchants to handle
India's textiles trade with Tibet.
Sikkim and Bhutan.-Our relations with Sikkim and Bhutan are
conducted through the Political Officer in Sikkim who resides at Gangtok.
In view of the good relations that have always prevailed between India
and Bhutan the subsidy that we used to pay to the Maharaja has been
continued together with an additional subsidy that was originally granted
only for the duration of the War. We have also made arrangements to
meet some of the essential requirements of Bhutan, e.g. petrol for the
transport of its timber. The revision of the Treaty with Bhutan is under
active consideration.
C. Europe
France.-An Embassy was opened in Paris in January 1948. Negotiations have been in progress regarding the future of French settlements
in India. In June 1948 the French Government issued a declaration
which conceded the right of the people of these territories to determine
their future through a referendum. Negotiations for an early holding of
the referendum under safeguards which will ensure the free expression of
the wishes of the people are in progress.
Economically France has made rapid recovery.
<pg10>
A French Trade Delegation is shortly expected in India and preliminary talks have already been held. Among the commodities which
France can supply are steel, machinery, capital goods and chemicals.
The Governments of India and of France have signed an Air Agreement, and a Debt Settlement Agreement which concerns French assets
frozen in India during the War and Indian assets in metropolitan France
as well as in French colonial territories.
Belgium.-A Belgian Trade Delegation visited
of December and after a survey of the commercial
has returned to Belgium. It is hoped that in the
Agreement, providing for technical and financial
the two countries, will be concluded.

India during the month
and industrial fields
rear future a Trade
collaboration, between

Switzerland.-Our Legation in Berne was opened in March 1948.
The Government of India entered into a "Treaty of Friendship and
Establishment' with Switzerland on August 14, 1948. This Treaty is now
awaiting ratification. The question of entering into a Trade Agreement
with Switzerland is under active consideration. Our Legation has made
wide contacts with Swiss industrialists; and proposals for starting factories
for the manufacture of machine tools, electrical goods and heavy machinery
in India with Swiss co-operation are under consideration.
A draft air-agreement is under consideration.
Germany.-An Indian Military Mission was first set up in Berlin in

August 1946 under a British Military Officer. In 1947 an Indian civilian
officer with the honorary rank of Brigadier and now Major General, was
appointed the Head of the Mission. The Military Mission has so far
repatriated approximately sixty Indians, many of whom were political
exiles from India. In many cases prolonged searches had to be undertaken before they could be found. Last year an Indian Trade Delegation
visited Germany and a Trade Agreement has been entered into between
India and the Western Zones of Germany. Negotiations for concluding
a similar Agreement with the Soviet Zone are under way. Our Mission
has also been instrumental in recruiting approximately fifty German
technicians and scientists for employment in various industrial projects in
India. Government have under consideration the exchange of students
between India and Germany.
Sweden.-Our Legation in Stockholm was opened in January 1949.
Industrially Sweden is capable of supplying us with fine machinery
particularly for Hydro-electric purposes, ball-bearings, machine tools etc.
It is also an important source for the supply of timber and wood pulp
for paper manufacture. India entered into an Air Agreement with
Sweden last year.
<pg11>
Italy.-Our embassy in Italy was opened in January 1949. An Italian
Economic Mission consisting of about thirty members is expected to
arrive in New Delhi this month to consider the possibility of entering
into a Trade Agreement with India. Italy is in a position to supply us
with heavy chemicals and capital goods. Being the sixth largest ship
building country in the world she may also be able to render assistance
in that field.
A draft Air Agreement is under consideration.
The Vatican.-In May 1948, our Minister in Berne was accredited to
the Holy See but he has not as yet been able to present his credentials.
The Holy See, however, established an Internunciature (i.e. Legation)
here last year.
Discussions and negotiations on ecclesiastical matters such as the
anomalous position whereby the Archbishop of Goa appoints Bishops to
certain Indian Dioceses are being conducted through the Internuncio.
Government their desire to review the matter.
Czechoslovakia-Our Embassy in Moscow was established in July
1947 and has been developing cultural as well as political relations with
the Soviet Union. There have also been a few commercial transactions.
Last year Russia gave us 50,000 tons of wheat in exchange for 5,000 tons
of tea, and according to an Agreement recently entered into, we shall be
supplied with 81,000 tons of wheat in return for tea, jute and castor-oil.
The possibilities of entering into a formal trade agreement with the Soviet
Union are also under consideration.
Yugoslavia.-A decision to exchange diplomatic representatives with
Yugoslavia was announced in December 1948, but neither country has yet
rent a representative to the other. A Trade Delegation from Yugoslavia
arrived in India last December and a Trade Agreement was signed.

Netherlands.-The Netherlands Government opened their Embassy in
Delhi as far back as August 1947. The Government of India have not
however been able so far to establish their mission at the Hague.
A Debt Settlement Agreement with the Netherlands covering assets
belonging to the two countries affected during the War is under consideration. This will also cover Dutch colonial territories.
<pg12>
Portugal.-The Portuguese Legation was opened in Delhi with the
arrival of the Portuguese Minister in January 1949. The opening of our
Legation in Lisbon will, it is hoped, not be delayed long.
The question of the future of the Portuguese possessions in India requires early settlement in a friendly manner and, for this purpose, the
completion of the exchange of Diplomatic representatives between India
and Portugal is a matter of urgency.
D. America
U.S.A.-Our Diplomatic Mission in Washington has been in existence
for several years. The Trade Commissioner's Office in New York was
converted to a Consulate-General in May, 1948; another Consulate
General was opened in San Francisco a few months ago. Our Ambassador in Washington has done a great del to maintain friendly relations
with the Government of the United States. Negotiations have been going
on for some time regarding a Treaty of Friendship and Commerce between
India and the U.S.A. It is expected that the conclusion of such a Treaty
will result in the removal of certain disabilities which Indian nationals
now suffer from in the United States and will lead to the greater benefit
of the two countries.
South
continent.
lities and
country is

America.-We are under-represented in this large and important
The Latin American countries have great economic potentiaare all represented in the United Nations. One Latin Aemircan
also a Member of the Security Council.

Brazil.-The opening of an Indian Embassy in Brazil has created wide
interest in India among all sections of the people of Brazil and has also
enabled us to build up contacts with other South American Republics
where we have no representation. Our Amabassador is shortly visiting
Chile and Peru in response to invitations from those countries.
A commercial Secretary was recently appointed to the Embassy to
watch India's trade interests not only in Brazil but also in Peru, Equador,
Columbia and Venezula, French and Dutch Guineas.
Argentine.-The Governments of India and Argentine have recently
agreed to exchange diplomatic missions at Embassy level. We have
maintained a Trade Commissioner in Argentine for 6 years and he has
generally looked after our trade interests in South America. The post was
not long ago reclassified as a Consulate General. It is proposed to open
our Embassy there shortly. Argentine has been an important source of
supply of food grains, and an agreement has recently been entered into
by the Government of India and Argentine for the supply of 3,85,000
tons of wheat in exchange for raw jute.

<pg13>
Chile.-At the instance of the Chilean Government, it has been decided
to establish diplomatic relations with Chile. The Chilean Minister is
shortly expected to arrive in New Delhi, but the Government of India
have stated that due to shortage of personnel they will be unable to open
an Indian Legation in Santiago for some time in the he near future. Chile
is rich in minerals particularly saltpetre, and is one of the more important
Latin American Republics.
E. The Commonwealth
The United Kingdmo.-Consequent upon the attainment of independence by India the High Commissioner in London became responsible for
the handling of our political relations with the U.K. and for certain agency
functions which were formerly performed by the old Indian Office. The
question of reorganising the staff of India House to meet the new responsibilities of the High Commissioner is under consideration.
Australia.-British Indian subjects holding Australian passports were,
until recently, required to return to Australia within a specified time
limit which was endorsed on their passports each time they left the
country. These restrictions proved irksome, and a more satisfactory
arrangement has been negotiated under which re-entry will be permitted
subject to a simple identy test.
Canada.-The Indian High Commissioner in Canada was able during
the year to secure municipal franchise for Indians domioiled in British
Columbia. The federal franchise was secure some time ago. The High
Commissioner was also able to obtain permission for the admission to
Canada of young Indians seeking to enter Canada for the immediate purpose of marrying girls of Indian origin, legally resident in that country,
and of relatives of persons of Indian origin, legally resident in Canada,
who have reached an advanced age and require assistance not otherwise
available in the management of their properties in that country.
Pakistan.-The partition of the Indian sub-continent into two States
India and Pakistan, has given rise to a number of problems. These were
handled by different Ministries in the Government of India, depending
on their nature; the Ministry of External Affairs & Commonwealth Relations has served mainly as a co-ordinating agency. In order to achieve
the necessary co-ordination, a Secretaries Committee has been set up with
the Additional Secretary of the Ministry as Convenor.
Ceylon.-The most important problem, which continue to receive
attention during the year, is that of the citizenship for Indians resident
in Ceylon. Prolonged negotiations on a Draft Bill which the Ceylon
<pg14>
Government proposed to introduce in their Parliament yield no agreement.
The Bill which passed the Ceylon Lower House is now before the Senate.
Objections were taken -- the Indian community in Ceylon to the
Ceylon Exchange Control Regulations which restrict remittances to India.
These objections were brought to the notice of the Ceylon Government
and some relief was obtained.

South Africa.-There has been no change in relations between India
and South Africa. A new Government which came to power in South
Africa on a declared programme of apartheid segregation of non-Europeans
has already taken certain measures to enforce its policy. In addition,
Part II of the Asiatic Land Tenure and Indian Representation Act, which
sought to give parliamentary representation to Indians through European
members elected by Indians has been repealed.
In January, 1949 there was a sudden outbreak of racial riots at Durban
between the Indians and the Africans. These involved serious casualties
on both sides and considerable loss of property belonging to Indians. The
Government of India have done what they could to give succour to the
persons affected by these riots irrespective of any racial consideration.
British East Africa.-The revised Immigration Restriction Bills were
passed into law by the East African Legislatures despite the objections
of the Government of India and the local Indian community. The Government of India made it clear that they could not acquiesce in legislation
which would adversely affect the rights and interests of their nationals
abroad. The Government of the United Kingdom assured the Government of India that the legislation was not directed against Indians. The
administration of the new law will now be watched and the matter considered afresh in the light of subsequent developments.
Mainly as a reflection of the political situation in India, a demand for
separate electorates for Muslims and non-Muslims gained ground in
Kenya since 1946. Various attempts at compromise failed. Thereupon
the Government of Kenya sought to introduce separate electorates for
Muslims and non-Muslims. As soon as this came to the notice of the
Government of India, they made vigorous representations to the U. K.
Government. Eventually it was decided by the Government of Kenya
to retain the electorates as they were but to reserve two of the five Indian
sets for Muslims in two double member constituencies, each voter
having one vote only. The ordinance giving effect to this decision is
restricted to the life of the present Legislative Council.
<pg15>
Early in 1948, riots took place in the Gold Coast Colony and several
shops belonging to Indians were burnt and looted. Representations were
made to the Government of the U. K. for payment of compensation and
other relief to the victims of these riots. The matter is still under the
consideration of the U. K. Government.
Mauritius.-The Government of India appointed a Commissioner in
Mauritius during the year.
As a result of the constitutional changes in Mauritius, Indians have
secured 11 seats out of 17 in the Legislative Council.
Fiji.-A Commissioner for India was appointed in Fiji during the
year. A residential tax of 62 per head per annum on persons who do not
pay income-tax has hit the Indian community which is composed mainly
of farmers or petty traders hard. Representations were made to H. M. G.
in March 1948 urging the introduction of a more equitable system of
taxation, and grant of relief to the persons affected by reduction in the
rate of residential tax. The matter is still under consideration.

A committee consisting of six non-official members of the Fiji Legislative Council (including two Indians) has been appointed to consider and
report on the desirability of granting to the peoples of the Colony a greater
measure of control in their own affairs and to recommend necessary
amendments in the constitution of Fiji. The Committee has not yet
submitted its report.
Though many Indians in Fiji are anxious to return to India, owing to
the acute shipping position, only about 300 have been registered for repatriation by the next available boat.
British West Indies.-The Government of India are examining the
proposal of the Secretary of State for the Colonies for constitutional
reforms in Trinidad. The question of assisted repatriation of Indians to
their homes also received attention.
In June 1948 Indian workers on sugar estates in British Guiana resorted to a strike owing o dissatisfaction with wages and conditions of
work. The U. K. Government have appointed a Royal Commission of
Enquiry to investigate the whole problem of the sugar industry in
British Guiana. The Commission have recently arrived in the Colony.
304 Indian repatriates from British Guiana are on their way to India
in spite of the Government of India's desire that no persons should return
at present in view of the difficult conditions in the country. The Indian
Commissioner has been instructed to dissuade the remaining Indians from
returning.
<pg16>
Malaya.-Internal Disturbances in Malaya and Indian Labour.-In
the early months of the year, strikes became almost chronic in certain parts
of
Malaya. As the labour population on the rubber estates was mainly
India, these strikes necessarily involved Indians. Subsequently strikes
were followed by outbreaks of violence on a large scale by the Chinese
communist. The great majority of Indian labour has held aloof from
communist activities. Through their Representative, the Government of
Indian have sought to protect innocent Indians, from the operation of the
various emergency measures which the Malayan authorities have imposed
to deal with lawlessness. They have also urged on H. M. G. in the U. K.
the importance of improving the standards of living of labour on plantations as the only effective antidote to communist propaganda.
F. Haji.
During the year the Government of India abandoned the centralised booking system which had been introduced during the war,
for passages direct with the shipping companies engaged in the pilgrim
traffic. Government, however continued to use their good offices with
Shipping Companies in securing adequate shipping for the Haji traffic.
An agreement was also reached with Pakistan whereby 50 per cent of
the available shipping was allotted to pilgrims from Pakistan. In spite
of the partition of the country the number of Indian pilgrims who performed Haji was 14,110 as against 20,423 from undivided India in the
previous year. To advise Government on matters connected with Haji,
a Standing Advisory Committee called the Central Haji Committee was

appointed. This Committee has advisory functions and includes three
members of the Constituent Assembly amongst its members.
EGYPT
INDIA AFGHANISTAN TURKEY JORDAN LEBANON USA IRAN IRAQ OMAN KUWAIT
ETHIOPIA BURMA INDONESIA CHINA PHILIPPINES CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
JAPAN NEPAL UNITED KINGDOM BHUTAN FRANCE BELGIUM SWITZERLAND RUSSIA
GERMANY LATVIA SWEDEN ITALY NORWAY SLOVAKIA YUGOSLAVIA THE NETHERLANDS
PORTUGAL BRAZIL CHILE PERU GUINEA AUSTRALIA CANADA PAKISTAN SOUTH
AFRICA KENYA MAURITIUS FIJI
May 26, 1948

part III
PART III
India and International Conferences.
As a member of the U. N. and its many specialised agencies, India
part in a number of International Conferences. Of these, apart from
discussions in the Security Council on the Indonesian, Kashmir and
Hyderabad issues-the last two concerned India directly-in which the
Government representatives participated, the session of the U. N. Assembly which met in Paris from September-December, 1948, was politically
the most important.
The Indonesian problem has been dealt with in another part of this
Report; Kashmir and Hyderabad have been the subject of special statements by the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister. The
Kashmir problem is being dealt with in consultation with the U. N.
Commission which has now returned to the Indian sub-continent.
<pg17>
The complaint made by the Laik Ali Ministry to the Security Council
regarding Hyderabad has been withdrawn and, so far as the Government
of India are concerned, the matter is closed.
The third ordinary session of the General Assembly was held in Paris
from the Sep 21, 1948 to the 12th December 1948. As many as
75 items comprised the Agenda for this session. Some of the more important items involved complex political problems such as Palestine,
Greece, Korea, the control of Atomic Energy, Disarmament, the Great
Power Veto, promotion of international co-operation in the political field,
treatment of Indians in South Africa and disposal of the former Italian
colonies. The last two items could not be taken up for want of time and
will be discussed in the second part of this session which will commence
in New York on the 5th April 1949.
On each important issue that was discussed in Paris, India's stand

was in line with her general foreign policy, viz., a consideration of the
matter in debate on its intrinsic merits and without favour to the policy
of any group or groups of nations. Such independence, though it may
not evoke universal popularity, does evoke respect if exercised with firmness and judgment. It is best calculated to serve India's national interest
and, on the long view, to promote the chances of international peace.
On Palestine, the Indian Delegation adhered to its advocacy of a
federal solution and its opposition to a solution imposed by force. For
Korea, while accepting the result of the elections held in the South under
the auspices of the U. N. Commission, the Delegation earnestly urged
persistence by the new Commission in endeavour to restore unity between
the North and the South.
The Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East.-Is one of the
Regional Commission of the United Nations and deals with the question
of economic development of the Asia and the Far East. It held its third
session at Ooty (India) from 1st to 12the June 1948. The fourth was held
at Lapstone (Australia) from the 28th November to 11th December 1948.
Sir B. N. Rau was elected by a very large majority of votes to the International Law Commission at the Paris session of the U. N. General
Assembly. This Commission is charged with the codification of International Law.
Of the 11 members of the Security Council, only two are from Asia
and, of the two, one, China, is permanent member. Of the remaining
9 seats, two are held by North and two are by South American countries

<pg18>
and the rest by Europe. This distribution is wholly disproportionate to
Asia's growing importance, and it was originally intended that India
should move for a more equitable regional representation on the Council.
Owing to the crowded nature of the Assembly's agenda and, in particular, the atmosphere of controversy which marked the debates on all
major issues, it was decided not to proceed with the idea. In the interests
of harmony among Asian nations, India also did not seek election to the
seat on the Council vacated by Syria. Egypt succeeded Syria. Of elections to other bodies which function as part or under the auspices of the
U. N., India sought and secured election to:
Transport and Communications Commission,
Economic and Employment Commission,
Statistical Commission,
Women's Rights Commission,
Human Rights Commission.
In all these bodies, representatives of India played a notable parts.
A competitive examination for the recruitment of probably 8 more
Indians to the U. N. Secretariat is to be held shortly with the help of

the F. P. S. C. The Government of India continue to press for the
appointment of more and more Indians to the U. N. Secretariat, both in
the higher and lower grades.
The part played by the Indian Delegation in the discussions relating
to Trusteeship in the United Nations General Assembly and its Constituent Committees was in keeping with India's policy of doing whatever
is possible to advance the condition of peoples still under foreign tutelage
and deserves special mention. Questions which received particular
attention were:
(i) Submission of a Trusteeship Agreement in respect of SouthWest Africa by the Government of the Union of South Africa.
(ii) Supply of information by Administrative Powers in regard to nonself-governing territories,
(iii) Constitution of a Special Committee to examine the summaries
of information transmitted to the Nations. Organisation on economic, social and educational conditions in nonself-governing territories, and
(iv)

Consideration of the report of the Trusteeship Council on the
administration of Trust Territories.

<pg19>
As regards (i), the Indian representatives brought out prominently South
Africa's intention to incorporate this territory in the Union and, although
they did not succeed in persuading the majority of the Assembly to forbid
such a step, their firm attitude helped in the adoption by the Assembly
of joint resolution which was moved by Denmark, Norway and some other
European countries. Resolutions relating to (ii) and (iv) were moved by
the Indian members, the former singly and the latter jointly with representative of Cuba, the Philippines and Venezuela. The resolution passed
by the General Assembly in regard to the advancement of education in
Trust Territories was also vigorously supported by India.
INDIA
INDONESIA USA FRANCE GREECE KOREA SOUTH AFRICA
SYRIA DENMARK NORWAY CUBA PHILIPPINES VENEZUELA
Sep 21, 1948

Part IV

PART IV
External Publicity

AUSTRALIA

CHINA

EGYPT

In order to secure more effective co-ordination with foreign policy,
external publicity was transferred to this Ministry from the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting in June 1948. During the last seven months
a number of new measures have been adopted. The number of Information Posts has been increased; from 13 to 24. Publicity organisations now
exist in London, Batavia, Washington, Tokyo, Saigon, Singapore, Bang
kok, Colombo, Rangoon, Dacca, Lahore, Karachi, Kabul, Tehran, Cairo,
Paris, Ankara Nairobi, Nanking, Jedda, Rome, Prague, Ottawa and
Canberra. Publicity directives have been made more comprehensive and
more regular.
Publicity Policy.-Special attention is paid to regional requirements,
e.g. of the Middle East; S. E. Asia and Far East; the Commonwealth etc.
News services to foreign posts which were formerly cabled and were
limited to 800 words were inadequate as background information and expensive. With effect from Jul 01, 1948, E. A. & C. R. multiple-address
broadcasts have been started to foreign posts through the Overseas Communications Service of the All India Radio twice daily. These carry about
2,500 words per day. At present 17 posts are being served and arrangements are being made for others to receive these broadcasts. Copies of
our wireless News Bulletins are sent every day by air to those centres which
are not yet picking up our transmissions.
Monthly newsreals consisting of items considered suitable for foreign
publicity are being sent abroad. Special films considered suitable for
foreign publicity are being produced. Information Centres are being
supplied with projectors.
<pg20>
Magazines.-Three magazines are produced for external publicity at
present. These are:
(1) "New India"-in English;
(2) "March of India"-in English;
(3) "Al-Nafir"-in Arabic.
It is proposed to issue a Persian version of "Al-Nafir". The future of
publicity through magazines is under discussion.
Libraries.-It has been decided to establish at 27 Missions abroad small
libraries containing books on Indian Philosophy, history and culture from
which books can be lent to local residents interested in India.

JAPAN
REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE UNITED KINGDOM AFGHANISTAN EGYPT IRAN PAKISTAN SRI
LANKA CANADA CZECH REPUBLIC FRANCE ITALY KENYA TURKEY AUSTRALIA CENTRAL
AFRICAN REPUBLIC INDIA USA

Jul 01, 1948

1949-50

Contents
Jan 01, 1949
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
REPORT
OF THE
Ministry of External Affairs
1949-50

REPORT OF THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
This report falls into four parts:
Part I describes the general set up of our diplomatic
representation abroad.
Part II deals with points of
countries where India

special interest in those
is represented.

Part III deals with international conferences; and
Part IV with External Publicity.
2. The designation of the Ministry has now been changed
from "Ministry of External Affairs and Commonwealth Relations" to "Ministry of External Affairs".
INDIA

Jan 01, 1949

A. Legations and Embassies.

Jan 01, 1949
PART I
Since the last report was published India's diplomatic
representation has been established in the following
countries: A. Legations and Embassies.
(1) Argentina
(2) Baghdad

Embassy.
Legation. (The Ambassador at Tehran is concurrently accredited as Minister to Iraq).
(3) Ethiopia
Legation.
(4) Denmark
Legation. (The Minister at Stockholm is concurrently accredited as Minister to Denmark
(5) Finland
and Finland)
(6) Holland
Embassy.
(7) Holy See
Legation. (The Minister at Berne is concurrently
accredited as Minister to the Holy See).
(8) Ireland
Embassy. (The High Commissioner for India in
the United Kingdom is concurrently accredited
as Ambassador to Ireland.)
(9) Portugal
Legation.
(10) German
Military Mission. (The Head of the Indian
Federal ReMilitary Mission, Berlin, is concurrently
public (Western appointed as Head of the Indian Mission).
Germany)
(11) Indonesia
Embassy. (The Consulate General at Batavia,
(Djarkarta) has been raised to an Embassy
with the inauguration of the United States of
Indonesia).
B. Consulates:
(1) Jogjakarta
(2) Hanoi
Consular Agency (Under the administrative control of the Consul-General, Saigon)
<pg1>
<pg2>
In addition the Consulates at Saigon and at Goa were
raised to Consulates General during the year.
Several important diplomatic Missions were established in
Delhi during the year bringing the total to 32.
Economy measures.-In view of the imperative need for
all possible economies in expenditure the proposals for establishing consular representation at Meshed and Khoramshahr
(Iran), Basra, Bahrein and Muscat (Persian Gulf) have been

kept in abeyance. Reductions in the existing establishments
of Indian Missions have been made wherever possible and
vacant posts left unfilled. The Information offices in our
Missions in Prague, Rome, Colombo, Bangkok, Singapore,
Nanking, Johannesburg and Mauritius have been discontinued. The post of Cultural Relations Officer at Rio de Janeiro
has similarly been abolished.
The Indian Foreign Service.-The problem of finding
suitable personnel for staffing India's newly started Missions
has now been solved. A total number of 89 persons above the
age of 25 the normal age for first appointment to Government
service have been selected with the assistance of the Federal
Public Service Commission and a Special Selection Board.
The future recruitment will be by means of open competitive
examinations held by the Union Public Service Commission.
Seven candidates were selected on the basis of the examination
held in 1947 and four in 1948. These candidates are now
undergoing the prescribed three years' training at foreign
universities and in Missions abroad.
Accommodation for Missions.-The problem of securing
accommodation for our Missions for office as well as residential purposes continues to be difficult. To purchase properties
has been found by experience to be cheaper than to rent them.
Properties have been acquired at: 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

London
Paris
Berne
Cairo
Rangoon
Singapore
New York
Washington
<pg3>

It is proposed to buy properties or construct houses in a few
more places during the financial year 1950-51. The majority
of our Missions, however, are housed in rented buildings and
this will have to continue until we are in a position to purchase
properties.

INDIA
ARGENTINA IRAN IRAQ ETHIOPIA DENMARK SWEDEN FINLAND SWITZERLAND IRELAND
PORTUGAL GERMANY INDONESIA VIETNAM OMAN USA CZECH REPUBLIC ITALY REPUBLIC
OF SINGAPORE SRI LANKA MAURITIUS SOUTH AFRICA UNITED KINGDOM FRANCE EGYPT
Jan 01, 1949

A. Middle East
PART II
A. Middle East
With the establishment of our Legation in Baghdad we
have now diplomatic representation in most of the important
countries of the Middle-East. The Governments of Syria and
Yemen have also expressed their desire to exchange diplomatic
relations with India.
Egypt.-Negotiations are in progress for concluding a
treaty of friendship with Egypt. A bilateral air agreement
between the two countries is also under negotiation.
Turkey.-The question of a trade agreement with Turkey
has been under examination.
Iraq.-The establishment of our Legation at Baghdad in
September 1949 has led to a greater understanding of Indian
problems in Iraq.
Persian Gulf.-There are no Indian representatives yet in
the Persian Gulf--Where large numbers of Indians are employed by the Oil Companies. The proposal to appoint a
Trade Agent at Bahrein and a Consul at Muscat and a Consul
at Basra, with jurisdiction over Kuwait has had to be kept in
abeyance as an economy measure. Meanwhile it has been proposed that the Secretary to the Indian Legation at Baghdad
should pay periodical visits to Bahrein and Kuwait for keeping in touch with Indian nationals there. Our Ambassador
at Tehran has paid a non-official visit to Kuwait recently in
order to acquaint himself with the living conditions of Indian
employees there.
Aden.-It is proposed to appoint a Commissioner for the
Government of India shortly in Aden to look after Indian
interests. The consent of the U.K. Government to this appointment is awaited.
Yemen.--A Yemen delegation visited New Delhi in July
last to negotiate a treaty of friendship and commerce which is
expected to be signed by both the Governments shortly.
<pg4>
Haj.-Arrangements were made for about 14,000 Indian

pilgrims to visit the Hejaz on pilgrimage during the last year
and a Special Haj Officer was appointed during the Haj
season to render assistance to the pilgrims.
Iran.-A treaty of friendship between India and Iran is
hoped to be signed shortly at Tehran.
Pending the conclusion of a bilateral air agreement between India and Iran, the temporary agreement with Iran
has been extended for a further period of six months from
December, 1949.
An Iranian Economic Mission arrived at New Delhi in
December 1949 to explore possibilities of promoting trade
between the two countries and the draft of a treaty of commerce and navigation has been handed over to the members
of the Mission. Negotiations are also in progress for concluding a direct wireless agreement and for finalising the Antilocust Convention.
As a measure of economy the opening of the Consulate
General at Meshed and the Consulate at Khoramshahr has
been postponed and the Ambassador has been asked to assume
responsibilities for the welfare of Indian employees of the
Anglo Iranian Oil Company in Southern Iran.
Afghanistan.-A treaty of friendship between India and
Afghanistan was signed on the A January 1950 at New Delhi
and will come into force after the exchange of the instruments
of ratification. An Afghan trade delegation arrived in India
in January 1949 to hold discussions for the conclusion of a
treaty of friendship and commerce. The draft of a treaty
was presented to the Afghan delegation and negotiations for
its conclusion are in progress.
A direct wireless telegraph agreement between India and
Afghanistan was signed at Kabul on the Dec 14, 1949
and the service was inaugurated at Bombay on the 12th
January, 1950.
Our Ambassador at Kabul is conducting preliminary
negotiations with the Afghan Government in connection with
an air agreement.
The Deputy Minister, visited Afghanistan in 1949 to participate in the Afghan Jashan celebrations. Indian hockey and
football teams and exhibitions of Indian paintings were sent
to Kabul in connection with the celebrations.
<pg5>
The Vice Consulates at Jalalabad and Kandahar started
functioning during the year.

B. South East Asia and the Far East
Pakistan.-The important matters dealt with during the
year were the Kashmir question the canal water
dispute the evacuee property dispute devaluation and its
consequent effects on Indo-Pakistan trade relations and the
setting up of a boundary disputes tribunal to resolve certain
boundary disputes in terms of the agreements reached in
December 1948 and the publication of the decision of the
tribunal. Matters falling within the specific jurisdiction of
other Ministries were dealt with by them the Ministry of
External Affairs acting in a coordinating capacity. Attempts
were continued in the year to resolve all outstanding issues
with Pakistan by friendly negotiations or by mediation or
arbitration etc. as might be suitable in the different cases.
Ceylon.-The Indian and Pakistan Residents (Citizenship)
Act was enforced on the 5th August, 1949 and Indians in
Ceylon who are qualified under the provisions of the Act to be
citizens of Ceylon by registration have been required to apply
for such citizenship within two years from that date. The
Ceylon Indian Congress, the most influential and representative body of Indians in Ceylon, decided to boycott the provisions of the Act as it considered them to be unsatisfactory.
Methods of resolving the present impasse are now being considered. The Emigrants and Immigrants Act was also brought
into force with effect from the 1st November 1949, as a result
of which Indians going to Ceylon are required to be in possession of a passport and residence permit (temporary or permanent) or a visa. Difficulties have arisen over the working of
this Act, some of which have been overcome through the
intervention of our High Commissioner in Ceylon and efforts
are being pursued for overcoming the rest.
A new system for permitting remittances from Ceylon on
the basis of permits has been introduced with effect from the
1st January 1950. Certain difficulties experienced by Indians
over the new arrangements are being tried to be removed in
consultation with the Government of Ceylon.
Burma.-In accordance with the agreement reached in the
Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference held in Ceylon in
January 1950, it is proposed to grant a short. term loan of
(pound) one million to Burma out of the blocked Sterling Account.
<pg6>
This will be part of a Commonwealth loan to Burma of six
million pounds. The Government of Burma passed the
Nationalisation Act, 1948 which provides for the resumption of
agricultural lands by Government for distribution amongst
cultivators. Representations were made to the Government of
Burma regarding the inadequacy of the compensation proposed under the Act. A delegation was also proposed to be

sent to Burma early in February 1949 to discuss this matter
but the visit had to be postponed indefinitely at the request
of the Government of Burma who were then preoccupied with
internal disturbances in the country. The Act has however
now been applied to certain areas and the Land Compensation
Commission has also been set up to determine the basis of
compensation and the Government of Burma have agreed to
receive our delegation sometimes in March 1950.
Repatriation of Indian destitutes from Burma.-Due to the
unsatisfactory internal situation in Burma, repatriation of
Indian nationals rendered destitute by the activities of insurgents had to be continued throughout the year, our Embassy
making all necessary arrangements to bring them from the
interior and for repatriating them to India. About 13,000
destitute Indian nationals have so far been repatriated at a
cost of approximately Rs. nine lakhs incurred by the Government of India.
Provision of alternative employment to destitute Indian
employees of the Burmese Government.-Efforts to secure
alternative employment in India for Indian nationals discharged from Burma Government services on grounds of alien
nationality were continued during the year. Employment
assistance is being given through employment exchanges and
concessions such as exemption from the upper age limit and
higher order of priority have also been granted by the Government of India. On 13th November 1949 one thousand and
thirty four ex-employees of the Government of Burma had
been absorbed under the Government of India.
Siam.-Negotiations for a bilateral air agreement and a
treaty of friendship commerce and navigation between India
and Siam are under consideration. A temporary authorisation has in the meanwhile been given to an Indian company
to operate an air service to Bangkok and beyond.
The Consulate at Songkhla in South Siam has been closed
down as a measure of economy.
<pg7>
Malaya.-Internal disturbances continued in Malaya and
the Malayan authorities have recently launched an Anti-Bandit
Month in an all out effort to crush the terrorist activities. The
vast majority of Indians in Malaya continued to keep away
from all terrorist activities though about 270 have been kept
in detention under the emergency regulations on suspicion of
having directly or indirectly aided the terrorists or their agents.
A number of Indians, together with their dependents have also
been repatriated to India at the cost of the Malayan authorities.
The Government of the Federation of Malaya passed a legislation on the 22nd December 1949 withdrawing facilities so far

given to the Agent of the Government of India in Malaya to
inspect work places etc. where Indian labourers are employed.
The question as to what extent the functions which the Agent
has hitherto been. discharging in respect of Indian labourers
can be performed by him in his capacity as Consul, is at
present under examination.
Indonesia.-A conference of 19 Asian and other nations was
held at New Delhi on the 20th January 1949 to discuss ways
and means for the settlement of the Indonesian problem.
Certain specific recommendations were made to the Security
Council. This was followed on the. 13th April 1949 by an
informal conference on Indonesia held under the chairmanship
of the Prime Minister and was attended by representatives of 11
countries. The end of the year marked the successful conclusion of the Round Table Conference at the Hague and the
consequent transfer of power in Indonesia from Dutch to
Indonesian hands culminating in the formation of the new
Republic of the United States of Indonesia. Our Consulate
General in Batavia has been raised to the status of an Embassy.
The Government of India sent Rajkumari Amrit Kaur as their
representative to take part in the Indonesian freedom celebrations and Dr. Soekarno President of the Indonesian Republic,
paid a visit to India on the occasion of India's becoming a
Republic in January 1950.
Indo-China.-Our Consulate at Saigon has been raised to a
Consulate General. Our Consul General has succeeded in
inducing the French passport authorities to abolish the practice
of obtaining finger-prints of Indians arriving in Indo-China.
China.-The year 1949 saw the overthrow of the Chinese
Nationalist Government by the Communists and the establishment of a Central People's Government with its capital at
Peking. In October 1949 this Government proclaimed itself as
the only lawful Government of China and expressed a desire
<pg8>
to enter into diplomatic relations with India. The Government
of India accorded de jure recognition to the new Government
of China on the 30th December 1949 and agreement has been
reached with the Chinese People's Government to establish
diplomatic relations. Discussions on preliminary and procedural matters connected with the establishment of diplomatic
missions, are now being conducted by the Indian Charge
d'Affaires in China with the new Government.
Sinkiang.-Sinkiang was taken over peacefully by the
Central People's Government of China on the 26th September, 1949. This has resulted in an influx of about 700
refugees into India. Transit facilities are being afforded to
them; and the Indian Red Cross has also given them relief.

Japan.-Significant changes in the attitude of the occupation Authorities towards Japan have taken place. The
process of Japan's economic revival has been accelerated;
and the dismantling of factories stopped. Little progress,
however, has been made in negotiating a Peace Treaty with
Japan.
India has entered into a Trade Agreement with Japan.
An Indian Delegation was sent to Japan to study and report
on Japan's cottage industries. They have brought with them
numerous exhibits of cottage industry products from Japan,
machinery to set up similar cottage industries in India and
also a team of Japanese technicians to train our refugees to
work the machinery imported from Japan.
In response to requests from Japanese children, the Prime
Minister sent an elephant, together with a message of good
will to the children of Japan.
Philippines.-On the 26th November, 1949, an Indian
Consulate General was established at Manila, the capital of
the Philippines.
An air agreement was signed between India and the
Philippines in October 1949, and a treaty of friendship is under
consideration.
Hong Kong.-The Colonial Government of Hong Kong
have been moved to restore pre-war conditions for the entry of
Indians into Hong Kong. Efforts are being made to remove
the restrictions imposed during the war.
Tibet.-In the year under review an Indian Political officer,
Mr. H. Dayal, paid an official visit to Lhasa for the first time.
A Tibetan Trade Mission visited China, the U.S.A. and the
<pg9>
U.K. and returned to Tibet via Delhi where the mission held
discussions on trade matters.
Nepal.-India sent a Scientific and Cultural Mission to
Nepal in the summer of 1949. A similar mission from Nepal
is due to visit India in April 1950. Negotiations for a new
treaty with Nepal have reached an advanced stage and are
expected to be finalised shortly. The Maharaja of Nepal paid
a visit to New Delhi in February 1950. Agitation for constitutional reforms continues in Nepal.
Sikkim.-The conflict between the Sikkim State Congress
and the Government of Sikkim menaced the administration of
Sikkim in the early part of 1949. In June 1949 the Maharaja

wrote to the Political Officer expressing his inability to carry
on the administration without the Government of India's
assistance and requesting the Political Officer to take over the
administration pending the appointment of the Dewan. The
Political Officer accordingly took over the administration and
continued to be responsible for it until Mr. J. S. Lall an officer
of the Government of India whose services were loaned to
the Maharaja of Sikkim assumed charge as Dewan.
The Dewan is now engaged in reforming the administration of the State. On his recommendations the Government of
India have agreed to grant funds to the State to meet the cost
of a land revenue settlement and for a forest survey.
It has been decided to convene a conference of representatives of various Parties in March in New Delhi in order to
discuss the administrative relationship of Sikkim with India.
Bhutan.--Bhutan and India entered into a new treaty of
friendship on 8th August, 1949. The treaty has since been
ratified by both Governments. Under the treaty the Government of Bhutan will continue to be guided by the Government
of India in regard to its external relations and the Government
of India have undertaken not to interfere in the internal
administration of Bhutan. As a measure of goodwill, the Government of India have ceded the territory known as Dewangiri
to Bhutan and have raised their annual subsidy to Bhutan to
Rs. 5 lakhs.
Assam Tribal Areas.--To improve the administration of the
inaccessible tribal areas, a new administrative centre at
Laimakru in the Abor Hills District was established in 1949,
and it is proposed to open another centre at Nizamghat in the
Mishmi Hills District.
<pg10>
The Pasighat-Tuting Road is under construction and the
work on a leper colony at Pasighat is under way. The proposal for the construction of essential roads and bridle paths
in the tribal areas is under active consideration.
A party of anthropologists under Dr. B. S. Guha visited the
Abor Hills during the first half of 1949. Their detailed report
is awaited.
Several outposts of the Assam Rifles have been established
on the Indo-Burma border as well as in the interior of the
tribal areas.
In order to check head-hunting raids by certain Naga
tribes, a punitive expedition of the Assam Rifles wag sent in
November, 1949, to punish the offending villages. The expedi-

tion was successful.
In the year under review, progress has been made in implementing schemes in relation to education, agriculture, medical
relief, etc. in the tribal areas. 45 schools have been opened
at Pasighat. A "Jeane" school has also been opened at
Pasighat.
The Deputy Minister visited the tribal areas twice during
the year and efforts are being made to give effect to his suggestions.
C. Europe
Portugal.-An Indian Legation was opened in Lisbon in
November, 1949.
Negotiations are in progress for the elimination of the patronage, exercised by Portugal over certain ecclesiastical
appointments in India under a convention between the
Holy See and Portugal, known as the 'Padroade'.
France.-On June 19th, 1949, a referendum was held in
Chandernagore to decide whether it should be merged with the
Indian Union or remain within the French Republic. By an
overwhelming majority the people of Chandernagore voted for
merger with the Indian Union. A Treaty between France and
India for the transfer of Chandernagore to India is now being
negotiated.
No date has yet been fixed for the referendum in the four
Southern Settlements, mainly because complete agreement
has not been reached between the Governments of India and
of France regarding the modalities of the referendum. The
Government of India have been pressing or arrangements
which will ensure that a free and fair referendum is held.
<pg11>
The Netherlands.-An Indian Embassy was opened at
The Hague on August 15, 1949. The presence of our
Ambassador at The Hague was useful during the negotiations
for the establishment of Indonesia as an Independent State.
Austria.-Diplomatic relations have been established
with Austria at Legation level. Pending the appointment of a
Minister a Vice-Consulate has been set up in Vienna.
Denmark.-In September 1949, diplomatic relations were
established with Denmark at Legation level and our Minister
in Sweden was accredited- concurrently as our Minister to
Denmark.

Finland.-In September 1949, diplomatic relations were
established with Finland at Legation level and our Minister
in Sweden was accredited concurrently as our Minister to
Finland.
Germany.-At the invitation of the Allied High Commission at Bonn, the Government of India have accredited
the Head of the Indian Military Mission in Germany as Chief
of the Indian Mission to the Allied High Commission.
Norway.-In 1947, Norway and India agreed to exchange
diplomatic missions at legation level. It is proposed to
accredit our Ambassador to France as Minister to Norway.
India entered into a temporary air agreement with Norway in
October, 1949.
Sweden.-In September 1949 an Indian Parliamentary
Delegation consisting of four members attended the InterParliamentary Conference held in Stockholm.
Switzerland.-A Treaty of Friendship and Establishment
with Switzerland was ratified on the 5th May 1949. India
entered into a Provisional Air Agreement with Switzerland on
the 24th June 1949. In December 1949, our Minister in
Berne signed on behalf of the Government of India an agreement relating to Red Cross Convention, formulated as a result
of the Diplomatic Conference in Geneva.
United Kingdom.-Consequent on India's becoming a
Republic during the year, the Government of India have
approved certain proposals received from the High Commissioner for the reorganisation of the Central Departments of
his office. These do not involve any appreciable additional
expenditure.
Most of the agency functions are now being performed by
<pg12>
the High Commissioner, excepting a few which still remain
with the Commonwealth Relations Office, London. The question of taking over such residual work also from the Commonwealth Relations Office is being examined.
Ireland.-Shri V. K. Krishna Menon, India's High
Commissioner in the U. K. was accredited concurrently as
India's Ambassador to Ireland in July 1949. Owing to the
present financial stringency, no staff has been appointed for
the Embassy in Dublin so far.
D. America
U.S.A.-The most important event of the year under

report was the visit of the Prime Minister to the United States
at the invitation of President Truman. The visit which lasted
for three weeks, has promoted friendship and understanding.
between India and the United States of America.
Negotiations for a Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and
Navigation between India and the United States of America
have not yet been concluded.
We have signed an agreement under the provisions of
U.S. Public Law 584 Of the 79th Congress, popularly known
as the Fulbright Act, to provide for the financing and
execution of educational and cultural programmes for the
mutual benefit of both countries. The agreement provides for
an expenditure not exceeding $400,000 annually, in rupees,
from the funds, realised from the sale of American surplus
property in India.
Canada.-In October last the Prime Minister paid a visit
to Canada at the cordial invitation of the Canadian Government.
Efforts to secure an annual immigration quota for Indian
nationals into Canada are continuing.
British West Indies.--Under the new Constitution for the
Colony of Trindad and Tobago, elections to the Legislative
Council, to be held under a system of universal adult suffrage
without reservation of seats for any particular community or
interest, are expected in the latter half of 1950.
The Royal Commission on Sugar Industry in British
Guiana has now submitted its report which is being considered by the United Kingdom Government.
Three hundred and four Indian repatriates from British
Guiana returned to India in February, 1949. There has been
<pg13>
no further repatriation from the British West Indies or
British Guiana since then.
E. South America
Brazil.-The Commercial Secretary attached to the
Embassy also looks after India's trade interests in Peru,
Venezuela, Colombia, Equador and French Guiana.
Argentine.-Our Ambassador presented his credentials on
the 23rd June, 1949. The Argentine Ambassador to India has
been appointed and is likely to arrive in-New Delhi shortly.

An agreement has been entered into between the Governments of India and Argentine for the supply of wheat in
exchange for raw jute from India.
The jurisdiction of the Commercial Counsellor at Buenos
Aires has been extended to Uruguay, Paraguay, Bolivia and
Chile.
Chile.-Diplomatic relations were established between
India and Chile at Legation level during the year under
report. The Chilean Charge d'Affaires arrived in India in
March, 1949. Our Ambassador in the Argentina was accredited as Minister to Chile in October, 1949.
F. Africa
Ethiopia.-Ethiopia's Minister to India has been in New
Delhi for some. time and our Minister has left recently for
Addis Ababa.
East Africa.-Mr. Peter Koinange, an influential and prominent African leader of Kenya paid a visit to India during the
year.
The failure of the Exchange Bank of India and Africa
Ltd., which ruined many African depositors in East Africa,
created considerable resentment among the Africans. As a
special case the Government of India sanctioned rupees one
lac to enable the Indian Commissioner in East Africa to make
ex gratia payments to the poor African depositors, as well as
to poor Indian depositors in particularly hard cases.
South Africa.-During the course of the last year the
position of Indians in the Union of South Africa has further
deteriorated. In active implementation of their repeatedly
emphasized policy of `apartheid' the Union Government are
opening separate telephone booths, post offices, entrances to
<pg14>
railway stations, aerodromes, etc., for Europeans and nonEuropeans respectively. A further tightening up of the provisions of the Asiatic Land Tenure Act in Natal and Transvaal is envisaged in the recent speech from the Throne in the
South African Parliament.
The United Nations General Assembly adopted a Resolution on the 14th May, 1949 recommending the holding of a
Round Table Conference between the Governments of India,
Pakistan and South Africa on the question of treatment of
Indians in the Union of South Africa. Tripartite Preliminary
Talks were held at Cape Town in February 1950 to find a
mutually acceptable basis of discussion at a Round Table

Conference in accordance with the resolution of the General
Assembly of the United Nations.
Madagascar.-The Secretary to the Indian High Commissioner in South Africa paid a visit to Madagascar in order to
enquire into the necessity of opening an Indian Consulate in
that Island.
Miscellaneous.-The scheme of cultural scholarships for
Indian and indigenous students from certain Asian and African
countries for studies in India was inaugurated in 1949 with the
object of fostering cultural and friendly relations with such
countries. Seventy scholarships were sanctioned but only
about sixty students could be selected and out of these 53 arrived in India. Another 70 scholarships have been sanctioned for
1950.
G. Australia and New Zealand
Australia.-In Australia, Indian businessmen permanently
settled there, had some difficulties due to the Licensing Act,
1917-46, and the Factories and Shops Act, 1920-47. As a result
of the representation made by the High Commissioner for
India in Australia, the Australian Government amended the,
acts in question in 1948 and thereby removed the disabilities
from which Indians had been suffering.
An agreement between Australia and India relating to Air
Services came into force on 11th July, 1949.
New Zealand.-There are about 1,200 Indians in New
Zealand. They are mostly farmers, shopkeepers and professional people. They enjoy equality of citizenship and do not
suffer from any disability on account of their race or colour.
There is a ban on the entry of fresh Indians into New Zealand.
But, as a special case, that Government permits entry of the
children of permanent residents there.
<pg15>
During the war, about fifteen Indian children were given
permits to enter New Zealand. But they could not avail themselves of these permits owing to shipping difficulties. Subsequently the Government of India recommended the names of
seven out of these fifteen persons to the New Zealand Government as deserving special and sympathetic consideration and
that Government has agreed to their permanent settlement as
a special case.
Fiji.-The land tenure policy of the Fiji Government has
adversely affected the interests of Indian agriculturists. These
difficulties are now engaging the attention of the Government
of India.

Another steam-ship, the `Sirsa' with greater accommodation
and better travelling facilities, has now been put on the IndiaFiji run in order to meet the demand of the Fiji Indians.
A request from a Muslim Member of the Fiji Legislative
Council for separate electorates for the Muslim community was
recently rejected.
IRAQ
SYRIA YEMEN INDIA EGYPT TURKEY OMAN USA KUWAIT IRAN UNITED KINGDOM
AFGHANISTAN PAKISTAN BURMA INDONESIA CHINA JAPAN PHILIPPINES HONG KONG
NEPAL CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC BHUTAN PORTUGAL FRANCE AUSTRIA DENMARK
SWEDEN FINLAND GERMANY NORWAY SWITZERLAND IRELAND CANADA BRAZIL PERU
COLOMBIA VENEZUELA BOLIVIA PARAGUAY URUGUAY CHILE ARGENTINA ETHIOPIA
KENYA SOUTH AFRICA ITALY MADAGASCAR AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND FIJI
Dec 14, 1949

India and International Conferences
PART III
India and International Conferences
By virtue of her position and status and because of her
many-sided interest in international co-operation India has assumed the obligation of membership of numerous international
organisations and was concerned with the following International conferences during the year under review.
(i) Second part of the Third Session of the General
Assembly of the United Nations: (April-May
1949) ;
(ii) Economic and Employment Commission;
(iii) Economic and Social Commission;
(iv) Human Rights Commission;
(v) Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East;
(vi) Fiscal Commission;
(vii) Statistical Commission;

(viii) Commission on the Status of Women;
(ix) Transport and Communication Commission;
(x) Narcotics Commission;
<pg16>
(xi) Social Commission;
(xii) Fourth Session of the General Assembly of the
United Nations (September-December 1949) ;
(xiii) Security Council ;
(xiv) Special Committee on non-self-governing territories appointed by the General Assembly;
(xv) Interim Committee of the General Assembly;
(xvi) Korean Commission.
Apart from these, India was also indirectly concerned with a
number of Conferences of the Specialised Agencies such as
FAO, UNESCO, ILO, ICAO, WHO, ITO, etc.
Problems of interest to India discussed in the United Nations
and its bodies.
General Assembly.-The General Assembly held the second
part of its third regular session in New York from Apr 05, 1949 to
19th May 1949 and dealt with the items left over from the Paris
Session of 1948. These included the questions of the disposal
of the former Italian colonies and the treatment of Indians
in South Africa.
The Assembly adopted a resolution recommending the holding of a round-table conference by India, Pakistan and South
Africa. On the initiative of India and Australia, the
question of Indonesia was placed on the agenda of the
General Assembly at this Session. No discussion of substance,
however, took place on this item as an agreement. was reached
between the Netherlands and the Republic of Indonesia on 7th
May 1949.
The fourth regular session of the General Assembly was
held in New York from 20th September to 10th December,
1949.
The Indian Delegation under the leadership of Shri B. N.
Rau took an active interest and made a substantial contribution
to the deliberations of the Assembly on the various problems
before it. Particular mention may be made of India's contribution to the Assembly's decision on the disposal of the former

Italian colonies. Most of the suggestions made by India on this
question were accepted and the draft constitution, proposed by
the Indian Delegation, formed part of the resolution adopted by
the Assembly. India's contribution on questions, relating to
Trusteeship and non-self-governing territories, was also widely
appreciated.
India was elected as a member of the Security Council for a
period of two years from 1st January, 1950. India was also
<pg17>
elected a member of the Special Committee appointed to examine information on non-self-governing territories for three
years from 1950. One of India's delegates, the jam Saheb of
Nawanagar, was also elected in his personal capacity for a period of three years as a member of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal.
Security Council.-India took her seat as a member of the
Security Council in January 1950. She is represented on this
Council by Shri B. N. Rau, India's Permanent Representative
to the United Nations.
Economic and Social Council.-India was elected to the
Economic and Social Council for a three year term commencing
on the 1st January 1949. The Council held its eighth and
ninth sessions during the year 1949. The tenth session of the
Council commenced on the 7th February 1950, when Shri
Ramaswami Mudaliar was elected Vice-President of the Council. Of the more important subjects, considered by the Council in 1949, India evinced particular interest in issues like the
Economic Development of the under-developed countries, President Truman's "fourth point" in so far as it related to the activities of the Council, Technical and social welfare fellowships.
Functional Commission of the Economic and Social Council and
its sub-commissions
During the ninth session of the Economic and Social Council in July 1949, India was re-elected to the Human Rights
Commission, the Statistical Commission and the Economic and
Employment Commission for a term of three years from 1950
and to the Narcotic Drugs Commission for an indefinite period.
Thus India's membership in seven out of nine Functional Commissions of the ECOSOC remains unaltered.
Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East.
This is one of the Regional Commissions of the United
Nations Economic and Social Council which deals with the
question of the economic development of Asia and the Far East.
It came into existence in 1947 and has so far held five regular

sessions.
The Commission's work extends to various fields of which
the more important items are given below:1. Flood Control.
2. Industrial Development including Technical Assistance.
3. Trade Promotion.
<pg18>
4. Inland Transport.
5. Travel Facilities.
6. Financing of capital goods.
7. Research in the development of Iron and Steel.
Recruitment to the U.N. Secretariat
As a result of our continuous efforts, we have been able to
secure greater Indian representation in the higher grades of
the U.N. Secretariat. Shree S. Lall, Secretary Ministry of
Labour, has recently been appointed to one of the eight posts
of Assistant Secretaries-General.
United Nations Fellowships
During 1949, the United Nations offered some Fellowships
to Indian nationals in the field of economic development and
social welfare services. Nominations for the 1950 programmes
are now under consideration by the Ministry in consultation
with the other Ministries concerned.
INDIA
USA KOREA FRANCE SOUTH AFRICA PAKISTAN AUSTRALIA INDONESIA THE NETHERLANDS
Apr 05, 1949

External Publicity
Jan 01, 1949
PART IV
External Publicity
During the early part of 1949-50, new publicity posts were
established at the following places:-

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Rio de Janeiro
Buenos Aires
Mauritius
Baghdad
Rome

Subsequently however, as a measure of economy, the following
publicity posts had to be abolished:1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Prague
Rome
Johannesburg
Mauritius
Colombo
Bangkok
Nanking
Saigon
<pg19>

This, together with economies effected at Headquarters, have
resulted in a total saving of Rs. 6,48,360 in the budget for 194950.
There are 20 publicity posts functioning at present at
Ankara, Baghdad, Batavia, Buenos Aires, Cairo, Canberra,
Dacca, Karachi, Kabul, Lahore, London, Nairobi, Ottawa,
Paris, Rangoon, Rio de Janeiro, Singapore, Tehran, Tokyo and
Washington.
During the period under review, 14 Publicity Directives
were issued to Missions abroad on special subjects to enable
them to present India's point of view on those subjects.
The Ministry's multiple address broadcasts of news in Morse
to Missions abroad through the Overseas Communications Service kept Missions informed of latest developments in India.
Increasing attention is being given in these broadcasts to regional requirements, e.g. the Middle East, South East Asia and Far
East, and special material likely to interest these regions is
being sent. These broadcasts are made twice daily and are at
present picked up by 19 Missions abroad. Copies of the broadcasts are sent by air to Missions which are not themselves picking up the broadcasts.
As a result of the recent expansion in the capacity of the
Photographic Studio of the Press Information Bureau, there
are better prospects for Photographic publicity in foreign magazines. Specially produced material is also being supplied to
Missions abroad for use on special occasions like Independence
Day, Republic Day, etc.
Pamphlets.-A pamphlet entitled "About India" has been

produced for distribution 'abroad. This pamphlet gives in
short outline the historical, cultural and economic aspects of
India and satisfies a widely felt need for general information
abroad about India. Arabic, Urdu and French versions of the
pamphlet "India's Minorities" have been distributed abroad.
Magazines.-Two special magazines are being produced for
external publicity. These are (1) March of India (in English)
and (2) Soet-el-Sharq (in Arabic). Certain journals produced for internal use are also being sent abroad to the extent that
this is considered suitable, especially for Indians overseas.
Libraries in Missions abroad.-Fourteen additional libraries
have been set up in Missions abroad, bringing the total to 41.
It is proposed to make additions to these libraries from year
to year.
<pg20>
External Broadcasts.-Improvements have been effected in
the programme content of the External Services of the All India
Radio. The Pushtu and Arabic Services have been extended.
Priorities have been laid down to govern the extension of External Broadcasts to various target areas, in the light of the requirements of Foreign Policy.
Films.-A number of Documentary films, produced by the
I & B Ministry and considered suitable for External Publicity,
have been supplied to Missions abroad for non-commercial exhibition as a part of Government publicity. Suitable items
from the home releases of Indian News Reviews are also sent
abroad as newsreel footage for similar showing. A number of
films specifically intended for External Publicity are under production by the Ministry of I & B.
Arrangements have been made for television in the U.K.
and U.S.A. of special news items appearing in our newsreels.
Cultural Relations.-An Indian Council of Cultural Relations has been established and branch organisations of this body
have been started in Egypt, Turkey and Iran with a view to
fostering cultural relations between India and the Middle East.
All possible assistance has been given to well-known Indian
Dancers and Artists to hold exhibitions of pictures and dancing
shows abroad.

GIPD--145 M. of E.A.--2 Sec.-2-3-50-1,200

ARGENTINA
MAURITIUS USA IRAQ ITALY CZECH REPUBLIC SOUTH AFRICA SRI LANKA AUSTRALIA
EGYPT TURKEY AFGHANISTAN CANADA KENYA PAKISTAN UNITED KINGDOM FRANCE IRAN
JAPAN REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE INDIA
Jan 01, 1949


