   java script is required for this page java script is required for this
   page java script is required for this page java script is required for
   this page java script is required for this page java script is required
   for this page

   Fri, February 06, 2015 at 05:18:13 IST Indian Flag
   Ministry of                      Print Content Small Font Medium Font      
    External       MEA Library      Large Font                                
    Affairs,   Ministry of External   * Sitemap                               
   Government  Affairs, Government    * Contact Us                            
    of India         of India         * Feedback                              
                                      * _____________________           [  ]  

     * Home
     * Director's Office
          * Director Lib & Info
          * Library Officers & Staff
     * Journals
          * Current Journals
          * Online Journals
          * CD-ROMs Databases
     * Online Services
          * Business Monitor Online
          * EIU
          * JSTOR
          * Janes Online Services
          * Kessing World News Archive
          * Marketline MDIC
          * Online Service Links
     * Newspapers
          * E-Newspapers
          * Subscribed Print Newspapers
     * Library Bulletins
          * Foreign Affairs Documentation Bulletin
          * Recent Additions
          * Chronicle of Events
     * Alert
          * Book Alert
          * Article Alerts
     * Important Abbrevations

    Annual Reports Prior to 1999                                              
      * Home >   Annual Reports Prior to 1999 >   Annual    * Home            
        Report 1978-79                                      * Director's      
    Annual Report 1978-79                                     Office          
                                                            * Journals        
    Contents                                                * Online          
    CHAPTER  Introduction                       PAGES(i)      Services        
    I.       India's Neighbours                 1           * Newspapers      
    II.      South-East Asia                    7           * Alert           
    III.     East Asia                          13          * Important       
    IV.      West Asia and North Africa         17            Abbrevations    
    V.       Africa (South of the Sahara)       20          * Back            
    VI.      Europe                             24                            
    VII.     The Americas                       32                            
    VIII.    United Nations and International   36                            
             Conferences                                                      
    IX.      Technical and Economic             48                            
             Co-operation                                                     
    X.       External Publicity                 54                            
    XI.      Cultural Relations                 58                            
    XII.     Protocol                           62                            
    XIII.    Passport, Emigration and Consular  63                            
             Services                                                         
    XIV.     Administration and Organisation    67                            
    XV.      Use of Hindi in Official Work.     69                            
             Appendices                         73                            
    NUMBER APPENDICES PAGES                                                   
                                                                              
    I. Major International Conferences/                                       
    Meetings/Seminars  etc.organised by                                       
    Inter-Governmental Organisations at                                       
    which Government of India was                                             
    represented in 1978-79 75                                                 
                                                                              
    1A.   Information received from                                           
    various Ministries/Deptts.  83                                            
                                                                              
    II. Major International Conferences                                       
    /Meetings/Seminars  or-ganised by                                         
    Non-Government Organisations at                                           
    which India was represented with                                          
    Government assistance in 1978-79 92                                       
                                                                              
    III.  Miscellaneous International                                         
    Conferences etc. in 1978-79 at                                            
    which Government of India was                                             
    represented or at which India                                             
    was represented with Government                                           
     of India's assistance  95                                                
                                                                              
    IV.   International Organisations                                         
    of which India became a Member                                            
    or ceased to be a Member during                                           
    the year 1978-79  101                                                     
                                                                              
    V. Treaties/Conventions/Agreements                                        
    concluded or renewed by India with                                        
     other countries in 1978   102                                            
                                                                              
    VI. Number of seats allotted to                                           
    various countries in Engineering and                                      
    Medical Colleges during 1978-79 110                                       
                                                                              
    VII. Statement showing number of                                          
    passport applications received and                                        
    number of passports issued in the                                         
    year 1978  111                                                            
                                                                              
    VIII. Passport Offices--Sanctioned                                        
    strength as on Dec 31, 1978112                                            
                                                                              
    IX.  Passport Offices in India and                                        
    their jurisdiction (as  on 31-12                                          
    -1978) 113                                                                
                                                                              
    X.Statement showing the total number                                      
    of Government servants and the number                                     
    of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled                                         
    Tribes amongst them as on 31-12-1978                                      
     114                                                                      
                                                                              
    XI. Statement showing the number of                                       
    appointments (both direct recruitment                                     
    and by promotion) made to various                                         
    groups of posts and reserved vacancies                                    
    filled by Scheduled Castes and                                            
    Scheduled Tribes during the year                                          
     1978115                                                                  
                                                                              
    XII.Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry                                   
    during the Financial Year 1978-79   116                                   
                                                                              
    XIII. Expenditure on Headquarters and                                     
     Missions/Posts abroad during                                             
    1978-79  117                                                              
                                                                              
    XIV.  Strength of IFS and IFS                                             
    (B) Cadres, etc.119                                                       
                                                                              
    XV.   Foreign Languages Chart120                                          
                                                                              
    Dec 31, 1978                                                              
    Introduction                                                              
                                                      Top                     
    The rationale of the policy of Nonalignment, to which                     
    India remains firmly committed, is that it                                
    safeguarded national inde- pendence and offered the                       
    widest measure of opportunities for international                         
    cooperation and at the same time contributed towards                      
    constructive and peaceful resolution of world                             
    problems.                                                                 
                                                                              
    India had always underlined that the validity of the                      
    policy of Nonalignment rested on the recognition of                       
    the sovereign equality of nations and the right of                        
    each country to determine its own social and                              
    political systems and to determine freely how, on the                     
    basis of mutual respect, to cooperate with other                          
    nations. The history of the post-war world has                            
    vindicated that every country, however small or weak,                     
    treasures its prerogative of independent discretion                       
    for internal affairs and external relations. The                          
    notions cherished so confidently at one time about                        
    the inevitability of one or other system or ideology                      
    prevailing, or the necessity of military arrange-                         
    ments which impose an externally determined                               
    discipline on eco- nomic and social and foreign                           
    policies of nations have proved false. Equally                            
    unconvincing was the belief that another world                            
    conflict was necessarily inevitable because of the                        
    diversity of ideological sys- tems. On the other                          
    hand, post-war history also shows the failure of                          
    great powers even when using all manner of economic                       
    and political persuasion, to win the genuine                              
    friendship and trust of small countries in the                            
    democratised and decolonised nation-state system.                         
                                                                              
    Whether seen in the long-term background or the                           
    developments in the year under review, the policy of                      
    Nonalignment has served the country well in                               
    safeguarding national goals and providing a lodestar                      
    in the turbulence of the international scene.                             
                                                                              
    It was entirely in keeping with this policy that                          
    government was able to resolve inherited problems,                        
    assuage unwarranted suspicions and create a climate                       
    of confidence with our neighbours. A new respect and                      
    a greater measure of trust than in the past                               
    characterises the relations between India and each                        
    one of her neighbours. There is a greater recognition                     
    that the corrosion of suspicion and friction can be                       
    overcome and on the positive side the benefits of                         
    economic cooperation could ease the burdens of                            
    development and create an atmosphere of stability so                      
    essential for any enlightened national goals.                             
                                                                              
    (i)                                                                       
                                                                              
    (ii)                                                                      
                                                                              
    The conclusion of separate Treaties of Trade and                          
    Transit with Nepal and the Inter-Governmental                             
    Agreement not only resolved an old problem but in                         
    turn has initiated the promise of industrial                              
    cooperation and wider economic relations between the                      
    two countries. Recognising Nepal's problem of a                           
    serious shortage of rupees because of the imbalance                       
    in its trade with India, steps were initiated after                       
    joint deliberations to facilitate setting up                              
    industries in that country which would not only                           
    generate employment and help its development but at                       
    the same time help to balance vast rupee purchases                        
    made from India. In this climate of confidence, more                      
    significant steps have been taken than, in the                            
    previous 30 years so that the immense potential of                        
    the rivers which flow from Nepal can be harnessed.                        
    Such projects could help inflood control and soil                         
    erosion and generate power for Nepal's own                                
    requirements and correspondingly reduce the pressure                      
    on its own forests for fuel and in turn make                              
    available the surplus of power to meet the energy                         
    requirements of the neighbouring states in India.                         
                                                                              
    With Sri Lanka also new measures have been agreed to                      
    promote cooperation, investment, enable a better                          
    balance in our trade and incidentally assist Sri                          
    Lanka in its planned develop- ment.                                       
                                                                              
    The improved climate of relations with Bangladesh has                     
    also led to a spurt in trade. There is more                               
    anticipation that cooperation between the two                             
    countries can develop on the basis of the logic of                        
    economic benefit and mutual complementarity.                              
                                                                              
    Some problems which, in the past, had                                     
    disproportionately clouded relations with Bhutan have                     
    been resolved. There exists today in the government                       
    and the people a firmer confidence in the common                          
    advantage of the interdependent relationship between                      
    India, and Bhutan.                                                        
                                                                              
    Even when recognising that improvement in relations                       
    have still a longer way to develop, with Pakistan                         
    also, there is a greater., measure of confidence and                      
    trust than in the past. The movement of people,                           
    exchange of sports teams and the visits of cultural                       
    troupes have been welcomed In both countries. After                       
    years of estrangement, old friends and, relations                         
    have been able to travel across the frontier to meet                      
    each other. Pakistan has been assured not only of                         
    strict adherence to non-interference but that India                       
    respects its integrity and would rejoice in its                           
    economic advancement. It is hoped that                                    
                                                                              
    (iii)                                                                     
                                                                              
    the beginnings of a new climate have been generated                       
    where both can mutually respond to develop more                           
    harmonious and beneficial neighbourly relations.                          
    India's willingness to provide wheat seeds for                            
    Pakistan's requirements was a small beginning in the                      
    kind of cooperation which we believe can be                               
    advantageous to both countries. The potentials for                        
    mutually advantageous trade are vast and remain to be                     
    optimised.                                                                
                                                                              
    The ultimate advantages of this policy of equality                        
    and cooperation between neighbours is that it enables                     
    the realisation of the optimum benefits of resources                      
    between countries which are linked by the permanent                       
    features of geography. It holds the promise of                            
    overcoming the suspicions which have drawn in out-                        
    side powers to exploit and exacerbate differences                         
    between the two neighbours. It is a policy which                          
    serves the vital interests of this country as it can,                     
    through cooperative attitudes, permit the development                     
    of energy and vital irrigation resources, It could                        
    also help to quarantine this area from the kind of                        
    turbulence and suspicions which exists in other                           
    regions. If this policy continues to receive the                          
    positive response of our partner nations, it can                          
    become an example for a world order where big nations                     
    and small coexist in a democratised international                         
    order. The task is not easy, but the alternatives of                      
    suspicion and conflict can only enhance insecurity                        
    and debilitate national development.                                      
                                                                              
    Notwithstanding the existence of the unresolved                           
    boundary question, the process of normalising                             
    relations with China started in 1976 when the                             
    Ambassadors of the two countries took up their posts                      
    in Peking and New Delhi respectively. In the last two                     
    years, small but significant steps have been taken to                     
    facilitate trade and permit delegations to exchange                       
    visits, to identify the fields where bilateral,                           
    functional or economic cooperation could be of                            
    reciprocal advantage. The Foreign Minister accepted                       
    the, invitation from the Chinese Foreign Minister to                      
    visit China and seek to explore the potential of                          
    fuller normalisation. At no stage was the complexity                      
    or importance of the issues between the two countries                     
    sought to be minimised. The visit itself, which was                       
    delayed for a few months, was marked by exchanges on                      
    the basis of equality and mutual respect. The                             
    endeavour was to see if some irritants in the                             
    relations could be removed and to assess whether                          
    major problems could be tackled in a climate of                           
    dignity and mutual respect. The visit did lead to a                       
    full discussion on all problems and there was ground                      
    for satisfaction that it improved understanding of                        
    each other's viewpoints. India hopes that the process                     
    of normalisation of relations with China will                             
                                                                              
    (iv)                                                                      
                                                                              
    continue so that outstanding problems, including the                      
    boundary question, can be resolved.                                       
                                                                              
    In East Asia, there were significant developments                         
    during the year such as the normalisation of                              
    Sino-American relations and the Sino-Japanese Treaty.                     
    India's economic relations with the countries in the                      
    region grew notably with Japan and the Republic of                        
    Korea. There are grounds to believe that the climate                      
    for exploring increased complementarity with a                            
    technologically ad- vanced country like Japan has                         
    improved considerably.                                                    
                                                                              
    During the year, there were promising beginnings for                      
    the restoration of trade and cooperative relations                        
    between ASEAN and Vietnam. The process, however,                          
    received a serious setback after the developments in                      
    Kampuchea. The situation became even more serious                         
    with the deterioration of relations between Vietnam                       
    and China culminating in the massive attack into                          
    Vietnam by Chinese forces. Consistent with our                            
    respect for the principle of territorial integrity,                       
    India could not but deplore this action. India has                        
    affirmed that the integrity and the national                              
    sovereignty and independent personality of Vietnam,                       
    Kampuchea and Laos, like those of all nations, must                       
    be respected, so that the search towards regional                         
    cooperation and stability in South-East Asia could be                     
    resumed.                                                                  
                                                                              
    There was notable improvement in India's bilateral                        
    relations with the countries of South-East Asia                           
    during the year under review. All the countries                           
    belong to the Nonaligned fraternity of nations. India                     
    became the first developing country to seek a                             
    dialogue with the ASEAN group of nations. During the                      
    year a new beginning was made in establishing                             
    bilateral economic rela- tions with Vietnam. India                        
    responded with great sympathy and understanding                           
    towards Vietnam in its immense task of reconstruc-                        
    ting its shattered economy.                                               
                                                                              
    The year saw dramatic changes in Afghanistan and in                       
    Iran. Since these were internal changes, India                            
    recognised the new regimes with alacrity. Further it                      
    was made clear that India looked forward to continue                      
    and intensify these traditional relations. The                            
    importance of South-West Asia, with its vast oil                          
    surplus, is crucial to the world economy. India looks                     
    forward to the establishment of stability where                           
    countries can fashion their social and political                          
    structures and forge their economic links by choice                       
    without the need for guardianship of any outside                          
    powers.                                                                   
                                                                              
    (v)                                                                       
                                                                              
    India followed the efforts to establish peace between                     
    Egypt and Israel. India would welcome a peaceful                          
    solution for the problems of West Asia but has not                        
    hesitated to make clear that a settlement could only                      
    prove durable if it is comprehensive and just,                            
    ensures Israeli withdrawal from occupied Arab                             
    territories and enables the fulfilment of the                             
    legitimate rights of the Palestinians.                                    
                                                                              
    In Africa, there were many continuing conflicts as                        
    well as new ones: e.g., Western Sahara, Somalia and                       
    Ethopia, Uganda and Tanzania. India could not but                         
    regret these conflicts between Nonaligned states and                      
    urged that solutions should be found with the help of                     
    OAU based on the principles of respect for                                
    established frontiers. The situation in Southern                          
    Africa became more serious and dangerous. Both in                         
    Namibia and Zimbabwe, the struggle for majority rule                      
    was sought to be undermined and delayed by racist                         
    minority regimes. While still hoping for a peaceful                       
    solution, it must be noted with regret that the                           
    likelihood of a more intensified armed struggle seems                     
    to have become un- avoidable. India has pledged both                      
    moral and material support in liberation struggles                        
    for majority rule in Namibia and Zimbabwe and for the                     
    struggle against apartheid in South Africa                                
                                                                              
    Throughout the year, the atmosphere of relations                          
    between the two Super Powers was somewhat tense. The                      
    SALT II agree- ment which both of them. seemed to set                     
    store by has so far eluded conclusion. The prospect                       
    of the Comprehensive Test Ban receded even further.                       
    Though the Helsinki process had appeared to have set                      
    the stage in promoting mutual confidence between East                     
    and West, the results of the second CSCE Conference                       
    in Belgrade proved disappointing, if not                                  
    insubstantial.                                                            
                                                                              
    On the other hand and despite a more surcharged                           
    atmosphere, India's own bilateral relations with the                      
    USA and the USSR were uncontaminated by the cold war                      
    spirit which complicated the international scene.                         
    Even when differences existed on specific issues, the                     
    climate of relations was friendly and propitious for                      
    continuing improvement. To the already confident and                      
    multistran- ded long established relations with the                       
    USSR, the year under review saw the addition of a                         
    far-reaching agreement for long-term economic                             
    cooperation. The problem of obtaining fuel supplies                       
    from the USA for the nuclear reactor in Tarapur                           
    remained un- solved. However, the dialogue on this                        
    and the wider question of non-discriminatory nuclear                      
    safeguards has been continuing bet- ween the two                          
    governments. (vi)                                                         
                                                                              
    India's relations with the countries of Europe, both                      
    east and west, continued at a friendly level, with                        
    increasing attention being given to the exploration                       
    of economic cooperation for mutual benefit. The                           
    impending structural changes in the EEC were noted                        
    and special efforts were made for closer relations                        
    with the Community.                                                       
                                                                              
    India has worked to preserve the unity and cohesive                       
    purpose- fulness of the Nonaligned movement which now                     
    represents nearly two-thirds of the membership of the                     
    United Nations. Similarly, in the North-South                             
    dialogue and in the search for the establish- ment of                     
    a new International Economic Order, India has sought                      
    to play a responsible, constructive and                                   
    bridge-building role. In this task, the Ministry was                      
    alive to requirements of coordination with other                          
    departments of Government.                                                
                                                                              
    India's commitment to the goal of general and                             
    complete disarmament under strict and effective                           
    international control was fully reflected in our                          
    active participation in the Tenth Special Session of                      
    the United Nations General Assembly held in the                           
    summer of 1978. The Prime Minister addressed the                          
    session and called for a meaningful programme of                          
    action, particularly in the area of nuclear                               
    disarmament, to which we attach the highest priority.                     
    India also participated actively in the other forums                      
    of the United Nations in this field and, in                               
    particular, in the newly created deliberative and                         
    negotiating bodies, namely, the Disarmament                               
    Commission and the Committee on Disarmament.                              
                                                                              
    India expressed its serious concern at the suspension                     
    of the US/USSR talks on the Indian Ocean and                              
    repeatedly urged the two powers to resume the talks.                      
    At the United Nations, India participated in all the                      
    meetings related to the implementation of the UN                          
    Declaration on the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace by                     
    eliminating from the Indian Ocean the manifestation                       
    of foreign military presence conceived in the context                     
    of Great Power rivalry.                                                   
                                                                              
    As in the previous year, India played ail active role                     
    in the deliberations of the UN Human Rights                               
    Commission and other international forums dealing                         
    with Various aspects in the field of Human Rights.                        
    The Government of India took a very important step in                     
    the practical demonstration of its commitment to                          
    Human Rights by deciding to accede to the two                             
    important Covenants covering civil, political,                            
    economic, social and cultural rights.                                     
                                                                              
    The chapters which follow contain a factual summary                       
    of India's relations with other countries during the                      
    year and the (vii)                                                        
                                                                              
    exchange of visits which contributed to the promotion                     
    of these relations. Based on the strength which comes                     
    from the democratic institutions and the strides made                     
    in our economic: progress, India has reasons for                          
    confidence that it can maintain and develop relations                     
    of cooperation and dignity with the developing and                        
    the developed nations. Guided by the touchstone of                        
    beneficial bilatera- lism, the last year saw a great                      
    increase in the scope and dimension of India's                            
    relations. Wherever such sinews of cooperation have                       
    been forged, it has contributed towards stabilising                       
    relations and catalysing greater measure of mutual                        
    confidence. The spirit of this policy of independence                     
    and positively motivated search for friendship is in                      
    keeping with the spirit of tolerance and the pacific                      
    tradition of our nation and civilization. India poses                     
    a throat to no country. Equally, it hopes it commands                     
    growing understanding and respect from all members of                     
    the international community and thus can be looked                        
    upon as a bulwark for international peace and                             
    stability.                                                                
                                                                              
    pg1                                                                       
                                                                              
    Jan 01, 1978                                                              
    India's Neighbours                                                        
                                                      Top                     
    Jan 01, 1978 CHAPTER I                                                    
                                                                              
    INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS                                                        
                                                                              
    India's relations with its neighbours measurably                          
    improved during the period. India's policy of                             
    beneficial bilateralism, meaningful cooperation,                          
    non-interference in internal affairs and goodwill has                     
    created a general atmosphere of confidence and trust                      
    in the region.                                                            
                                                                              
    India was among the first to recognise the new                            
    government in Afghanistan. The official visit of the                      
    Minister of External Affairs to Kabul, in September                       
    1978, preceded by the Foreign Secretary's discussions                     
    there in June, established a personal equation with                       
    the new leadership in Afghanistan. The Indo- Afghan                       
    Joint Commission for Economic, Trade and Technical                        
    Cooperation met in Delhi in January 1979 for a                            
    mid-term review of the progress in the carrying out                       
    of various projects. The review led to a decision                         
    whereby India agreed to finance a number of new                           
    projects in Afghanistan.                                                  
                                                                              
    India continued to work with some success towards                         
    improved relations with Bangladesh. We supported the                      
    successful candida- ture of Bangladesh for a seat in                      
    the U.N. Security Council. The visits of the                              
    Bangladesh Commerce Minister. Mr. Saifur Rahman in                        
    July 1978, and of the Foreign Minister, Mr. Shamsul                       
    Haque in December 1978 in that connection provided an                     
    opportunity for a broad exchange of views between the                     
    two governments on, bilateral matters and                                 
    international issues. The Foreign Minister repeatedly                     
    testified to the improved climate of relations.                           
                                                                              
    However, certain problems remain to be resolved.                          
    Regular meetings of the Border Security Forces of the                     
    two countries have helped to ease problems connected                      
    with the border. But they did not put an end to the                       
    continued illicit migration from Bangladesh to India.                     
    The Joint River Commission held two meetings during                       
    the year. Long term augmentation of the flow of the                       
    river Ganga during the dry season was discussed, but                      
    there was little progress towards agreement. A Joint                      
    Committee was set up to prepare data with a view to                       
    working out an agreement on the waters of river                           
    Teesta. Other committees are                                              
                                                                              
    pg2                                                                       
                                                                              
    studying problems connected with other border rivers.                     
    Dis- cussions were held regarding maritime boundary                       
    and a further meeting is expected to be held in this                      
    connection in the near future.                                            
                                                                              
    Economic cooperation between the two countries                            
    continued to make some improvement. A credit                              
    agreement was signed by the Industrial Development                        
    Bank of India to supply to Bangladesh capital goods                       
    worth Rs. 12 crores. India also agreed to give to                         
    Bangladesh products access to the Indian market, and                      
    to provide technical assistance in various agricul-                       
    tural fields and techno-economic studies in certain                       
    industrial areas. A number of meetings took place to                      
    consider improving transport facilities between the                       
    two countries and a Memorandum of understanding was                       
    signed to help towards overland transit traffic                           
    between Nepal and Bangladesh. India also continued to                     
    provide a large number of scholarships and other                          
    training facilities to nationals of Bangladesh. It is                     
    our hope and expectation that following the                               
    parliamentary elections, the pace of increasing                           
    cooperation and also resolving problems will become                       
    speedier.                                                                 
                                                                              
    India continued to develop friendly relations through                     
    high- level contacts and by extending assistance to                       
    Bhutan for its development plans. The visit of the                        
    King of Bhutan to India in March 1978 highlighted the                     
    bonds of friendship and the spirit of trust and                           
    confidence that governed India's relations with that                      
    country.                                                                  
                                                                              
    Apart from the visit of King of Bhutan, India's                           
    Ministers of Energy and Finance visited that country                      
    in April and May respectively while three delegations                     
    from Bhutan visited India under the Indo-Bhutan                           
    cultural exchange programme.                                              
                                                                              
    The Government of India committed itself to                               
    contribute approximately Rs. 70 crores for the Fourth                     
    Five Year development plan of Bhutan. Apart from this                     
    expenditure, India is contributing to the                                 
    construction of a major hydro-electric project on a                       
    grant-cum-loan basis at Chukha. Expected to be                            
    completed in mid-1980s, this would develop 332MW of                       
    power. India is also assisting Bhutan in the                              
    construction of a cement project at Penden which is                       
    estimated to cost Rs. 12.75 crores and expected to                        
    commence production in early 1979. India is also                          
    implementing a comprehensive allied irrigation scheme                     
    in the town of Gaylegphug meant to provide the                            
    inhabitants                                                               
                                                                              
    pg3                                                                       
                                                                              
    of the area with extensive irrigation facilities for                      
    agriculture and allied purposes.                                          
                                                                              
    India continued to give assistance to Bhutan for                          
    building and creating a viable infra-structure for                        
    its foreign trade and letters were exchanged to                           
    facilitate exports from and imports to Bhutan.                            
                                                                              
    Apart from providing assistance for Bhutan's                              
    development plans and economic diversification, India                     
    provided Bhutan experts in various fields for its                         
    development. Further, it helped Bhutanese students by                     
    providing assistance through scholar- ships to                            
    undertake advanced studies in various institutions in                     
    India.                                                                    
                                                                              
    India looked forward to developing closer relations                       
    in all fields with Burma. A Burmese economic                              
    delegation led by Col. Sein Tun, Minister for                             
    Cooperatives, visited India during September 1978.                        
    They were assured that India is prepared to help                          
    Burma in its economic development through the                             
    transfer of technology, skills and equipment required                     
    by Burma. Bilateral trade was also discussed and it                       
    was agreed to exchange information on each other's                        
    Five Year Plan which could help in their effective                        
    implementation. The visit of the Minister of State                        
    for External Affairs, Shri Samarendra Kundu, to Burma                     
    in January 1979 further demonstrated India's policy                       
    of promoting friendly relations with its neighbours.                      
    During his visit there were discussions, particularly                     
    relating to cooperation between the two countries in                      
    the field of agriculture, science and technology and                      
    culture. An air transport agreement between India and                     
    Burma was also signed during the same time.                               
                                                                              
    India and the Maldives maintained friendly relations.                     
    The Minister of Transport and President elect Mr.                         
    Abdul Gayoom visited India in October 1978 and held                       
    discussions regarding bilateral air agreement and                         
    other matters connected with tourism and civil                            
    aviation. The visit of the Foreign Minister of                            
    Maldives in December 1978 reflected development of                        
    closer ties. There was some increase in trade and                         
    economic cooperation between Maldives and India.                          
    Economic assistance is being extended for the                             
    development plant of Maldives and we are taking steps                     
    to enlarge and systematise our efforts in the future.                     
                                                                              
    The signing of separate treaties of trade and transit                     
    and the inter-governmental agreement on cooperation                       
    to control unauthorised trade in March 1978 created a                     
    favourable climate                                                        
                                                                              
    pg4                                                                       
                                                                              
    for promoting mutually beneficial cooperation between                     
    India and Nepal. The visit of the Nepalese Prime                          
    Minister, Shri Kirti Nidhi Bishta, in April 1978                          
    resulted in an agreement whereby the two countries                        
    were to cooperate in setting up joint industrial                          
    ventures in Nepal, the produced of which could be                         
    marketed in India. Concrete proposals in this regard                      
    were finalised through the signing of a memorandum of                     
    understanding during the visit of Shri George                             
    Fernandes, Minister of Industry, to Kathmandu in                          
    September 1978. It inter alia provided that India                         
    would help in setting up industrial ventures in a                         
    number of fields and that India would extend                              
    assistance to Nepal worth Rs. 9 crores to be utilised                     
    in the next couple of years for setting up industrial                     
    estates, technical training institutes, polytechnic                       
    etc.                                                                      
                                                                              
    The visit of the Minister of External Affairs to                          
    Kathmandu in October 1978 marked the normal practice                      
    of the two countries of holding periodic                                  
    consultations to discuss bilateral and international                      
    problems. It was agreed to upgrade the Kosi Joint                         
    Coordination Committee to be presided over at the                         
    level of Ministers of the two countries and a meeting                     
    of experts would be held to consider setting up of                        
    flood warning stations in Nepal to implement measures                     
    for flood control.                                                        
                                                                              
    India continued to extend financial and technical                         
    assistance for development programmes in Nepal. An                        
    amount of Rs. 10.904 crores was provided during the                       
    current year for meeting expenditure on schemes on                        
    hand. The major projects for which assistance was                         
    given were : (1) the 302KM long central sector of                         
    Mahinder Raj Marg expected to be completed by 1980-81                     
    at an estimated cost of Rs. 44.36 crores; and (2) the                     
    14.1MW Devighat hydroelectric project which was                           
    estimated to cost Rs. 30 crores and the work on which                     
    was commenced during the year. India also agreed to                       
    extend financial assistance for the expansion of a                        
    number of other projects including the Patan                              
    industrial estate and expansion of Paropakar                              
    maternity hospital and area survey of the alignment                       
    of the Dolalghat-Dhankuta road.                                           
                                                                              
    India in pursuance of its policy of promoting                             
    friendship with the neighbouring countries worked for                     
    normalisation of relations with Pakistan. The visit                       
    in April 1978 of Mr. Agha Sham, the Adviser on                            
    Foreign Affairs of Pakistan, was notable for the                          
    signature of an agreement on the Salal Hydro-Electric                     
    project; a problem that had remained unresolved for                       
    eight                                                                     
                                                                              
    pg5                                                                       
                                                                              
    years. Ideas were also exchanged regarding promotion                      
    of trade, repatriation of detenus, and liberalisation                     
    of trade facilities There was normal travel by road,                      
    rail and air between the two countries and the                            
    situation on the common border also continued to be                       
    undisturbed. The decision to open Consulates General                      
    in each other's country is intended to facilitate                         
    travel and commercial contacts between the two                            
    countries and contribute to further normalisation of                      
    their relations.                                                          
                                                                              
    Trade teams of India and Pakistan met twice in 1978                       
    to review the Trade Agreement of 1975. As a result of                     
    the talks, it was agreed that pending finalisation of                     
    a new Trade Agree- ment, trade on Pakistan's side                         
    would continue to be conducted through public                             
    agencies while on the Indian side both private and                        
    public sectors would participate in commercial                            
    transactions.                                                             
                                                                              
    Contacts between the representatives of the two                           
    countries in various fields led to greater                                
    cooperation between the two countries. As a result of                     
    the meeting of the, Ministers of Food and Agriculture                     
    of the two countries, an agreement was reached in                         
    September 1978 whereby India was to provide 5270                          
    tonnes of wheatseeds to Pakistan. As a result of                          
    periodic discussions between the concerned                                
    authorities the two countries co- ordinated locust                        
    control activities along the border. A delega- tion                       
    of officials of the Pakistani Central Board of                            
    Revenue visited India in January 1979 for discussions                     
    with the Indian Central Board of Excise and Customs.                      
    The two countries decided to cooperate with each                          
    other to prevent smuggling across the border.                             
                                                                              
    The cultural exchanges between the two countries                          
    included visits of some Pakistani poets and singers                       
    to India, the playing of Hockey matches against each                      
    other in India and Pakistan and a visit of the Indian                     
    Cricket team to Pakistan after a lapse of 17 years.                       
                                                                              
    Conscious of the humanitarian aspects involved, India                     
    realeased 460 Pakistani detenus during the year while                     
    Pakistan released 115 Indian detenus held in                              
    Pakistan. Efforts are continuing to get all the                           
    remaining detenus released as early as possible.                          
                                                                              
    The visit of President Jayawardane to India in                            
    October 1978 and that of the Prime Minister Shri                          
    Morarji Desai to Sri Lanka in February 1979 reflected                     
    the warmth and cordiality that govern the relations                       
    between the two countries. It was 6 EA/78--2                              
                                                                              
    pg6                                                                       
                                                                              
    recognised by both sides that there were no longer                        
    any outstanding problems between the two countries.                       
    During the visit of the President of Sri Lanka, it                        
    was agreed that India and Sri Lanka should increase                       
    bilateral trade and further economic cooperation.                         
    During the visit of the Indian Prime Minister, India                      
    agreed to facilitate joint ventures in Sri Lanka and                      
    specially in the Colombo free-trade-zone. The                             
    Commerce Ministries of the two countries agreed that                      
    greater efforts should be made to promote trade, and                      
    concrete measures are being taken to ensure greater                       
    access for Sri Lanka's products to Indian markets.                        
    The working of the Indo-Sri Lanka Agreement on the                        
    future of the people of Indian origin in Sri Lanka,                       
    was also reviewed and India decided to streamline the                     
    procedure for the repatriation and rehabilitation of                      
    the people of Indian origin under that agreement.                         
                                                                              
    pg7                                                                       
                                                                              
    Jan 01, 1978                                                              
    South-East Asia                                                           
                                                      Top                     
    CHAPTER II                                                                
                                                                              
    SOUTH-EAST ASIA                                                           
                                                                              
    India took steps to strengthen relations with the                         
    countries of South-East Asia through some notable                         
    high-level visits and signing of specific bilateral                       
    agreements with the countries of the region in                            
    economic, technical and cultural fields. It also took                     
    initiative to seek dialogue with the Association of                       
    the South- East Asian Nations (ASEAN) for cooperation                     
    in various fields and discussions towards this end                        
    were held with the Secretary- General of the ASEAN                        
    Secretariat who visited New Delhi in November 1978.                       
                                                                              
    The visit of Shri Mohan Dharia, Minister of Commerce,                     
    to Malaysia, Indonesia, Singapore, marked another                         
    step taken by India to develop closer economic ties                       
    with these countries. During his visit he presided                        
    over a Conference of India's Trade Representatives in                     
    South-East and South-East Asia held in Singapore from                     
    May 30, 1978 31 May 1978. He stressed on the need for                     
    greater trade and economic cooperation between India                      
    and the countries of South-East Asia. A trade                             
    agreement was signed with Indonesia during the visit.                     
                                                                              
    India's close ties with Malaysia received an impetus                      
    following the visit of the Malaysian Prime Minister                       
    Mr. Dato Hussein Bin On from 20--25 January 1979. The                     
    visit resulted in the signing of an agreement on                          
    technical and economic cooperation and exchange of                        
    letters that provided for extradition of fugitive                         
    criminals between the two countries. An agreement on                      
    Technical and Economic Cooperation provided for the                       
    setting up of a consultative machinery to step up                         
    cooperative efforts towards enlarging the areas of                        
    mutual cooperation and sharing skills and know-how                        
    for mutual development. Earlier, during the visit of                      
    the Foreign Minister of Malaysia in March a cultural                      
    agreement was signed between the two countries. The                       
    Foreign Secretary, Shri Jagat Mehta led the Indian                        
    delegation to the Annual Bilateral Talks between                          
    India and Malaysia held in Kuala Lumpur in December                       
    1978.                                                                     
                                                                              
    pg8                                                                       
                                                                              
    There was significant development in India's economic                     
    relations with Malaysia. India's total import from                        
    Malaysia rose to Rs. 202.23 crores during 1977-78.                        
    India had 28 joint ventures, the largest number in                        
    any country, functioning in Malaysia during the year.                     
                                                                              
    Exchange of a number of visits at high-levels                             
    reflected India's close ties with Singapore. The                          
    Deputy Prime Minister and the Defence Minister of                         
    Singapore. Dr. Goh Keng Swee visited India in                             
    January-February 1978 and the Foreign Minister of                         
    Singapore Mr. S. Rajaratnam stopped-over New Delhi in                     
    July on his way to Belgrade to exchange views before                      
    the holding of the Conference of Non-Aligned Foreign                      
    Ministers. The foreign Secretary, Shri Jagat Mehta                        
    visited Singapore in November 1978. But the most                          
    notable event was the visit of the Prime Minister of                      
    Singapore Mr. Lee Kuan Yew to India in December 1978.                     
    Besides international issues, there was discussion on                     
    ways and means of strengthening India's economic ties                     
    with number of countries of ASEAN in general and                          
    Singapore in particular. It was noted that the                            
    already existing wide-range co-operation between the                      
    two countries could be expanded especially in the                         
    fields of trade, investment and transfer of                               
    technology.                                                               
                                                                              
    An agreement on the avoidance of double taxation                          
    between India and Singapore was signed in February                        
    1.979. Though India does not have much trade with                         
    Singapore, there has been a recent spurt in India's                       
    purchases from Singapore, particularly farm oil and                       
    this has turned the balance of trade in favour of                         
    Singapore. Three Indian export-oriented joint                             
    ventures had gone into produc- tion in Singapore.                         
                                                                              
    India's friendly relations with Thailand were marked                      
    by the signing of a seabed boundary agreement with                        
    that country by the Foreign Minister of Thailand Dr.                      
    Upadit Pachariyangkun who visited India in June 1978,                     
    and the visit of the Deputy Prime Minister of                             
    Thailand, Mr. Sunthorn Honglabaron. Other visits                          
    exchanged between India and Thailand included the                         
    visit of Shri S. S. Barnala, Minister of Agriculture                      
    to Bangkok in July, that of Shri Jagat Mehta, the                         
    Foreign Secretary in December 1978 and of Shri                            
    Samrendra Kundu, the Minister of State for External                       
    Affairs in February 1979.                                                 
                                                                              
    There are a number of Indo-Thailand joint ventures                        
    operating in Thailand and Indian firms are                                
    successfully competing for in- dustrial production in                     
    that country. Indo-Thai trade is in favour of India.                      
    Indian exports being worth US $30 million and imports                     
    about US $5 million annually.                                             
                                                                              
    pg9                                                                       
                                                                              
    The visit of the Minister of State for External                           
    Affairs, Shri S. Kundu from 27-31 January 1979 to the                     
    Philippines helped to further co-operation between                        
    the two countries. In the discussions held during the                     
    visit both countries agreed on the desirability of                        
    increasing bilateral co-operation and exchanges in                        
    the fields of Commerce and culture.                                       
                                                                              
    Trade with the Philippines in 1977-78 was very much                       
    in India's favour. There are four Indian joint                            
    ventures in the country. The Rail India Technical and                     
    Economic Services (RITES), the Fertilizers                                
    Corporation of India and the Water and Power                              
    Development Consultancy Services Limited (WAPCOS)                         
    have undertaken projects in that country. India has                       
    exported large number of railway coaches and wagons                       
    to the Philippines. In the field of agriculture,                          
    Indian scientists have continued to be associated                         
    with the International Institute for Agricultural                         
    Research in Los Banos.                                                    
                                                                              
    India continued to maintain friendly relations with                       
    Indonesia and worked for co-operation with that                           
    country in various fields. The signing of the                             
    India-Thailand-Indonesia agreement on the                                 
    determination of tri-junction points of the seabed                        
    boundaries reflected a co-operative approach on the                       
    part of the countries in settling their problems.                         
    Discussions during the visit of the Foreign Minister                      
    of Indonesia to India in November for annual bilatral                     
    talks revealed close identity of views and the two                        
    countries could broaden and deepen their co-opera-                        
    tion in the fields of agriculture, forestry, science                      
    and technology. The visit of the Indonesian Chief of                      
    Staff Genl Widodo to India in January 1979 and that                       
    of Minister of Industry Mr. A. R. Soehoed in February                     
    1979 indicated some other fields where the two                            
    countries were maintaining close contacts with each                       
    other.                                                                    
                                                                              
    In the economic sphere, the Federation of Indian                          
    Chamber of Commerce and Industry signed an agreement                      
    with its Indo- nesian counterpart KADIM in August                         
    1978 for the establish- ment of a Joint Business                          
    Council. A delegation of the Asso- ciated Chamber of                      
    Commerce and Industry, Calcutta, also visited                             
    Indonesia in December 1978. India proposes to arrange                     
    a wholly Indian engineering exhibition in Djakarta in                     
    March 1979.                                                               
                                                                              
    Industrial co-operation assuming increasing                               
    proportion in the economic relations of the two                           
    countries there are seven industrial joint ventures                       
    now in operation in Indonesia. Public Sector                              
                                                                              
    pg10                                                                      
                                                                              
    organisations like Water and Power Development                            
    Consultancy Services (RITES) Limited, the Engineers                       
    India Limited, the Metrological and Engineering                           
    Consultancy (India) Limited (MECON) have taken active                     
    interest in Indonesian programme of economic                              
    development.                                                              
                                                                              
    Friendly contacts were maintained with Vietnam                            
    through exchange of a number of visits at a high                          
    level. The most signi- ficant visit was that of the                       
    Deputy Premier and Foreign Minister of Vietnam, Mr.                       
    Nguyen Duy Trinh, during December 1978. During the                        
    visit, both sides expressed satisfaction at the pace                      
    of development of bilateral ties between the two                          
    countries and measures were discussed to improve them                     
    and expand co-operation in various fields. It was                         
    agreed that estab- lishment of regional co-operation                      
    in South-East Asia and South Asia would be mutually                       
    beneficial. The cultural exchange pro- gramme signed                      
    in February 1978 gave an impetus to cultural                              
    relations between the two countries. An Indian ballet                     
    group visit- ed Vietnam in July 1978. A 9-member                          
    delegation sponsored by the Indo-Vietnamese                               
    Friendship Association and led by Shri Madhu Limaye,                      
    Member of Parliament, made a goodwill visit to                            
    Vietnam in November 1978. From the Vietnamese side, a                     
    two-member journalists delegation came to India in                        
    December 1978/January 1979.                                               
                                                                              
    India maintained friendly ties with Laos. It gifted                       
    textiles, irrigation pumps and medicines worth Rs. 30                     
    lakhs during the: year to that country and also sent                      
    experts to make field studies for setting up a                            
    pumping station in the Vientiane area.                                    
                                                                              
    There were increasing contacts with Australia through                     
    exchange of visits of parliamentary delegations and                       
    other promi- nent leaders. The Leader of Opposition                       
    in the Australian Parlia- ment, Mr. W. G. Hayden,                         
    came to India in June 1978. A former Australian High                      
    Commissioner in India and presently the Defence                           
    Secretary of Australia, Sir Arthur Tange, visited                         
    India in January 1979. The Australian Minister for                        
    Special Trade Re- presentations, Mr. R. V. Garland,                       
    came to India in August, 1978 to attend the ESCAP                         
    Trade Ministers' Conference. During his stay be also                      
    met the Minister of Commerce, Shri Mohan Dharia. In                       
    November 1978, India also hosted the Chief of the                         
    General Staff of the Australian Army, Lt. Gen. D. B.                      
    Dunstan.                                                                  
                                                                              
    The 10th round of Indo-Australian bilateral talks was                     
    held in Canberra. Trade between India and Australia                       
    is increasing gradually, though India's share of                          
    global Australian trade remains small.                                    
                                                                              
    pg11                                                                      
                                                                              
    The most notable was the visit of Australian Prime                        
    Minister, Mr. M. Fraser to India in January 1979. It                      
    underlined India's developing closer ties with that                       
    country and the warm personal rapport established                         
    between the Prime Minister of India and and the Prime                     
    Minister of Australia following the Commonwealth                          
    Conference held in Australia in February 1978.                            
    Discussions held during the visit stressed that                           
    co-operation between India and Australia could help                       
    towards creating an atmosphere of stability in South                      
    and South-East Asian region. It was recognised that                       
    there could be further co-operation between India and                     
    Australia in various fields and practical methods for                     
    further co-operation parti- cularly in science,                           
    technology, trade, energy and related areas could be                      
    discussed by officials of the two countries. It was                       
    agreed that an Indian mission would visit Australia                       
    to explore possibilities of setting up joint ventures                     
    for exploitation and production of coking coal in                         
    that country.                                                             
                                                                              
    The traditional friendly ties with New Zealand                            
    continued to grow on a friendly and co operative                          
    basis. The Foreign Secretary, Shri Jagat Mehta, paid                      
    a visit to Wellington in February 1978 and met his                        
    counterpart in the New Zealand Foreign Office. The                        
    New Zealand Minister of Broadcasting, Statistics and                      
    Internal Re- venues, Mr. H. C. Templeton, who came to                     
    India to attend the ESCAP Conference of Trade                             
    Ministers in New Delhi in August had discussions with                     
    various Ministers.                                                        
                                                                              
    An official trade delegation visited New Zealand in                       
    December 1978 to discuss ways and means of                                
    accelerating bilateral trade.                                             
                                                                              
    India and Fiji continued to have warm and close                           
    relations. In February 1978, the Foreign Secretary,                       
    Shri Jagat Mehta, visited Fiji and met the Governor                       
    General, the Acting Prime Minister and other Cabinet                      
    Ministers and held extensive dis- cussions on                             
    subjects of mutual interest. Mr. Vivekanand Sharma,                       
    the Fijian Minister for Youth and Sports, who visited                     
    India in March-April also met the Minister of                             
    External Affairs. Another prominent visitor from Fiji                     
    was Col. P. F. Manueli, the Commander of the Royal                        
    Fijian Military Forces, who came to India in January                      
    1979.                                                                     
                                                                              
    It has been agreed to supply equipment worth about                        
    Rs. 10 lakhs to the Fiji Institute of Technology for                      
    setting up an Agricultural Wing at the Ban Technical                      
    Centre. This is the first time that India has                             
    committed itself to assist Fiji in a pro- ject of                         
    this dimension.                                                           
                                                                              
    pg12                                                                      
                                                                              
    The Minister of Trade, Mr. Pita Lees, came to India                       
    in October 1978 to attend a Conference of the                             
    International Silk Association held in Bangalore.                         
    After the Conference, he visited Delhi and                                
    familiarised himself with various small-scale                             
    industries in and around the capital.                                     
                                                                              
    Congratulatory messages were sent by our Prime                            
    Minister to the Prime Ministers of Solomon Islands                        
    and Tuvalu on these countries achieving their                             
    independence on 7th July, 1978 and 10 October, 1978                       
    respectively. Relations with Tonga and Naura                              
    continued to be warm and cordial.                                         
                                                                              
    pg13> May 30, 1978                                                        
    Ministry Of External Affairs                                              
                                                      Top                     
    CHAPTER III MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS                                  
                                                                              
    (East Asia Division)                                                      
                                                                              
    EAST ASIA                                                                 
                                                                              
    Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee, Minister for External                          
    Affairs, visited China from Feb 12, 1979 to 18th                          
    February 1979, This visit, which was in response to                       
    an invitation from the Chinese Foreign Minister,                          
    extended about a year ago, was originally fixed for                       
    October/November 1978, but had to be postponed                            
    because of the Foreign Minister's indisposition.                          
    While accept- ing the invitation the Foreign Minister                     
    made it clear that it was an exploratory mission                          
    consistent with India's policy of non- alignment and                      
    quest for improved relations with all her neigh-                          
    bours, without jeopardising well-established                              
    friendships.                                                              
                                                                              
    The discussions which the Foreign Minister had with                       
    China's Premier Hua Guofeng, Vice Premier Deng                            
    Xiaping and the Chinese Foreign Minister Huang Hua                        
    were based firmly on these fundamental principles of                      
    India's foreign policy.                                                   
                                                                              
    In an atmosphere marked by frankness and cordiality                       
    the two sides discussed the international situation,                      
    the situation in and around the Indian sub-contient                       
    and most important the issues affecting India-China                       
    bilateral relations.                                                      
                                                                              
    While explaining the steps taken by India to create                       
    climate of confidence between nations South of                            
    Himalayas on the basis of scrupulous non-interference                     
    in internal affairs of other coun- tries, the Foreign                     
    Minister made it clear that while India does not                          
    object to normal bilateral relations between Pakistan                     
    and China, the prospects of improvement of                                
    India-China rela- tions would be impeded if their                         
    relations adversely affect India's legitimate                             
    interests. He also pointed out that the attitude on                       
    the Kashmir question taken by Chinese Govern- ment,                       
    which contrasted with the stand they themselves had                       
                                                                              
    taken in the 50s was an additional and unnecessary                        
    complica- tion in the Sino-Indian relations. In this                      
    context he reiterated India's concern at the                              
    construction of the Karakoram Highway. As far as the                      
    bilateral relations are concerned, the Foreign                            
    Minister in his discussions with the Chinese leaders                      
    empha- sised that the satisfactory solution of the                        
    India-China boun- dary question was vital to the                          
    restoration of confidence and full normalisation in                       
    the climate of Sino-Indian relations. The discussions                     
    held in Peking succeeded in unfreezing the issue and                      
    led to the understanding that there should be further                     
    reflection on the possible ways of resolving this                         
    crucial question. It was agreed that tranquility                          
    should be maintained along the border. On the                             
    question of Chinese assistance to disaffected                             
    elements from Nagaland, Mizoram and Manipur, the                          
    Chinese leaders stated that the support which may                         
    have been given earlier was looked upon as a thing of                     
    the past. The Foreign Minister also expressed the                         
    hope that the Chinese Government would consider                           
    facilitating pilgrimages to Kailash and Mansrover.                        
                                                                              
    The two sides also reviewed the bilateral functional                      
    exchanges which had taken place since the return of                       
    their respective Ambassadors in 1976 and explored the                     
    possibility of further exchanges in various fields of                     
    mutual benefit.                                                           
                                                                              
    The Foreign Minister was in Hangchow after completion                     
    of his talks in Peking when he received the news                          
    about the Chinese attack on Vietnam on 17th February.                     
    He decided to cut short his visit and returned to                         
    India immediately.                                                        
                                                                              
    The Indian Government has expressed in unequivocal                        
    terms its opposition to Chinese invasion of Vietnam                       
    and has called for withdrawal of Chinese troops.                          
    During the last year there have been a number of                          
    exchanges where experts of both countries have                            
    visited each other's coun- tries under the aegis of                       
    Study Tours/Conferences sponsored by international                        
    organisations. Such exchanges ranged over fields of                       
    agriculture, health, medicine, broadcasting,                              
    international trade etc. In the bilateral context                         
    also there have been a number of exchanges in the                         
    field of trade and commerce, culture, sports etc. An                      
    Indian dance ensemble visited China in                                    
                                                                              
    November/December 1978 and had a highly successful                        
    perfor- mance tour of certain major Chinese cities.                       
    In addition, an Indian journalists' delegation, a                         
    delegation of FICCI and re- presentatives of certain                      
    public sector undertakings visited China during the                       
    year. In the reverse direction there was the visit of                     
    a delegation of the Chinese People's Association for                      
    Friend- ship with Foreign Countries led by H. E. Mr.                      
    Wang Pingnan in February-March 1978 and a visit to                        
    Indian agricultural re- search establishments by a                        
    five-member delegation of Chinese agricultural                            
    scientists in September-October 1978. China also                          
    participated in the Seventh International Film                            
    Festival in India through the screening of films.                         
                                                                              
    The desire of India and Japan to maintain high-level                      
    contacts found expression in the inauguration of the                      
    institution of annual consultations at the level of                       
    the Foreign Ministers with the visit of our Foreign                       
    Minister to Tokyo in August 1978. The talks covered a                     
    wide range of bilateral and international issues and                      
    gave the two sides a valuable opportunity to gain                         
    deeper insights into their respective policies and                        
    perspectives. As the visit happened to take place                         
    immediately after the signing of the Sino-Japanese                        
    Treaty of Peace and Friendship, the Foreign Minister                      
    expressed the hope that the Treaty would contribute                       
    to the maintenance of peace and stability and will                        
    not become the cause of any new tensions in the                           
    region. Further, as Foreign Minister stated in the                        
    Parliament on his return from Tokyo, "our hope is                         
    that it is implemented in a manner which removes                          
    misgiving expressed in certain quarters".                                 
                                                                              
    Japan continues to be a major economic partner of                         
    India. In token of its continuing interest in India's                     
    economic develop- ment, Japan has kept up a                               
    significant level of credits for deve- lopmental                          
    purposes besides resuming grant aid in the field of                       
    culture and socioeconomic development. Japan is our                       
    second largest trading partner. But some recent                           
    trends in the global iron ore market have been a                          
    source of concern. This and other related matters                         
    were taken up at bilateral trade talks held in Tokyo,                     
    with the Commerce Secretary leading the Indian                            
    delegation.                                                               
                                                                              
    Several eminent non-official Japanese from various                        
    walks of life visited India during the year under                         
    review.                                                                   
                                                                              
    During the year India's relations with the Republic                       
    of Korea (South Korea) and the Democratic People's                        
    Republic of Korea continued to be very good. We have                      
    consistently advocated                                                    
                                                                              
    pg16                                                                      
                                                                              
    peaceful re-unification of Korea through bilateral                        
    discussions without outside interference. The                             
    Minister for External Affairs visited ROK in August                       
    1978 and a Government-Parliamentary Delegation led by                     
    the Minister for Parliamentary and Labour Affairs                         
    attended the 30th Anniversary celebrations of the                         
    establishment of the D.P.R.K.                                             
                                                                              
    An eight-Member Indian Parliamentary Delegation led                       
    by Shri Ravindra Varma, Minister of Parliamentary                         
    Affairs and labour, visited the Mongolian People's                        
    Republic from the 13th to the 18th September, 1978,                       
    at the invitation of the Great People's Hural. The                        
    Delegation was accorded a very warm welcome. The                          
    Delegation had talks and discussions with the                             
    representatives of the Great People's Hural and                           
    leaders of the Mongolian Parliamentary Groups; the                        
    Delegation called on Sampliyn Jalan-Ajav, Deputy                          
    Chairman of the Presidium, J. Batmunkh, Chairman of                       
    the Council of Ministers, N. Luvsan- chultem,                             
    Chairman of the Great People's Hural and M.                               
    Dugersuran, Minister of Foreign Affairs. During their                     
    talks, the two sides lauded the close and cordial                         
    relations between the two countries and commended                         
    their mutual understanding and co-operation in the                        
    international fora. It was felt that the close                            
    relations between the two countries would continue to                     
    grow in the years to come.                                                
                                                                              
    pg17 Feb 12, 1979                                                         
    West Asia And North Africa                                                
                                                      Top                     
    CHAPTER IV                                                                
                                                                              
    WEST ASIA AND NORTH AFRICA                                                
                                                                              
    India continued to show keen interest in the                              
    developments in West Asia and North Africa and worked                     
    for developing greater contacts and exchanges, on a                       
    bilateral basis with the countries of the region in                       
    order to promote cooperation in political, economic                       
    and other fields. India noted the dramatic changes                        
    that took place in the region as a result of the Camp                     
    David Agreements between Egypt and Israel, It was                         
    India's belief that a comprehensive solution of the                       
    West Asian problem could only be possible on the                          
    basis of a unified stand by the Arab States and that                      
    a durable peace could be achieved only with the                           
    withdrawal of Israeli troops from all Arab                                
    territories occupied by it and by the restoration to                      
    the Palestinian people of their right to                                  
    self-determination and to a State of their own.                           
                                                                              
    On the bilateral level, exchange of visits between                        
    the leaders of India and those of a number of                             
    countries of the region provided opportunities for                        
    discussions on ways and means of promoting closer                         
    cooperation in various fields. The visit of President                     
    Assad of Syria in April 1978 resulted in a number of                      
    agreements for increased economic, technical and                          
    scientific cooperation. Ways and means for promoting                      
    closer bilateral relations were discussed during the                      
    visit of the Prime Minister of the People's                               
    Democratic Republic of Yemen to India in May 1978.                        
    Cooperation with Iraq in industrial ventures and                          
    other fields received an impetus following the visit                      
    of Vice-President of Iraq to India in July 1978. The                      
    visit of Shri Mohan Dharia, Minister of Commerce,                         
    Civil Supplies and Cooperation to Iraq in                                 
    September-October 1978 to participate in the Baghdad                      
    International Trade Fair, and the visit of Shri H.                        
    Bahuguna, Minister of Petroleum, Chemicals and                            
    Fertilizers as the Head of the Indian delegation to                       
    the 5th Session of the Indo-Iraqi Joint Commission                        
    held in Baghdad in December 1978 also led to greater                      
    understanding.                                                            
                                                                              
    The visit of Major Abdul Salam Ahmed Jalloud of the                       
    Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahariya to India in                     
    July 1978                                                                 
                                                                              
    pg18                                                                      
                                                                              
    paved the way for greater cooperation in Libya's                          
    developmental programmes. A number of agreements were                     
    signed during the visit for increased industrial and                      
    economic cooperation. Shri George Fernandes, Minister                     
    of Industry, visited Libya in December 1978 in                            
    connection with the first meeting of Indo- Libyan                         
    Joint Commission which had been set up to                                 
    institutionalise the existing relationship between                        
    the two countries. Projects worth nearly Rs. 1200                         
    crores to be executed by Indian companies, were                           
    secured during the visit.                                                 
                                                                              
    The visit of the Foreign Secretary to Saudi Arabia in                     
    July 1978 provided an opportunity for India to                            
    project its foreign policy and to review in depth the                     
    economic cooperation between India and Saudi Arabia.                      
                                                                              
    The oil-producing countries in West Asia have                             
    embarked upon massive development plans which have                        
    opened up immense prospects for Indian exports to the                     
    region.                                                                   
                                                                              
    From the total volume of exports worth Rs. 427.77                         
    crores in 1974-75, the volume went up to Rs. 703.8                        
    crores in 1976-77 and from April 1977 to February                         
    1978 it was to the order of Rs. 650.33 crores. A                          
    striking feature of exports to these countries was                        
    their diversification from traditional items to                           
    sophisticated equipment and machinery, engineering                        
    products and electrical appliances. India was also                        
    able to increase cooperation with the countries of                        
    the region in carrying out projects in various                            
    fields. i.e. construction of industrial projects,                         
    rails, roads, darns, civil construction and power                         
    generating plants. In 1978 alone, projects worth Rs.                      
    1200 crores were secured by India.                                        
                                                                              
    There were a large number of Indian personnel working                     
    in the region ranging from highly qualified doctors,                      
    engineers and technicians to unskilled labour. This                       
    reflected an awareness among the countries of the                         
    region of the benefits of employing Indians for                           
    carrying out various developmental projects.                              
                                                                              
    India's relations with Iran continued to be marked by                     
    mutual trust and understanding.                                           
                                                                              
    The Minister for External Affairs paid his first                          
    formal visit to Iran in May 1978. This was part of                        
    the continuing process of exchange of visits at                           
    different levels initiated by the Government last                         
    year. During the visit, it was agreed that the                            
    process of building stability and confidence in the                       
    area, already under way especially through economic                       
    cooperation and                                                           
                                                                              
    pg19                                                                      
                                                                              
    commercial relations, should continue. The exchange                       
    of views continued during the Prime Minister's brief                      
    transit halt-over in Tehran in June 1978.                                 
                                                                              
    We carefully watched the political developments in                        
    Iran and at an appropriate time conveyed our                              
    sympathetic understanding of the Iranian peoples'                         
    aspirations for democratic rights to Ayatollah                            
    Ruhollah Khomeini. On the successful culmination of                       
    the peoples' revolution in Iran, India recognised the                     
    new government led by Dr. Mehdi Bazargan.                                 
                                                                              
    The political unrest and slowdown in economic                             
    activity in Iran have had there repercussions on                          
    bilateral economic relations. This led to the exit                        
    and repatriation of a number of Indian skilled and                        
    unskilled workers from Iran. With the restoration of                      
    political stability in Iran, we hope to establish                         
    mutually beneficial bilateral economic relations.                         
                                                                              
    pg20 Jan 01, 1978                                                         
                                                      Top                     
    Africa (South Of The Sahara)                                              
    CHAPTER V                                                                 
                                                                              
    AFRICA (SOUTH OF THE SAHARA)                                              
                                                                              
    India continued to play an active role in the                             
    international efforts to secure a just and peaceful                       
    solution to the problems of Zimbabwe and Namibia and                      
    in the campaign against apartheid and racial                              
    discrimination in Southern Africa. At the Extra-                          
    ordinary Meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the                          
    Coordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries in                           
    Maputa (Jan 26, 1979 1st February 1979) which was                         
    convened to consider exclusively the situation in                         
    Southern Africa, India was unanimously elected                            
    Chairman of the Drafting Committee. At that meeting                       
    Foreign Minister, Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee, spelt                        
    out India's assessment of the situation in Southern                       
    Africa and our stand on the issues involved. He noted                     
    that the minority racist regimes had for far too long                     
    resorted to blatant defiance of world opinion and                         
    remained impervious to moral forces; in consequence                       
    the freedom fighters had been driven as a last resort                     
    to armed struggle. In regard to Namibia, he                               
    reiterated India's full support for all efforts by                        
    the U.N. Security Council towards implementing its                        
    Resolution No. 435(1978). He also declared India's                        
    full support for the imposition of comprehensive and                      
    mandatory economic sanctions against South Africa                         
    adding that if attempts of the Security Council to                        
    compel South Africa to end its illegal occupation of                      
    Namibia failed, the General Assembly should itself                        
    consider appropriate action in accordance with the                        
    United Nations Charter and its resolutions.                               
                                                                              
    In regard to Zimbabwe, the Foreign Minister noted                         
    that while the Patriotic Front had consistently                           
    demonstrated its willingness to participate in                            
    negotiations for an internationally acceptable                            
    settlement, the illegal Ian Smith regime had                              
    repeatedly stalled, circumvented and sabotaged all                        
    efforts to bring about genuine majority rule. He                          
    reiterated India's categorical rejection of any                           
    attempts to legitimise any provisions of the                              
    so-called Internal Settlement envisaged in the                            
    Salisbury Agreement of 3rd March, 1978, In this                           
    context, he declared India's support both for review                      
    of the existing sanctions against Southern Rhodesia                       
    with a view to tightening and extending them under                        
    Article 41 of the                                                         
                                                                              
    pg21                                                                      
                                                                              
    Charter, as well as the imposition of comprehensive                       
    economic sanctions against South Africa as a means of                     
    terminating the illegal Ian Smith regime. With                            
    reference to the continuing practice of apartheid by                      
    the Pretoria regime, the Foreign Minister declared                        
    India's full support for the adoption of a                                
    comprehensive arms embargo against South Africa as                        
    also a complete embargo on oil exports to South                           
    Africa.                                                                   
                                                                              
    India continued to provide all possible material                          
    assistance to the liberation movements in Southern                        
    Africa, namely, the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe,                          
    SWAPO of Namibia and the ANC of South Africa. India                       
    also appealed for united within the liberation                            
    movements. Mr. Sam Nujoma, President of SWAPO visited                     
    India in April, 1978.                                                     
                                                                              
    In response to the U.N. General Assembly Resolution                       
    proclaiming 21st March, 1978 to 21st March, 1979 as                       
    "United Nations International Anti-Apartheid Year",                       
    the Government of India appointed a National                              
    Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri Asoka Mehta,                     
    which has been implementing a nation-wide programme                       
    of activities such as seminars, publications, film                        
    shows etc. aimed at mobilising public opinion against                     
    apartheid.                                                                
                                                                              
    India's traditionally friendly and close relations                        
    with Mauritius were further consolidated through                          
    exchange of high level visits and conclusion of                           
    bilateral agreements. We had the privilege of                             
    receiving from the Mauritian side visits by the Prime                     
    Minister, Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, in January 1979;                     
    the Finance Minister Sir V. Ringadoo; the Minister of                     
    Commerce and Industry, Hon'ble D. Basant Rai; and                         
    Minister of Labour and Industrial Relations, Mr. A.                       
    R. Yousuf Mohammed. Our Foreign Minister, Shri Atal                       
    Bihari Vajpayee, visited Mauritius from the 26th to                       
    27th January, 1979. The Instruments of Ratification                       
    relating to the Economic, Technical and Cultural                          
    Cooperation Agreement between the two countries were                      
    exchanged. The agreement inter alia provides for the                      
    setting up of a Joint Commission.                                         
                                                                              
    The Seychelles Foreign Minister, Mr. Guy Sinon, paid                      
    his first official visit to India from 30th October                       
    to 5th November, 1978. During his visit an Air                            
    Services Agreement and an Agreement on Economic and                       
    Technical Cooperation between India and Seychelles                        
    were concluded.                                                           
                                                                              
    The Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri                          
    Samarendra Kundu, led the Indian delegation to the                        
    Fourth Revolution Day Celebrations of Ethiopia in                         
    September, 1978. 6 EA/78--3                                               
                                                                              
    pg22                                                                      
                                                                              
    The Prime Minister of India attended the funeral of                       
    the late President Jomo Kenyatta of Kenya in Nairobi                      
    in August, 1978. During the visit he also discussed                       
    matters of mutual interest with the successor                             
    President Mr. Daniel Arap Moi. The Foreign Minister,                      
    Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee, visited Nairobi from the                       
    4th to 5th February, 1979, during which he exchanged                      
    views on bilateral and international matters with                         
    Kenya's Foreign Minister Mr. M. Waiyaki. The                              
    Assistant Minister of Commerce of Kenya, Mr. Okiki                        
    Amayo visited India from 27th September to 8th                            
    October, 1978.                                                            
                                                                              
    The Tanzania Vice-President, Mr. Aboud Jumbe, visited                     
    India in April, 1978. The Tanzania Minister of                            
    Finance and planning, Mr. Edwin Mtei, led his                             
    country's delegation to India for the Third Session                       
    of Indo-Tanzania Joint Commission in November 1,978,                      
    which identified further avenues of bilateral                             
    cooperation.                                                              
                                                                              
    Ties with Zambia were further strengthened through                        
    the State Visit to India of Zambian Prime Minister,                       
    Mr. Daniel Lisulo in December 1978, and our Foreign                       
    Minister's visit to Zambia in February 1979, during                       
    which he had discussions with President Kenneth                           
    Kaunda on matters of mutual interest including the                        
    ways and means to further develop cooperation betwen                      
    the two Countries. During Prime Minister Lisulo's                         
    visit a Trade Agreement was signed and India agreed                       
    in principle to grant a Government-to-Government                          
    credit of Rs. 100 million to Zambia. The agreement on                     
    the avoidance of double taxation was concluded                            
    between India and Zambia on 24th February, 1979.                          
                                                                              
    Shri Asoka Mehta, Chairman of the Indian National                         
    Committee for the Observance of the U.N.                                  
    International anti- Apartheid Year paid a visit to                        
    Zambia from 23rd to 30th October, 1978 at the                             
    invitation of the Government of Zambia.                                   
                                                                              
    During his visit to Maputo (Mozambique) for the                           
    meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned                     
    Countries in January-February 1979, the Foreign                           
    Minister called on President Samora Machel and other                      
    leaders of Mozambique and exchanged views on matters                      
    of mutual interest, both in the international and                         
    bilateral spheres. Under the bilateral agreement on                       
    Technical, Economic and Scientific Cooperation, 49                        
    Indian railway personnel were deputed to the                              
    Mozambican Railways. The Minister of State for                            
    External Affairs Shri Samarendra Kundu, paid a                            
    goodwill visit to Zaire, Ghana, Liberia and                               
                                                                              
    pg23 Senegal, during which he had high level                              
    discussions with the leaders of these countries on                        
    the prospects of further developing bilateral                             
    cooperation. Among the important visitors from West                       
    Africa to India during the period under review were                       
    the Minister of Planning of Liberia, Mr. Franklin                         
    Neal, the Minister of Industry of Senegal, Cheikh                         
    Amidou Kane and the Chief of Army Staff of Nigeria,                       
    Lt. Gen. T. Y. Danjuma.                                                   
                                                                              
    A Conference of Indian Heads of Mission in Africa                         
    South of the Sahara was held in Nairobi from the 4th                      
    to 7th February, 1979, to review bilateral relations                      
    with the countries of the region and to consider ways                     
    and means of further improving them: It was presided                      
    over by the Foreign Minister Shri Atal Bihari                             
    Vajpayee from the 4th to 5th February, 1979, and by                       
    the Commerce Minister, Shri Mohan Dharia from the 6th                     
    to 7th February, 1979. There was general consensus at                     
    the Conference that there was considerable scope for                      
    further developing our economic and technical                             
    cooperation with the countries of the region and that                     
    for that purpose strengthening of our diplomatic                          
    representation in Africa was necessary.                                   
                                                                              
    pg24> Jan 26, 1979                                                        
    Europe                                                                    
                                                      Top                     
    CHAPTER VI EUROPE West Europe                                             
                                                                              
    India continued to build on its balanced and                              
    constructive relationship with the countries of West                      
    Europe in the political, economic, cultural and                           
    commercial fields. A number of high-level visits were                     
    exchanged which provided an opportunity to streng-                        
    then bilateral friendship, review developments of                         
    mutual interest and chalk out programmes for                              
    cooperation. Aware of the structural changes in the                       
    European Economic Community and its projected                             
    enlargement (to include Spain Portugal and Greece),                       
    India paid attention to the development of closer                         
    relations with its members individually and                               
    collectively. India followed the developments in the                      
    process of detente and, while welcoming it, lost no                       
    opportunity of conveying to European countries that                       
    detente should cover all pails of the world by                            
    promoting the settlement of problems by peaceful                          
    negotiations and helping progress towards                                 
    disarmament. India's ties with Britain were                               
    reinforced by the Prime Minister's visit to London in                     
    June 1978. He was joined there by the Minister for                        
    External Affairs. The British Prime Minister, Mr.                         
    Callaghan, had come to India in January, 1978 on our                      
    Prime Minister's invitation. The talks in June 1978                       
    covered international and bilateral questions of                          
    common concern including Southern Africa, disarmament                     
    and race relations. Mr. Callaghan affirmed his                            
    Government's commitment to the establishment of                           
    harmonious race relations in Britain and opposition                       
    to racial discrimination against any immigrant                            
    community residing in that country. Specific                              
    complaints made by Indian nationals about unfair                          
    treatment were taken up with the British authorities                      
    for prompt resolution. At the invitation of the                           
    Hon'ble Speaker, a British Parliamentary delegation                       
    led by the Earl Listowell visited India in December                       
    1978 and strengthened the contacts between the                            
    Parliaments of both countries. At the beginning of                        
    March                                                                     
                                                                              
    1979, Sir Michael Palliser, Permanent Under Secretary                     
    in the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office,                           
    visited India for official talks with the Foreign                         
    Secretary.                                                                
                                                                              
    The visit of the Economic Minister of the Federal                         
    Republic of Germany, Count Lambsoorff, in August 1978                     
    at the invitation of the Finance Minister led to a                        
    fruitful exchange of views regarding the future                           
    economic cooperation between the two countries. An                        
    agreement was signed whereby the Federal Republic was                     
    to provide DM 360 million as development assistance                       
    to. India for 1978-79. The visit of an Indian                             
    Parliamentary Delega- tion to the Inter-Parliamentary                     
    Union Meeting in Bonn and the formation of an                             
    Indo-FRG Parliamentary Group in the FRG Parliament                        
    and a similar group in the Indian Parliament                              
    reflected the mutual interest of both countries to                        
    have closer cooperation between their parliamentary                       
    institutions. In January 1979, Dr. Meyer-Landrut, a                       
    senior official of the FRO Foreign Ministry, visited                      
    India for bilateral consultations with the Ministry                       
    Extrenal Affairs.                                                         
                                                                              
    An agreement on Science and Technology was concluded                      
    with France in July 1978 during the visit of the                          
    French Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, Mr. O.                      
    Stirn. At the meeting of the Indo-French Committee on                     
    Economic and Technical Co- operation held in New                          
    Delhi in December 1978, during the visit of the                           
    Foreign Trade Minister. Mr. Deniau, the two countries                     
    agreed to try and double the volume of their                              
    bilateral trade within the next four years and to                         
    increase cooperation in joint ventures in third                           
    countries. The Minister for External Affairs paid an                      
    official visit to Austria in May 1978 in response to                      
    an invitation from his counterpart. The two countries                     
    agreed to maintain regular contacts at ministerial                        
    level. While the Minister lauded the contribution of                      
    Austria's "permanent and active neutrality" in                            
    promoting detente, security and cooperation in                            
    Europe, the Austrian Foreign Minister expressed                           
    appreciation for India's policy of non-alignment. The                     
    Minister also had talks with the Austrian President                       
    and Chancellor Kreisky. The Minister of State for                         
    External Affairs visited Vienna later in the year, as                     
    did the Minister for Steel and the Industry Minister.                     
    The talks held between the two sides strenthened                          
    cooperation between India and Austria. This was given                     
    a further impetus by the visit to India of Mrs.                           
    Finberg, Minister for Science and Technology, in                          
    January 1979 on an invitation from the Education                          
    Minister.                                                                 
                                                                              
    Promising lines for cooperation between the two                           
    countries in science and technology were identified.                      
                                                                              
    The Prime Minister's visit to Brussels in June 1978                       
    resulted in a useful exchange with the Belgian Prime                      
    Minister on inter- national and bilateral matters.                        
    The Belgian Minister for Foreign Trade came to India                      
    in April 1978 which also opened up possibilities for                      
    promotion of trade between the two countries. The                         
    Dutch Minister for Foreign Affairs, Dr. C. A. Van der                     
    Klaauw, visited India in October 1978, the first such                     
    visit in more than 15 years. Discussion,, between him                     
    and the Minister for External Affairs stressed the                        
    possibilities for, further coopera- tion between the                      
    two countries. The visit of Dr. De Koning, Dutch                          
    Minister for Cooperation and Development, followed in                     
    December 1978 on the Finance Minister's invitation.                       
    India maintained close relations with Italy. An                           
    agreement on cooperation between the two countries in                     
    science and techno- logy was signed in Rome in April                      
    1978. The Italian Foreign Minister, Arnaldo Forlani,                      
    visited India in November 1978. India expressed the                       
    hope that Italy, a founder member of the European                         
    Economic Community, would use its influence to                            
    counter tendencies towards protectionism.                                 
                                                                              
    Relations between India and Norway were strengthened                      
    by the visit of Minister for Petroleum, Chemicals and                     
    Fertilisers to Oslo in May 1978 and the return visit                      
    by the Norwegian Minister for Petroleum, Mr. Gjerde,                      
    at the head of a large delegation, in January 1979.                       
    During the year, the Minister for Communications also                     
    visited Norway.                                                           
                                                                              
    During the visit of the Swedish Trade Minister to                         
    India in July 1978, it was agreed that India and                          
    Sweden should take steps to increase and diversify                        
    their trade. A Swedish Parlia- mentary Delegation                         
    visited India in August 1978 and conducted studies in                     
    the field of health and medical and social care. The                      
    third meeting of the Indo-Swedish Joint Commission on                     
    economic, industrial, technological and scientific                        
    cooperation was held in New Delhi in October 1978.                        
    Detailed discussions took place on matters relating                       
    to trade, science and technology, industry and                            
    possible industrial cooperation between India and                         
    Sweden in third countries. The visit of the Minister                      
    of Foreign Affairs of Turkey, Mr. Gunduz A. Okcun, to                     
    India in July 1978 helped strengthen                                      
                                                                              
    relations with that country. A five-year agreement on                     
    economic and technical cooperation was signed during                      
    the visit. An Indo- Turkish Joint Committee on                            
    Economic, industrial and technical cooperation was to                     
    be set up to help towards the effective impel-                            
    mentation of the agreement which provided for                             
    exchange of technicians, experts and training                             
    facilities between the two countries. A cultural                          
    exchange programme was also drawn up.                                     
                                                                              
    India's concern that the Cyprus problem should be                         
    satisfactorily resolved figured during the call on                        
    the Minister of External Affairs by Mr. A                                 
    Michaelides, President of the House of                                    
    Representatives of Cyprus who visited India in                            
    response to an invitation from the Hon'ble Speaker in                     
    January 1979.                                                             
                                                                              
    During the year India established a resident Embassy                      
    in Athens and the first resident Ambassador of India                      
    to Greece took up his post in September 1978.                             
                                                                              
    India's excellent relations with the Vatican were                         
    maintained. India took part in solemn functions to                        
    mark the funeral of Pope Paul VI, the inauguration of                     
    Pope John Paul I, his funeral and the inauguration of                     
    Pope John Paul II. The Minister of State for External                     
    Affairs led the Indian delegation on the first                            
    occasion, while Shri A.L. Dias was the Indian                             
    representative at the second. The Minister for                            
    Industry had an audience with Pope John Paul II in                        
    December 1978 and handed over a massage from the                          
    Prime Minister.                                                           
                                                                              
    India's relations with EEC marked an improvement with                     
    the visit of Prime Minister to Brussels and his                           
    discussions with Mr. Roy jenkins, president of the                        
    European Commission. An India-EEC Joint Commission                        
    met in Brussels in October 1978 and discussed                             
    possibilities of increasing trade. A proposal for                         
    establishing an India Trade Centre in Brussels in                         
    being imple- mented by the Commerce Ministry in                           
    consultation with the Mission of India to the EEC,                        
    and Government of India are working on the                                
    renegotiation of the commercial cooperation agreement                     
    with the EEC.                                                             
                                                                              
    THE SOVIET UNION AND EASTERN EUROPE                                       
                                                                              
    India's relations with the Soviet union and other                         
    countries of Eastern Europe continued to grow in                          
    strength through exchange of visits at high levels                        
    and through the mechanism of Joint Commissions                            
    established by India with these countries for                             
    economic, industrial, scientific and technical                            
    cooperation.                                                              
                                                                              
    It had been agreed in 1977 that the level of the                          
    Indo-Soviet Joint Commission would be raised by the                       
    nomination of the Indian Minister of External Affairs                     
    and the Soviet Deputy Prime Minister to be the two                        
    Co-chairmen. At the session of the Indo-Soviet Joint                      
    Commission held in New Delhi in March 1978 it was                         
    decided to set up a Working Group to draw up a draft                      
    Long Term Programme of Economic, Trade, Scientific                        
    and Technical Cooperation between India and the USSR.                     
    This Programme had now been drawn up, initialled in                       
    New Delhi on 1st December 1978 and is to be signed at                     
    the highest level during the forthcoming visit of the                     
    Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR, Mr.                     
    A.N. Kosygin.                                                             
                                                                              
    During the visit of the Minister of Defence Shri                          
    Jagjivan Ram to the Soviet Union in May 1978,                             
    Indo-Soviet cooperation in the field of defence was                       
    reviewed, An Indian exhibition was held in Moscow in                      
    August 1978 to acquaint the people of the USSR with                       
    India's progress in the field of industry and trade.                      
    This was widely appreciated by over two million                           
    visitors to the exhibition.                                               
                                                                              
    During his visit to the Soviet Union in September                         
    1978 the Minister of External Affairs, Shri A.B.                          
    Vajpayee held meetings and discussions with Soviet                        
    leaders, President Brezhnev, Chairman Kosygin and                         
    Foreign Minister Gromyko. In a wide-ranging                               
    discussion on bilateral relations as well as of                           
    international questions, he emphasised the very great                     
    importance which India attached to strengthening its                      
    relations with the USSR and added that India's                            
    normalisation of relations with any other country                         
    would not be allowed to affect adversely its friendly                     
    relations with other countries including the Soviet                       
    Union.                                                                    
                                                                              
    During his visit to the Soviet Union in October 1978                      
    Shri Biju Patnaik, Minister of Steel & Mines held                         
    talks for enlarging the scope of Indo-Soviet                              
    cooperation in the expansion of existing steel plants                     
    at Bhilai and Bokaro.                                                     
                                                                              
    The long standing question between the two countries                      
    regarding the new rate of exchange between the Rupee                      
    and the Rouble was resolved through a Protocol signed                     
    in November 1978. A new rate of exchange has been                         
    agreed upon which will apply to all the existing and                      
    future credits and commercial transactions. India                         
    regards the new exchange rate as a reasonable                             
    readjustment between the two currencies taking into                       
    account the adjustment between the Rupee and other                        
    currencies. The                                                           
                                                                              
    Protocol also contains an agreed built-in-mechanism                       
    for future adjustments in the exchange rate. The                          
    Soviet Union has provided an interest free 45 year                        
    deferred payment facility to meet additional                              
    liabilities arising from the application of the new                       
    rate of exchange in respect of supplies made and                          
    services rendered upto the date of the protocol under                     
    the existing credits. The Protocol is expected to                         
    smoothen the flow of trade and further strengthen the                     
    economic cooperation between the two countries. India                     
    also developed closer relations with other, socialist                     
    countries of Eastern Europe with a concerted effort                       
    towards the achievement of greater cooperation in                         
    diverse fields.                                                           
                                                                              
    The Minister of Defence, Shri Jagjivan Ram, paid a                        
    visit to the GDR in June 1978 to exploit the                              
    possibilities of mutually beneficial cooperation in                       
    the field of defence. In October 1978 during the                          
    visit of GDR Deputy Foreign Trade Minister two                            
    agreements were signed covering export to GDR of                          
    leather shoe uppers (worth Rs. 39.4 million) and                          
    570,000 tonnes of iron ore. It was also agreed that                       
    India and GDR would strive to identify new areas of                       
    trade at the next meeting of the Joint Commission.                        
    The third session of the Indo-GDR Joint Commission                        
    for Economic, Scientific and Technical Cooperation                        
    met in Berlin in December 1978. A Protocol concluded                      
    during the meeting of the Commission identified                           
    several projects for implementation, including those                      
    relating to machine tools, dairy machinery, chemical                      
    industries, lignite mining, textile machinery and                         
    manu- facture of specialised firms. A new stage in                        
    the relationship between India and the GDR was marked                     
    by the visit of the Chairman of the Council of State                      
    of the GDR, H. E. Mr. Erich Honecker, accompanied by                      
    a high level delegation, to India in January 1979.                        
    Particularly significant was the Long Term Agreement                      
    on Economic, Industrial, Scientific and Technical                         
    Cooperation signed during this visit, which adds a                        
    new dimension to the already existing close                               
    cooperation between the two countries. During the                         
    same visit an Agreement on Merchant Shipping between                      
    India and the GDR was also signed. The Long Term                          
    Agreement envisages, among other things, an exchange                      
    of experts, development and promotion of industrial                       
    cooperation, including transfer of technology and                         
    cooperation in joint ventures in third countries.                         
                                                                              
    The fourth meeting of the Indo-Romanian Joint                             
    Commission on Economic, Technical and Scientific                          
    Cooperation was held in New Delhi from Mar 13, 1978                       
    18 March 1978. The commission considered measures to                      
    bring about an increase in bilateral trade and also                       
    examined the possibility of setting up joint projects                     
    in third countries. The new areas of cooperation                          
    identified during the meeting included the setting up                     
    of a plant for production of 600--3000 metric tonnes                      
    of Clinkers, supply of power equipment by Romania,                        
    setting up of a pelletisation plant and a port-based                      
    pig iron plant in India on production-compensation                        
    basis. On his way back from a State visit to some                         
    countries in the Far East, the President of Romania,                      
    Mr. N. Ceausescu, broke his journey briefly at New                        
    Delhi in June 1978, to exchange views on                                  
    international and bilateral issues with the Prime                         
    Minister of India. The two leaders agreed that there                      
    was considerable scope for greater economic                               
    cooperation particularly in industrial,                                   
    petro-chemical and meteorological fields. The Trade                       
    Protocol for 1979 concluded between India and Romania                     
    envisaged an increase of about 25 per cent in the                         
    two-way trade turnover. At the last session of the                        
    Indo-Hungarian Joint Economic Commission held in May                      
    1978 an Agreement on Economic and Scientific                              
    Cooperation between the two countries was signed for                      
    the period 1979-81. This Agreement envisages exchange                     
    of scientific information, joint research in various                      
    projects and identifies various items of engineering                      
    goods for export from India to Hungary as well as                         
    identifies several new projects which could provide                       
    the basis for cooperation between the two, countries.                     
    The fourth session of the Indo-Bulgarian Joint                            
    Commission met in Sofia in May-June 1978. Bulgaria                        
    agreed to set up two agro-industrial complexes, one                       
    each in Karnataka and Bihar. Some new projects were                       
    also identified for cooperation and under a Protocol                      
    the two countries agreed to explore possibilities of                      
    setting up joint ventures in medium and heavy                             
    industries in third countries. A new Trade and                            
    Payments Agreement was signed in December 1978                            
    providing for a switch over to trade in freely                            
    convertible currency with Bulgaria from 1st January                       
    1979. A two year Cultural Programme signed by Deputy                      
    Foreign Minister of Czechoslovakia, Mr. Milos Vojta                       
    during his visit to India in November 1978 provided                       
    for greater cultural cooperation through an exchange                      
    of experts in various fields between the two                              
    countries.                                                                
                                                                              
    India's relations with Yugoslavia continued to                            
    develop through exchange of visits bilaterally as                         
    well as cooperation in international forums. The                          
    Foreign Minister of Yugoslavia Mr. Minic visited                          
    India in May 1978. During his discussions with the                        
    Indian leaders important international issues were                        
    discussed and a broad consensus emerged on the need                       
    for maintaining the unity and solidarity of the                           
    Non-Aligned Movement.                                                     
                                                                              
    pg32> Mar 13, 1978                                                        
    The Americas                                                              
                                                      Top                     
    CHAPTER VII THE AMERICAS The United States                                
                                                                              
    The visit of Prime Minister Morarji Desai to the                          
    United States in June 1978, following the visit to                        
    India of President Carter earlier during the year,                        
    helped towards promoting bilateral relations between                      
    India and the United States and a greater                                 
    understanding of each country's points of view by the                     
    other on various international issues. The Prime                          
    Minister's statement that "even though our paths may                      
    continue to be different, our ultimate relations will                     
    always be the same" set the tone of India's relations                     
    with the United States. Besides holding talks, with                       
    President Carter, the Prime Minister met members of                       
    the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and several                        
    important members of the Congress.                                        
                                                                              
    One of the major issues which figured prominently in                      
    the talks that Prime Minister had with US leaders                         
    during his visit to Washington and invariably in the                      
    continued exchange of letters between him and                             
    President Carter was that of nuclear cooperation                          
    between India and USA, particularly in the context of                     
    the US Non-Proliferation Act, the provisions of which                     
    would seriously affect the continued supply of                            
    enriched uranium fuel for the Tarapur Atomic Power                        
    Station. In his talks and correspondence with                             
    President Carter, Prime Minister reiterated                               
    repeatedly the sanctity of contractual obligations                        
    and the need to avoid any form of discrimination in                       
    the field of nuclear cooperation between countries.                       
    The visit of Commerce Secretary Mrs. Kreps and that                       
    of Mr. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political                     
    Affairs, to India from the American side and the                          
    visit of Minister of State Shri Kundu and the three                       
    Service Chiefs and some Members of Parliament and the                     
    Finance Minister reflected contacts at high level and                     
    exchange of views in various fields between the two                       
    countries.                                                                
                                                                              
    The Indo-US Sub-Commission on Science and Technology                      
    met in November 1978 in Delhi. It recommended an                          
    allocation of $ 2 million for integral rural                              
    development and cooperation in developing non-science                     
    subjects relating to the rural sector including                           
    exchange of information between the two countries in                      
    this regard.                                                              
                                                                              
    The Economic and Commercial Sub-Commission, which                         
    also met in November, discussed a wide range of                           
    multilateral and bilateral economic and trade issues.                     
    India explained that its foreign investment policy                        
    was designed to encourage transfer of sophisticated                       
    technology and production of commercially needed                          
    goods. It also raised the issue of difficulties being                     
    faced by Indian exports to the US market. Another                         
    field in which the two countries cooperated was that                      
    of space research. A memorandum was signed in July                        
    1978 which provided for the launching of an Indian                        
    national satellite (INSAT-I) aboard NASA's space                          
    shuttle planned for 1981.                                                 
                                                                              
    Dr. Joseph Nye, US Deputy Assistant Secretary of                          
    State and principal negotiator on nuclear matters,                        
    also visited Delhi in November and discussed with                         
    senior Indian officials future nuclear cooperation                        
    between India and the United States. The nuclear                          
    issue, however, remains one important factor of                           
    difference between the two countries. CANADA The year                     
    was marked by greater cooperation between India and                       
    Canada in cultural and economic affairs. Under an                         
    agreement signed in February 1978, India agreed to                        
    give a grant of Rs. 48 lakhs for promotion of                             
    academic and cultural exchanges between India and                         
    Canada. The same month, an agreement wag signed                           
    whereby Canada would give a loan to India worth C$ 10                     
    million (Rs. 7.43 crores) for import of ferti- lizers                     
    and fertilizer materials. A number of high-level                          
    visits were exchanged between the two countries. Shri                     
    Arif Beg, Minister for State for Commerce, visited                        
    Canada and Mr. T. Abbott, Canadian Minister for Small                     
    Business, led a trade team to India. The visit of Mr.                     
    Abbott led to the decision to set up a Joint                              
    Commission between India and Canada. The Canadian                         
    leader of the Opposition, Mr. Joe Clarke, along with                      
    Opposition spokesman on Finance, Mr. Sinclair                             
    Stevens, visited India in January 1979 and exchanged                      
                                                                              
    views on bilateral and international issues with                          
    Indian leaders. Earlier, the Opposition spokesman on                      
    Foreign Affairs, Mr. Roche had also visited India in                      
    July. On the cultural side, Mr. Roy McMurtry, the                         
    Attorney General of the province of Ontario, visited                      
    India at the invitation of the Indian Council for                         
    Cultural Relations. South and Central America There                       
    was a greater emphasis on developing economic and                         
    commercial relations with the countries in the                            
    Caribbean and Latin America. The awareness in this                        
    region that India was emerging as a leading                               
    industrial country which could offer technological                        
    and scientific cooperation led to a shift in emphasis                     
    from cultural agreements to signing of agreements in                      
    the field of trade, science and technology. A                             
    delegation from Brazil led by Mr. Paulotaroso Flecha                      
    De Lima, Head of Department of Promotion of Trade of                      
    Brazilian Ministry of External Relations visited                          
    India in June 1978 and held discussions with various                      
    authorities regarding increasing trade between India                      
    and Brazil. The Chairman of the State Trading                             
    Corporation led a delegation to Brazil in September                       
    1978 and hid wide-ranging discussions with various                        
    Chambers of Commerce and public sector companies. A                       
    delegation from Cuba led by Amadeo Blanco, Director,                      
    Asia and Africa Division of the Cuban Ministry of                         
    Commerce during his visit to India in October 1978                        
    held discussions to identify items of exports between                     
    the two countries and the signing of a trade                              
    agreement. The Minister of External Affairs of Cuba,                      
    Mr. Isidoro Malnierca Peoli paid an official visit to                     
    India during November 1978. He held discussions on                        
    bilateral relations and regarding the Non-Aligned                         
    movement. India and Cuba being both members of the                        
    movement had maintained continuous dialogue on                            
    problems relating to the movement. During the visit                       
    of the Minister an agreement was signed on                                
    cooperation in the field of Science and Technology                        
    and a Cultural Exchange programme. A two-member                           
    delegation represented India on the 25th Anniversary                      
    of the Attack on Moncadaporracks. Another delegation                      
    led by Dr. Ram Kripal Singh, Minister of State for                        
    Parliamentary Affairs visited Cuba to represent India                     
    on the 20th Anniversary of the Cuban Revolution.                          
                                                                              
    A Mexican delegation led by Dr. Edmundo Flores,                           
    Director- General of the National Council of Science                      
    and Technology visited India in November 1978 to                          
    review the Indo-Mexican programme on cooperation in                       
    the field of science and technology. A delegation of                      
    the Federation of Indian Exports Organisation and                         
    another of the Federation of Indian Chamber of                            
    Commerce and Industry proposes to visit Latin                             
    American countries in the near future to explore                          
    trade possibilities with the countries of the region.                     
    India welcomed the independence of Dominica on Nov                        
    03, 1978 and its becoming a member of the                                 
    Commonwealth.                                                             
                                                                              
    Nov 03, 1978                                                              
    United Nations And International Conferences                              
                                                      Top                     
    CHAPTER VIII UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL                             
    CONFERENCES                                                               
                                                                              
    During the year, India continued to take active                           
    interest in the activities of the United Nations and                      
    its specialised agencies and in other international                       
    conferences. India participated very actively in the                      
    Thirty-Third session of the United Nations General                        
    Assembly as well as at its various special sessions                       
    on specific problems. Besides, it took part in the                        
    World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial                              
    Discrimination held in Geneva from Aug 14, 1978 to 25                     
    August, 1978. India continued its active                                  
    participation in the meetings of the Non-aligned                          
    Movement of which there were several during the year,                     
    namely, the meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of                         
    Non-aligned Countries at Foreign Ministers' level in                      
    Havana (15-20 May, 1978), the Conference of the                           
    Foreign Ministers of all non-aligned countries held                       
    in Belgrade (24-30 July, 1978) and the meeting of the                     
    Coordinating Bureau of Non-aligned Countries of                           
    Foreign Ministers' level in Maputo (26 January-2                          
    February, 1979). The Minister of State of External                        
    Affairs, Shri Samarendra Kundu, led the Indian                            
    delegation to the Conference of Foreign Ministers of                      
    the 25-member Coordinating Bureau of Non-aligned                          
    Countries which met in Havana from 18 to 20 May,                          
    1978. The Conference adopted a document divided into                      
    political and economic sections. The political                            
    section addressed itself to the definition and role                       
    of non-alignment, need for unity and solidarity among                     
    non-aligned countries, and the re-affirmation of the                      
    views of non-aligned countries on major international                     
    issues. It also endorsed the reports and                                  
    recommendations of the three conferences of                               
    non-aligned agencies on information and broad-                            
    casting held at Djakarta, Sarajevo and Havana. The                        
    economic section contained an analysis of the current                     
    international economic situation, an assessment of                        
    the outcome of the ongoing dialogue between the                           
    developed and developing countries, the elements that                     
    should go into the forumulation of the Strategy for                       
    the Third Development Decade, and review of the                           
    progress in the implementation of the Colombo Action                      
    programme for                                                             
                                                                              
    Economic Cooperation Among the Non-aligned and                            
    Developing Countries.                                                     
                                                                              
    The Minister for External Affairs, Shri Atal Bihari                       
    Vajpayee led the Indian delegation to the Third                           
    Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-aligned                            
    Countries held in Belgrade from 25 to 29 July, 1978.                      
    The Conference was attended by 86 member countries,                       
    10 countries and organisations with observer status,                      
    and 9 countries with guest status. Djibouti was                           
    admitted as a new member and Pakistan and San Marino                      
    as guests. While welcoming Pakistan as a guest, India                     
    expressed the hope that it would go on to detach                          
    itself from the military alliance system. India was                       
    unanimously elected as Chairman of the Political                          
    Committee and presided over the drafting committee                        
    set up by the Political Committee to draft what                           
    turned out to be the most controversial part of the                       
    political declaration. The Minister for External                          
    Affairs, in his address to the Conference, reiterated                     
    India's total commitment to the fundamental                               
    principles of non-alignment. He pointed out that by                       
    faithful adherence to these principles, India was                         
    able to improve its bilateral relations with each of                      
    the great powers without being drawn into the                             
    differences between them or getting involved in                           
    issues which exacerbate international tensions.                           
    Further, with the inspiration of the non-alignment                        
    philosophy, India had purposefully sought to resolve                      
    old and intricate problems and built bridges of                           
    understanding and cooperation with its neighbours. He                     
    noted that a determined resolve to solve bilateral                        
    problems peacefully would release energies which                          
    could enable the movement to play its positive role                       
    in facing major world political and economic                              
    problems.                                                                 
                                                                              
    The Conference was held in the midst of a great deal                      
    of speculation regarding the ability of the movement                      
    to maintain its unity and cohesion in view of the                         
    emergence of sharp differences and bilateral                              
    conflicts between some of the non-aligned countries.                      
    The Conference addressed a special appeal to the                          
    non-aligned countries involved in bilateral disputes                      
    to make every effort to reach a peaceful settlement                       
    through negotiations. In addition, it recommended                         
    that non-aligned countries could render assistance to                     
    the parties concerned towards a resolution of such                        
    disputes. India's contention that if the countries                        
    remained genuinely non-aligned, any attempt either                        
    from inside or outside could not weaken or deflect                        
    the movement received wide support. 6 EA/78--4                            
                                                                              
    The Conference adopted a two-part Declaration and a                       
    separate section containing a review of the                               
    implementation of the Colombo Action Programme for                        
    Economic Cooperation. As in the past, the political                       
    part of the Declaration reflected the joint stand of                      
    the non-aligned countries on major international                          
    issues as well as issues facing the non-alignment                         
    movement itself. A new feature of the Declaration was                     
    a section on Human Rights which, at the initiative of                     
    India, stressed the need for the world community to                       
    adopt an integral and comprehensive approach to human                     
    rights in all its aspects. A Special Conference of                        
    Foreign Ministers of the Coordinating Bureau of                           
    Non-aligned countries was held in Maputo (Mozambique)                     
    from 28 January to 2 February, 1979 to consider the                       
    developments in Southern Africa. In a Declaration                         
    adopted after the conclusion of the Conference, the                       
    Bureau reiterated the decisions and recommendations                       
    made at earlier non-aligned meetings and at the                           
    United Nations and called for further measures                            
    including : (a) Increased support in all                                  
    forms--political, diplomatic,                                             
                                                                              
    military and financial--for the liberation struggle                       
                                                                              
    in South Africa. (b) Imposition of a complete and                         
    effective oil embargo                                                     
                                                                              
    on South Africa. (c) Prevention of recruitment,                           
    training, transit and                                                     
                                                                              
    financing of foreign mercenaries. (d) Admission of                        
    the Patriotic Front (Zimbabwe) as                                         
                                                                              
    a full member of the non-aligned movement. The                            
    Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri                              
    Samarendra Kundu, led the Indian delegation to the                        
    World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial                              
    Discrimination held at Geneva from 14 to 25 August,                       
    1978. Sri Samarendra Kundu, in his speech,                                
    highlighted the contribution made by India to the                         
    struggle against apartheid in South Africa. Declaring                     
    that only firm and decisive measures under Chapter                        
    VII of the United Nations Charter could force South                       
    Africa to see the path of sanity, he stressed that                        
    mandatory measures against that country must include                      
    sanctions against export of oil, investment capital,                      
    arms and nuclear collaboration.                                           
                                                                              
    The 8th special session of the General Assembly,                          
    which met from 20 to 21 April, 1978. was called                           
    specially to consider the                                                 
                                                                              
    question of making financial provisions for the                           
    United Nations Force in Lebanon and adopted a                             
    resolution apportioning US $ 54 million for the                           
    operation of this Force (UNIFL) for the period 19                         
    March to 18 November, 1978. India contributed US $                        
    73,132 towards this amount.                                               
                                                                              
    The Minister for External Affairs of India led the                        
    Indian delegation to the 9th Special Session of the                       
    UN General Assembly held from 24 April to 3 May, 1978                     
    to consider the question of Namibia. The Minister, in                     
    his address, underlined that the special session                          
    provided the United Nations with the last chance to                       
    take decisive steps towards bringing genuine                              
    independence to the people of Namobia. He reiterated                      
    India's firm and abiding support for the struggle of                      
    the people of Namibia for liberation and promised all                     
    possible support to the freedom fighters of the                           
    country. The special session adopted a Declaration                        
    and a Programme of Action which was initially drawn                       
    up by the Council for Namibia of which India was an                       
    active member and Vice-President. The Programme                           
    called for complete, immediate and unconditional                          
    withdrawal of South Africa from Namibia. The                              
    Declaration reiterated that Namibia was a direct                          
    responsibility of the United Nations until genuine                        
    self-determination and national independence was                          
    achieved by it. In keeping with this, the General                         
    Assembly reiterated its commitment to discharge the                       
    solemn obligation it had assumed to assist the                            
    Namibian people in achieving self-determination and                       
    independence. The Tenth Special Session of the United                     
    Nations General Assembly, devoted to disarmament, was                     
    held from 23 May to 30 June, 1978. This represented a                     
    major achievement for the Non-Aligned movement which                      
    had suggested the convening of such a session as                          
    early as in 1961 at its first Summit Conference held                      
    in Belgrade and reiterated it at the Colombo                              
    Conference of Heads of Governments/States of                              
    Non-Aligned Countries held in 1976. The Prime                             
    Minister, who led the Indian delegation to the                            
    Special Session, in his address, stressed the                             
    necessity to keep in view the final objective of                          
    realising total disarmament without any reservation,                      
    and the necessity to work out a non-discriminatory                        
    programme based on universal application shorn of any                     
    monopolistic feature or preferential treatment. The                       
    first step in that direction, he said, should be a                        
    declaration outlawing utilisation of nuclear                              
    technology for military purposes, freezing of present                     
    stockpile of nuclear arms under international                             
    inspection, qualitative and quantitative limitation                       
    of nuclear                                                                
                                                                              
    armament and gradual reduction of the stockpile with                      
    a view to achieving total elimination of all nuclear                      
    weapons. He also advocated the adoption of a                              
    Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty with provisions to                          
    prevent its breach through independent inspection.                        
    The Final Document adopted by the Special Session,                        
    inter alia, called on the nuclear-weapon-States to                        
    initiate urgent negotiations on both qualitative and                      
    quantitative freeze as well as for a comprehensive                        
    phased programme with agreed time frames, for the                         
    reduction of stockpiles of nuclear weapons leading to                     
    their ultimate and complete elimination. In the area                      
    of conventional weapons, the document called for the                      
    limitation and gradual reduction of armed forces and                      
    conventional weapons within the framework of progress                     
    towards general and complete disarmament. The special                     
    session achieved significant results in the field of                      
    machinery for disarmament deliberations and                               
    negotiations. A Disarmament Commission open to all                        
    members of the United Nations was established to make                     
    recommendations on disarmament problems, follow up                        
    the work of the Special Session, to consider the                          
    elements of a comprehensive disarmament programme and                     
    to report annually to the United Nations General                          
    Assembly. Shri M. A. Vellodi, Secretary, Ministry of                      
    External Affairs was unanimously elected as the first                     
    Chairman of the United Nations Disarmament                                
    Commission. The existing Conference of the Committee                      
    on Disarmament (CCD) was replaced by a new                                
    negotiating body, Committee on Disarmament. This body                     
    consists of the nuclear-weapon-States and 35 other                        
    member-States of the United Nations. The Committee                        
    now consists of all the 31 members of the CCD plus 8                      
    other States, i.e., Algeria, Australia, Belgium,                          
    Cuba, Indonesia. Kenya. Sri Lanka and Venezuela. The                      
    first meeting of the Committee on Disarmament was                         
    held in Geneva on 24th January, 1979. By its                              
    attendance in this meeting, France participated in                        
    multilateral disarmament negotiations for the first                       
    time since the establishment of an 18-nation                              
    Disarmament Committee (EDC) 1962. China, however, has                     
    not yet agreed to participate in the work of the new                      
    Committee on Disarmament. Shri D. T. Lakdawala, the                       
    Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission, led the                       
    Indian delegation to the United Nations Conference on                     
    Technical Cooperation Among Developing Countries held                     
    in Buenos Aires from 30 August to 12 September, 1978.                     
    The objective of the Conference was the furtherance                       
    of the national and collective self-reliance in                           
    developing countries                                                      
                                                                              
    through mutual cooperation. The Conference adopted a                      
    Plan of Action which enunciated the objectives of                         
    technical cooperation among. developing countries and                     
    contained specific recommendations for action at the                      
    global, inter-regional, regional and national levels.                     
                                                                              
    The Minister for External Affairs, Shri A. B.                             
    Vajpayee, led the Indian delegation to the 33rd                           
    regular session of the United Nations General                             
    Assembly which met from 19 September to 21 December,                      
    1978 and again from 15 to 29 January, 1979. The                           
    Assembly had before it an Agenda of 126 items                             
    covering political, economic, human rights, social,                       
    disarmament and related issues. The membership of the                     
    United Nations increased during the session from 149                      
    to 151 with the admission of Solomon Islands and                          
    Dominica as the two new members. The Assembly adopted                     
    over 250 resolutions, a majority of which was adopted                     
    by consensus or without vote. India played an active                      
    and constructive role in the deliberations of the                         
    General Assembly and its Committees and took                              
    initiative in tabling or actively co-sponsoring a                         
    number of resolutions. The Minister for External                          
    Affairs, in his address, delivered in Hindi, outlined                     
    the policies and attitudes of Government of India                         
    towards major international issues. He made a plea                        
    for a better world for all through harnessing of                          
    modern science and technology to bring about progress                     
    and prosperity. He expressed the hope that in the                         
    critical years ahead. The world community through the                     
    United Nations would demonstrate its determination,                       
    realism and sagacity to realise the dream of                              
    universal peace based on freedom and justice. During                      
    the period of the session, the Foreign Minister also                      
    addressed two special meetings at Foreign Ministers'                      
    level i.e., of the Non-Aligned countries and of the                       
    "Group of 77" developing countries. In the latter                         
    meeting he called upon the developing countries                           
    themselves to be prepared to make sacrifices for the                      
    disadvantaged and relatively less developed among                         
    them. He suggested the pooling of resources to assist                     
    the less developed countries and not to expect                            
    reciprocity for special measures adopted for them.                        
                                                                              
    The question of Namibia figured prominently in                            
    discussions at the United Nations. The five western                       
    members of the Security Council, i.e., UK, USA,                           
    France, Federal Republic of Germany and Canada, after                     
    consultations with the Government of the Republic of                      
    South Africa, SWAPO and neighbouring African                              
    Governments, submitted a proposal to the Security                         
    Council in April 1978 for Namibia's transition to                         
    independence                                                              
                                                                              
    after UN supervised and controlled elections. The                         
    Security Council took note of this proposal and                           
    following a visit by the special Representative of                        
    the United Nations Secretary General to Namibia and                       
    discussions with the parties concerned, adopted a                         
    resolution establishing a U.N. Transitional                               
    Assistance Group and requesting the Secretary General                     
    to report back on the implementation of the proposal                      
    by 23 October 1978. The South African Government, in                      
    defiance of world opinion, declared its intention to                      
    hold internal elections under its own supervision and                     
    control. The Security Council adopted a resolution                        
    condemning this decision and called for its                               
    cancellation warning the Government of the Republic                       
    of South Africa that its policy not to cooperate with                     
    the Secretary General in implementation of Security                       
    Council resolution would lead to the initiation of                        
    appropriate action under the UN Charter for the                           
    imposition of sanctions against South Africa. A                           
    full-fledged debate on Namibia was also held in the                       
    General Assembly at its thirty-third session in spite                     
    of the attempt by the Western Countries to get it                         
    postponed. India played an active role in ensuring                        
    that the question of Namibia was taken up by the                          
    General Assembly. The Assembly adopted three                              
    resolutions by a majority vote, all of which were                         
    co-sponsored by India. The main resolution,                               
    introduced primarily at India's initiative, condemned                     
    South Africa for its unilateral decision to hold                          
    elections under its supervision and declared the                          
    result of such elections to be null and void. It                          
    called for imposition of sanctions under Chapter VII                      
    of the UN Charter against South Africa for its                            
    non-compliance with the resolution of the Security                        
    Council. Further, it stated that should the Security                      
    Council be unable to take effective action, the                           
    General Assembly should "consider the situation                           
    further and take all necessary measures in conformity                     
    with its relevant resolutions and the Charter for the                     
    purpose of dealing with this threat to international                      
    peace and stability". During the debate at the                            
    thirty-third session of the General Assembly on                           
    Zimbabwe, the administering power, Britain, referred                      
    to the "expanded proposals" handed over to the                            
    internal leaders, to the Patriotic Front and to the                       
    Governments of frontline States on October 20, 1978,                      
    and clarified that these proposals embodied the basic                     
    purpose of the Anglo-American proposals. It suggested                     
    that the next step should be an all-party conference                      
    that would lead to full agreement on the modalities                       
    for independence and majority rule. The General                           
    Assembly                                                                  
                                                                              
    adopted two resolutions on Zimbabwe by a majority                         
    vote. India voted in favour of both. The resolutions                      
    inter alia deplored the decision of the United Stated                     
    Government to allow the entry into the United States                      
    of Ian Smith and some members of his illegal regime.                      
    It further called for widening the scope of sanctions                     
    against the illegal regime of Southern Rhodesia.                          
    These should include all measures envisaged under                         
    Article 41 of the Charter. It called upon the                             
    Security Council to impose, among other things, a                         
    mandatory embargo on the supply of petroleum and                          
    petroleum products to South Africa since these were                       
    transported into Southern Rhodesia from South Africa.                     
                                                                              
    The question of the Middle East and Palestine was                         
    debated against the background of the Camp David                          
    talks between the United States, Egypt and Israel on                      
    a settlement in West Asia. the resolution on West                         
    Asia, co-sponsored by India, reaffirmed that a just                       
    and lasting settlement must be based on a                                 
    comprehensive solution under the auspices of the                          
    United Nation and called for the early convening of                       
    the Geneva Peace Conference under the co-chairmanship                     
    of the Soviet Union and the United States with full                       
    participation of the PLO. The resolution on the                           
    Palestine issue, also co-sponsored by India, inter                        
    alia reaffirmed that a just and lasting peace in West                     
    Asia could not be established without finding a just                      
    solution to the problem of Palestine based on the                         
    attainment of the inalienable rights of the Palestine                     
    people, including their right to return to the                            
    homeland and the recognition of the PLO as the                            
    homeland and the recognition of the PLO as their                          
    represen- tative who should be allowed participation                      
    in all conferences on West Asia under the auspices of                     
    the United Nations. The General Assembly once again                       
    adopted a resolution on a nuclear weapon free zone in                     
    South Asia, India voted against the                                       
    Pakistani-sponsored resolution. India opposed the                         
    resolution because it did not regard South Asia as an                     
    appropriate region for the creation of such a zone.                       
                                                                              
    Two resolutions introduced by India calling for the                       
    prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons by an                           
    international convention and a moratorium on nuclear                      
    weapon testing pending a Comprehensive Test Ban                           
    Treaty were adopted by the General Assembly by                            
    overwhelming majorities.                                                  
                                                                              
    The question of the Indian Ocean being made a zone of                     
    peace moved a step forward when the General Assembly                      
    endorsed                                                                  
                                                                              
    the unanimous recommendations of the ad hoc Committee                     
    on the Indian Ocean and decided to convene a meeting                      
    of the littoral and hinterland States of the Indian                       
    Ocean in New York from 2 to 13 July, 1979 as the next                     
    stage towards convening a Conference on the Indian                        
    Ocean.                                                                    
                                                                              
    The question of Cyprus was once again considered in                       
    the plenary session of the General Assembly. Through                      
    a resolution co-sponsored by India, the Assembly                          
    reiterated full support for the sovereignty,                              
    independence, territorial integrity and non-alignment                     
    of the Republic of Cyprus. It called for an urgent                        
    resumption of meaningful and constructive                                 
    negotiations under the auspices of the                                    
    Secretary-General between the representatives of the                      
    two communities in order to arrive at a mutually                          
    acceptable agreement. The resolution further                              
    recommended that the Security Council examine the                         
    question of the implementation within a specified                         
    time frame, of all its relevant resolutions and take                      
    appropriate practical measures. The Second Committee                      
    of the General Assembly adopted as many as 65                             
    resolutions, most of them by consensus, on various                        
    international economic and financial issues. The                          
    decisions arrived at by consensus related to                              
    guidelines for the preparation of a new International                     
    Development Strategy, future work and mandate of the                      
    Committee of the whole and convening a UN Conference                      
    on New and Renewable Sources of Energy (excluding                         
    nuclear energy) in 1981. A consensus resolution was                       
    also adopted calling for an adequate increase in real                     
    terms in the resources of the International                               
    Development Association and in the lending of the                         
    World Bank to developing countries. Among the                             
    resolutions adopted by a majority vote were included                      
    those dealing with the preparations for the Fifth                         
    Session of UN Conference on Trade and Development,                        
    steps to combat world inflation, moves for a new                          
    International Wheat Agreement and convening a                             
    conference on restrictive business practices. The                         
    Indian delegation played a major role in bringing                         
    about the adoption of the consensus resolution on                         
    preparations for an International Development                             
    Strategy for the 1980s. Later, India was unanimously                      
    elected as Chairman of the General Assembly                               
    Preparatory Committee on New International                                
    Development Strategy. India has also provided the                         
    Chairman for the Preparatory Committee on the United                      
    Nations Conference on the Application of Science and                      
    Technology for Development. The UN General Assembly                       
    celebrated the 30th anniversary of Universal                              
    Declaration of Human Rights. India piloted a                              
                                                                              
    draft resolution on the establishment and functioning                     
    of national institutions for the promotion and                            
    protection of human rights. This was co-sponsored by                      
    all other countries and adopted without a vote.                           
    Indias initiative in presenting another resolution,                       
    which was adopted without a vote, relating to the                         
    United Nations Decade for Women-sub-theme Employment,                     
    Health and Education--was also greatly appreciated.                       
    The Indian delegation to the thirty fourth session of                     
    the Commission on Human Rights held in Geneva from 12                     
    February to 16 March 1979 was led by Smt.                                 
    Vijayalakshmi Pandit. The Commission dealt 29 items                       
    on its agenda covering different aspects of human                         
    rights and adopted a number of resolutions and                            
    decisions. India played a very active role in the                         
    Session and was called upon to chair a number of                          
    working groups set up to deal with specific subjects.                     
    The Government of India decided to accede to two                          
    important International Comments on Human Rights,                         
    namely, the International Comment on Civil and                            
    Political Rights and the International Comment on                         
    Economic, Social and Central Rights.                                      
                                                                              
    India ceased to be a member of the Security Council                       
    with effect from 31 December 1978. During 1978, India                     
    effectively championed the cause of the victims of                        
    aggression, racism and colonialism. India was                             
    particularly active whenever the question of Namibia                      
    came up for discussion in the Security Council. India                     
    provided the Chairman for the Sanctions Committee                         
    against Southern Rhodesia. The Minister of External                       
    Affairs introduced the Anti- Apartheid (United                            
    Nations Convention) Bill in the Lok Sabha in November                     
    1978. The Bill is likely to be taken up for con-                          
    sideration and approved by the Lok Sabha during 1979.                     
    The object of the Bill is to give effect to the                           
    provisions of the International Convention on the                         
    Suppression and Punishment for the Crime of Apartheid                     
    which was adopted by the General Assembly of the                          
    United Nations on 30 November 1973 and to which India                     
    became a party on 22 October 1977. The purpose of the                     
    said Convention is to make it possible for the States                     
    party to the Convention to take more effective                            
    measures at the national and international level                          
    against the crime of apartheid. The Law of the Sea                        
    Conference held its seventh session at Geneva from 22                     
    March to 19 May 1978 and after an adjourn- ment it                        
    was resumed at New York from 20th August to 15th                          
    September 1978. The Conference has so far achieved                        
    con- sensus on many issues, including a 12-mile                           
    territorial sea, a                                                        
                                                                              
    200-mile economic zone and the regime of the                              
    continental shelf. However, a deadlock still                              
    prevailed because of the lack of agreement on the                         
    question of international regime for seabed minerals                      
    and particularly on the financial between the Inter-                      
    national Seabed Authority and contractors and                             
    transfer of technology to the Authority. Towards the                      
    end of the Session, the United States, the Federal                        
    Republic of Germany and other industrialised                              
    countries stated that they were contemplating                             
    unilateral mining legislation to accord legitimacy to                     
    the exploita- tion of the resources of international                      
    seabed area for their nationals and companies. The                        
    Gorup of 77 reiterated its view that such unilateral                      
    action would be illegal and its effects would not be                      
    recognised. The Minister for External Affairs,                            
    speaking before the UN General Assembly in October                        
    1978, cautioned the industrialised States, against                        
    adopting unilateral mining, legislation. The leader                       
    of the Indian delegation was unanimously elected                          
    Chairman of the drafting committee of the UN                              
    Plenipotentiary Conference on the Carriage of Goods                       
    by Sea which was held at Hamburg from 6 to 31 March                       
    1978. The Conference adopted a Convention on the                          
    subject which would replace The Hague Rules by what                       
    would be called the Hamburg Rules.                                        
                                                                              
    India participated in the work of the United Nations                      
    Corn- mission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL)                       
    held at New York in June 1978. The meeting finalised                      
    a draft con- vention on the formation and validity of                     
    contracts relating to international sale of goods.                        
    The subject of the New Interna- tional Order was                          
    listed as one of priority items in the future                             
    programme of work of the UNCITRAL. The Indian                             
    delegation, which participated in the deliberations                       
    of the Legal Sub-Committee of the UN Committee on                         
    Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, maintained its position                     
    that any treaty relating to the moon must contain an                      
    unequivocal provision that the moon and its natural                       
    resources were the common heri- tage of mankind. The                      
    treaty, however. could not be finalised because of                        
    differences on this principle in the Sub-Committee.                       
                                                                              
    On the question of remote sensing of the earth by                         
    satellites, the Sub-Committee was able to reach                           
    consensus on some more principles, but no consensus                       
    could be reached on the principle of prior approval                       
    in disseminating data and information; the principle                      
    of navigation for conducting remote sensing                               
    activities and the relationship between the principle                     
    of full and permanent                                                     
                                                                              
    sovereignty of States over their wealth and natural                       
    resources and remote sensing activities.                                  
                                                                              
    On the subject of television direct broadcasting by                       
    satellites, the Sub-Committee failed to reach an                          
    agreement on whether it was necessary to obtain                           
    agreement of a State at whose territory direct                            
    broadcasting by satellites was specifically directed.                     
                                                                              
    India participated at the fifth session of the                            
    Inter-Governmen- tal Group of Experts on Natural                          
    Resources Shared by Two or more States held at                            
    Nairobi from 23 January to 8 February 1978. The Group                     
    has formulated 15 principles for the guidance of                          
    States for the preservation and harmonious                                
    utilisation of natural resources shared by two or                         
    more States. Later, the Governing Council of UNEP                         
    approved and forwarded these principles for                               
    consideration by the UN General Assembly. The General                     
    Assembly took note of these principles and requested                      
    the Secretary General of the United Nations to                            
    transmit them for study and comments by Governments                       
    and report on it.                                                         
                                                                              
    An officer of the Ministry attended the second                            
    session of the Working Group of Governmental Experts                      
    on Environmental Law held at Geneva from 3 to 12                          
    April, 1978. The Group considered the question of                         
    maritime pollution arising out of offshore drilling                       
    and mining within the limits of national                                  
    jurisdiction. India also took part in an Expert Group                     
    Meeting on Environment convened by the Asian-African                      
    Legal Consultative Committee at New Delhi from 18 to                      
    21 December 1978. The Group identified areas common                       
    to the region which needed urgent attention. These                        
    included human settlement, land use, mountain                             
    ecology, industrialisation and marine pollution.                          
                                                                              
    Aug 14, 1978                                                              
    Technical And Economic Co-operation                                       
                                                      Top                     
    Jan 01, 1978 CHAPTER IX TECHNICAL AND ECONOMIC                            
    CO-OPERATION                                                              
                                                                              
    Believing in global inter-dependence and collective                       
    self-reliance as the twin pillars on which the                            
    blue-print for the international development strategy                     
    for the eighties should be based, India endeavoured                       
    to fashion its strategy for economic and technical                        
    co-operation in multilateral forms and work out new                       
    frameworks in addition to strengthening old and                           
    time-tested methods for developing economic and                           
    technical co-operation with developed, developing and                     
    socialist countries on the basis of beneficial                            
    bilateralism encompassing functional co-operation in                      
    different fields. India continued to share its                            
    know-how and placed its skilled, scientific and                           
    technical manpower at the dis- posal of many                              
    developing countries and progress in regard to joint                      
    ventures scaled new heights. Inside the Ministry, the                     
    functioning of the Economic Division was streamlined                      
    by intro- ducing geographisation in the sense that                        
    bilateral economic and political work were combined                       
    in the territorial divisions with Economic Division                       
    concentrating on specialised tasks such as                                
    multilateral economic relations, long-term programmes                     
    and projects of co-operation, manpower and personnel                      
    work, admi- nistration of Indian Technical and                            
    Economic Co-operation Pro- gramme, analysis of                            
    developmental plans of developing coun- tries with a                      
    view to identifying areas of co-operation etc.                            
                                                                              
    Progress in Joint collaboration and co-operation in                       
    different fields continued to be made within the                          
    framework of already established joint commissions.                       
    During the year, a joint com- mission on economic,                        
    cultural, scientific and technical co- operation with                     
    Mauritius was established and an agreement was                            
    reached in principle on a joint commission with                           
    Nigeria on economic, scientific and technical                             
    co-operation. A budgetary allocation of Rs. 650 lakhs                     
    made under ITEC programme was sought to be utilised                       
    for providing training facilities in India for                            
    trainees from developing countries, deputing Indian                       
    experts to other developing countries, for carrying                       
    out technical economic surveys and feasibility                            
    studies and for gifting of equipment or projects, in                      
    different developing countries of Asia. Africa and                        
                                                                              
    Latin America. Consistent with our policy, stress was                     
    naturally placed on such programmes with neighbouring                     
    countries such as Afghanistan, Sri Lanka, Burma,                          
    Mauritius etc.                                                            
                                                                              
    Steps were taken to diversify and strengthen our                          
    economic relations with Nepal taking into account                         
    special problems of Nepal as land-locked and least                        
    developed country, In regard to Afghanistan, we have                      
    agreed to finance feasibility studies as well as                          
    certain projects on mutually acceptable terms. Though                     
    some problems did arise in our economic relations                         
    with Iran particularly in regard to availability of                       
    crude oil supplies from there due to political                            
    disturbances there, by and large the economic                             
    relations have withstood the stresses and strains and                     
    it is hoped that once political conditions get                            
    stablised there, our economic relations would gather                      
    new momentum. India agreed to give tariff preferences                     
    to Sri Lanka for several products of interest in                          
    addition to permitting imports of certain banned                          
    products upto certain specified limits. Other                             
    significant arrangements with Sri Lanka related to                        
    buy-back commitments for Indo-Sri Lanka joint                             
    ventures based in Sri Lanka, preference to each other                     
    for imports of requirements provided quality and                          
    prices were suitable, co-operation in pro- duct                           
    developments in packaging of tea and special                              
    allowances to Indian visiting Sri Lanka for tourism.                      
    The pilot plants projects being established in Burma                      
    maintained scheduled pro- gress during the year. An                       
    economic delegation from Burma headed by the Minister                     
    of Co-operatives visited India and acquired                               
    first-hand knowledge of the industrial progress made                      
    by India. New ground was broken in regard to trade                        
    with China, Pakistan and Bangladesh. India                                
    participated in the Canton Fair. As regards                               
    co-operation with countries of South East Asia, a new                     
    dimension was added with the initiation of Indo-ASEAN                     
    dialogue. The Secretary General of ASEAN had                              
    preliminary discussions in the Ministry. Possible                         
    areas of co-operation with ASEAN were identified                          
    through inter-ministerial consultations and it is                         
    hoped that a detailed discussions will take place                         
    with ASEAN Secretariat in the near future                                 
                                                                              
    Indian co-operation with Vietnam was strengthened                         
    during the year, particularly in the field of daily                       
    sciences and oil explo- ration. ITEC programme in                         
    regard to Tonga and Fiji was con-                                         
                                                                              
    tinued. Medicines and rice were gifted to Laos.                           
    Indian entre- preneurs and public-sector                                  
    organizations continued to be active in Malaysia,                         
    Indonesia, Thailand and Philippines both in regard to                     
    joint ventures and for supply of capital equipment.                       
    Indian expertise and technical know-how continued to                      
    be in great demand in the West Asian region,                              
    particularly because it proved apt and relevant to                        
    the conditions prevailing there. An 8-member Indian                       
    medical team was sent to the Peoples' Demo- cratic                        
    Republic of Yemen for three weeks under ITEC                              
    programme. A Protocol of Understanding was signed                         
    with the visiting delega- tion from the Ministry of                       
    Health of Sultanate of Oman for re- cruitment of                          
    medical and paramedical staff needed by that country.                     
    Some beginnings were made in regard to durable and                        
    comprehensive economic co-operation with Saudi                            
    Arabia, Iraq and to some extent Saudi Arabia and UAE                      
    agreed to help India in meeting shortages in crude                        
    oil requirements of India as a result of troubles in                      
    Iran, Libya also showed understanding on this matter.                     
    Economic relations with that country continued to                         
    make rapid strides, especially after the visit of                         
    Vice-President and Premier Jalloud. A protocol was                        
    signed with Algeria on economic, scientific and                           
    technical relations. Indo-Iraqi Joint Commission                          
    identified several fields for co-operation,                               
    particularly co-operation in the field of                                 
    agriculture. India's economic ties with Africa were                       
    further strengthened during the period, particularly                      
    with the island countries of the Indian Ocean,                            
    littoral and hinterland states bordering the Indian                       
    Ocean and Nigeria. A decision was taken in the third                      
    session of the Indo-Tanzanian Joint Commission in                         
    regard to identification of possible participation by                     
    India in the Tanzanian development plan and for                           
    carrying out feasibility study for production co-                         
    operation for growing cashewnuts in Tanzania. An                          
    Agreement on economic and technical co-operation with                     
    Seychelles was signed. India gifted a further                             
    quantity of corrugated sheets for housing projects in                     
    Seychelles. A Joint Commission with Mauri- tius was                       
    established and an agreement to supply 24,000 tons of                     
    rice to Mauritius was concluded. About fifty Indian                       
    railway experts took their assignments in Mozambique.                     
    The visit of the Zambian Prime Minister resulted in                       
    better mutual understanding about possibilities of                        
    co-operation between India and Zambia, particularly                       
    by way of India giving commercial credits for export                      
    of capital equipment and machinery to Zambia and                          
    Zambia agreeing to meet requirements of India for                         
    non-ferrous metals such as copper, cobalt tec. The                        
    Malawi Minister for Industries                                            
                                                                              
    pg51                                                                      
    visited the Small Scale Industries Fair and returned                      
    deeply im- pressed with possibilities of Indian                           
    co-operation in Malawi's industrial development.                          
    Trade with Kenya and Uganda register- ed further                          
    increases with exports of Indian commercial vehicles,                     
    sugar and textile machinery, gaining entry in that                        
    region.                                                                   
                                                                              
    In West Africa, close economic ties were developed                        
    with Nigeria and relations with Liberia and Sierra                        
    Leone were streng- thened. RITES were awarded the                         
    prestigeous contract for railway management of                            
    Nigeria. Nigeria continued to look to India for                           
    recruitment of experts for various fields such as                         
    tele- communications, medicines, architecture etc, An                     
    agreement with Liberia on economic and technical                          
    co-operation was entered into. Currently a Liberian                       
    request for management of their mines etc. is being                       
    processed.                                                                
                                                                              
    Exploratory work in regard to identification of                           
    concrete areas of economic and technical co-operation                     
    between India and Latin America continued. It is                          
    proposed to organise a meet in New Delhi between                          
    Indian representatives and representa- tives from                         
    Economic Commission for Latin America to identify                         
    possibilities of technical co-operation between India                     
    and Latin American countries. FICCI has proposed to                       
    send a delegation to certain Latin American countries                     
    in the near future to make an on-the-spot study of                        
    possible areas of co-operation.                                           
                                                                              
    With developed countries India continued to explore                       
    avenues of friendly co-operation in specialised                           
    fields involving import of sophisticated technology                       
    and joint ventures in third countries. Efforts were                       
    also made in international and multi- lateral forums                      
    for persuading developed countries to take helpful                        
    decisions relating to official development assistance                     
    and mea- sures for debt relief. India's point of view                     
    was also projected in high level meetings which                           
    Indian leaders had with leaders from developed                            
    countries. The Prime Minister's meeting with the                          
    President of the Commission of the European Community                     
    was followed by the decision of the European Economic                     
    Com- munity to establish a Trade Centre in Brussels                       
    for providing specialised and technical services in                       
    the field of trade promotion for Indian speciality                        
    exports. Consultations for renewal of the Commercial                      
    Co-operation Agreement between India and the European                     
    Economic Community have also made progress and it is                      
    hoped that a comprehensive economic and commercial                        
    co- operation agreement would be concluded in the                         
    near future. India's concern at the rising tide of                        
    protectionism in the develop- ed countries was                            
    communicated by the Prime Minister during his talks                       
    with the President of the Commission of European                          
    Communities in Brussels, by the Commerce Minister                         
    during his meeting with the American Secretary of                         
    State for Commerce, and the French Minister for                           
    Foreign Trade, and by the Finance Minister to the FRG                     
    Minister for Economic Co-operation. During the visit                      
    of the Dutch Foreign Minister, the Dutch Minister for                     
    Development Co-operation and the Italian Foreign                          
    Minister, our Foreign Minister put across India's                         
    views on the measures that need to be taken by                            
    developed countries for bringing about the New                            
    International Economic Order. India welcomed the                          
    retrospective terms adjustment measures under- taken                      
    by U. K. and Sweden in pursuance of Trade and                             
    Develop- ment Board Resolution for providing debt                         
    relief. The Minis- terial level meeting of                                
    Indo-French Joint Committee has identi- fied areas                        
    for sectoral co-operation in fields such as coal                          
    mining and coal processing, telecommunications,                           
    electronics, offshore drilling,                                           
                                                                              
    automobile industry, etc. An agreement has been                           
    concluded with Turkey on economic, scientific and                         
    technical co-operation. A dialogue with U.S.A. in the                     
    framework of the Indo-U.S. Sub-Commission on Economic                     
    and Commercial Co- operation and with Japan in the                        
    framework of Indo-Japan Business Committee have                           
    helped in a better perception of the possibilities                        
    and potential for bilateral co-operation and measures                     
    that are required in the light of contemporary                            
    economic realities for global management of                               
    inter-dependence. including, inter alia, increasing                       
    share of the developing countries in the decision                         
    mak- ing processes that affect the development of the                     
    developing countries.                                                     
                                                                              
    With Socialist countries, India concluded several new                     
    agreements designed to further strengthen and promote                     
    economic co-operation in the light of the technical                       
    and industrial progress achieved by India in these                        
    countries and in the context of the evolving                              
    environment for international economic relations. A                       
    long-term programme of economic, trade, scientific                        
    and technical co-operation between India and the USSR                     
    was finalised during the year and initialled. This                        
    would involve co-operation setting up new enterprises                     
    in India, improvements in existing enterprises built                      
    with Soviet assistance, co-operation in third coun-                       
    tries, co-operation in science & technology and                           
    co-operation in trade and planning. During the visit                      
    of the First Secretary of the GDR, a long-term                            
    agreement on economic, scientific and techni- cal                         
    co-operation was finalised. The Indo-Bulgarian Joint                      
    Com-                                                                      
                                                                              
    mission has identified new areas of co-operation,                         
    particularly for agro-based industries. The                               
    Indo-Hungarian and the Indo-GDR Joint Commission                          
    meetings have helped focussing on opportunities that                      
    are available for co-operation in third countries.                        
                                                                              
    India actively participated in programmes of                              
    co-operation within Commonwealth framework, i.e.,                         
    Colombo Plan, the Commonwealth Fund for Technical                         
    Co-operation, the Special Commonwealth African                            
    Assistance Programme. India hosted a meeting of                           
    experts from South East Asian and Pacific countries                       
    (Commonwealth) on energy during which detailed dis-                       
    cussions took place on co-operation in this vital                         
    field. India also actively participated in the                            
    meeting of the senior Common- wealth officials held                       
    in Kuala Lumpur preparatory to the meet- ing of the                       
    Commonwealth Heads of Governments/States. 6EA/78--5                       
                                                                              
    Jan 01, 1978                                                              
    External Publicity                                                        
                                                      Top                     
    Jan 01, 1978 CHAPTER X EXTERNAL PUBLICITY                                 
                                                                              
    The publicity and information activities of the                           
    Ministry are guided by the consideration to promote a                     
    better understanding and appreciation of the                              
    country's foreign policy and to locus attention on                        
    the progress made in social, economic, cultural,                          
    scientific and technological fields. This was done                        
    through printed publicity material, through the                           
    medium of documentary and feature films as well as                        
    Indian newsreels and through the news bulletins                           
    issued by the various Missions abroad. The spokesman                      
    of the Ministry, in his daily briefings, explained                        
    the policies of the Government to the Correspondents                      
    of Indian and foreign newspapers based in India.                          
    Invitations were extended to foreign journalists and                      
    T. V. men to visit India to see the country's                             
    progress with their own eyes. Appropriate efforts                         
    were made to draw the attention of the journalists to                     
    the various initiatives taken by the Government hi                        
    building bridges of understanding with our neighbours                     
    in consolidating and diversi- fying established                           
    friendship and seeking to enlarge the areas of                            
    understanding and co-operation, in supporting the                         
    cause of liberation of countries in Southern Africa                       
    and by the re- assertion of India's adherence to the                      
    policy of non-alignment.                                                  
                                                                              
    The Committee set up under Shri Chanchal Sarkar to                        
    devise measures to improve the work of external                           
    publicity sub- mitted its report during the year and                      
    efforts are being made to implement its                                   
    recommendations.                                                          
                                                                              
    The publicity work of the Ministry continued under                        
    the following heads (i) Press Relations                                   
                                                                              
    The press relations section acted as host to 37                           
    foreign journalists and another 20 are expected to                        
    visit by the end of March 1979. 270 foreign                               
    journalists, who came to India on their own, were                         
    accorded all possible assistance to make their visits                     
    fruitful and were provided facilities to acquire                          
    better                                                                    
                                                                              
    knowledge and appreciation of the country's policies                      
    and achievements. About 100 more such journalists are                     
    expected to come by the end of March 1979. During                         
    April 1978 to December 1978, about 87 foreign TV                          
    teams visited India for making documentary films on a                     
    variety of subjects. Another 30 are expected to visit                     
    by the end of March 1979.                                                 
                                                                              
    Necessary facilities were given to about 80 Indian                        
    Journa- lists to visit foreign countries. (ii)                            
    Audio-visual Publicity                                                    
                                                                              
    More than 400 prints of approved documentary films                        
    were supplied to different Indian Missions and Posts                      
    abroad. Besides, four prints each of 7 feature films                      
    were sent to Missions on circulations on circulation                      
    basis. A few more feature films of artistic value are                     
    being bought within this financial year.                                  
                                                                              
    Special compilation films on the state visits to                          
    India of several Heads of State were produced for                         
    publicity abroad. A number of Indian Missions also                        
    organised Indian films weeks with films in their                          
    possession or supplied by headquarters.                                   
                                                                              
    To activise the film projection work of some of the                       
    Missions abroad, 16 mm. cine projectors were                              
    sanctioned for the Missions in Port Louis, Brussels,                      
    Mombasa, Male, Tananarive, George- town, Rabat and                        
    Rangoon. 70 gramophone records of Indian classical                        
    and film music and the national anthem were supplied                      
    to different Missions. (iii) ISI Transmission                             
                                                                              
    Some 50 Missions were kept informed about the latest                      
    developments and progress in India with the                               
    twice-daily news transmissions through the Overseas                       
    Communications Service. Efforts are being made to                         
    provide transmission receiving sets to other Missions                     
    also which do not at present have them. Some of these                     
    Missions are being fed through press cables on an                         
    average about three times a week. Copies of daily                         
    transmissions are also sent to all Mission and Posts                      
    abroad by bag.                                                            
                                                                              
    The External Publicity Division is actively                               
    considering a plan to link all Missions through the                       
    newly-introduced press bulletin service which will                        
    transmit daily bulletins to Missions through                              
    satellite. When this goes into operation, the                             
    Missions are expected to be provided with fast, more                      
    detailed and more                                                         
                                                                              
    dependable means of receiving transmissions.                              
    Arrangements for linking Indian Missions in North                         
    America through the satellite press bulletin service                      
    are about to be completed and depending upon the                          
    availability of resources and in the light of                             
    experience, it is intended to gradually extend the                        
    service to Indian Missions in other regions as well.                      
    (iv) Print Publicity                                                      
                                                                              
    The External Publicity Division stepped up its                            
    activities of feeding Missions with increased supply                      
    of printed material on India's progress and                               
    achievements Publications "FOREIGN AFFAIRS RECORD"                        
    (monthly), "INDIAN AND FOREIGN REVIEW" (fortnightly)                      
    and "COURIER DE L'INDE" (a fortnightly in French)                         
    were, produced as before for distribution through                         
    Indian Missions to various media and institutions in                      
    foreign countries. Efforts were made to make the                          
    INDIAN AND FOREIGN REVIEW more attractive by                              
    improving its cover and content by lending it colour                      
    and through addition of re- productions of Indian                         
    miniature paintings, poems, cartoons and articles of                      
    literary interest. A few booklets published by the                        
    External Publicity Division for distribution by                           
    Missions includ- ed "CONTINUITY AND CHANGE IN INDIA's                     
    FOREIGN POLICY" and "INDIA's ROLE IN THE CHANGING                         
    WORLD" by the Minister for External Affairs, Shri                         
    Atal Behari Vajpayee, "UNIVERSAL DISARMAMENT--A WAY                       
    TO GLOBAL PEACE" by Prime Minister Shri Morarji                           
    Desai, and "INDIA's ROLE IN THE FIGHT AGAINST                             
    APARTHEID" by Smt. Shanti Sadiq Ali. Other                                
    publications included pamphlets covering speeches by                      
    the Minister for External Affairs and the Minister of                     
    State in different interna- tional forums like the                        
    ECOSOC in Geneva, the non-aligned co- ordination                          
    meeting in Havana and the conference of Foreign                           
    Ministers of non-aligned countries in Belgrade.                           
                                                                              
    On the occasion of the visit of the Prime Minister to                     
    the United States in June 1978, special feature                           
    articles were com- missioned in the series                                
    "Development India" written by specia- lists for wide                     
    distribution in the countries visited by the Prime                        
    Minister as well as in others. Besides, World Press                       
    Review, con- taining selected comments on India by                        
    major newspapers in diffe- rent countries, continued                      
    to be issued and distributed widely.                                      
                                                                              
    The External Publicity Division also supplied books                       
    on various Indian subjects to the Missions for their                      
    libraries and                                                             
                                                                              
    for presentation, newspapers for their reading rooms                      
    and for local distribution, photographs showing                           
    development activities and cultural events in India,                      
    and assisted in the production of supplements by                          
    important foreign journals to bring out special                           
    features on different facets of the country's life                        
    and achieve- ments. The XP Division also carried out                      
    exhibition and cultural work through supply of                            
    photographs, paintings for arranging exhibitions                          
    abroad, coordinated the work regarding sending of                         
    cultural troupes, holding of exhibitions of Indian                        
    modem art and of philately exhibitions in various                         
    countries and co-ordinat- ing the work regarding book                     
    exhibitions. The Indian Art Exhi- bition, that opened                     
    in Paris in November 1978 and which ran till the end                      
    of February 1979, deserves special mention. The work                      
    of restructuring the Indian pavillion at the                              
    Commonwealth Institute in London to make it                               
    themetically up- to-date was given to the Indian                          
    Institute of National Design, Ahmedabad, and it is                        
    expected to be completed by May 1979.                                     
                                                                              
    an 01, 1978                                                               
    Cultural Relations                                                        
                                                      Top                     
    CHAPTER XI CULTURAL RELATIONS                                             
                                                                              
    The Indian Council for Cultural Relations continued                       
    to be the main agency for promoting India's cultural                      
    relations with other countries. During the year, some                     
    administrative re-organi- sation was undertaken to                        
    increase its efficiency and rationalise the                               
    distribution of work. Further, additional work was                        
    transferred to this Organisation from the Department                      
    of Culture in pursuance of the recommendations of the                     
    Administrative Reforms Com- mission, thus enlarging                       
    the scope of its activities. These included handling                      
    of all incoming and outgoing cultural delegations,                        
    visits of academic delegations and Organisation of                        
    art exhibitions. The ICCR, for carrying out these                         
    functions, would consult national academies and other                     
    professional organisations in the same manner as the                      
    Department of Culture had been doing in the past.                         
    There would also be periodical reviews of the                             
    implementation of the programmes assigned to the                          
    ICCR. Until the middle of November, the Council                           
    sponsored 17 Indian delegations and 48 Indian                             
    visitors to go abroad. The individual visitors went                       
    to countries in Europe, North America, Latin & South                      
    America and South East Asia. A small number visited                       
    Australia and Japan. The purpose of these visits by                       
    individuals was to participate in symposia and                            
    seminars, to study sciences or give lectures and                          
    present papers on social, political, artistic and                         
    literary subjects.                                                        
                                                                              
    The delegations sponsored by the Indian Council for                       
    Cultural Relations visited Australia, West Europe,                        
    South East Asia, West Asia and North America, the                         
    Soviet Union and the neighbouring countries like                          
    Nepal, Sri Lanka and Bhutan. The majority of these                        
    sponsored delegations specialised in the field of the                     
    evolving arts. Their visits coincided with either                         
    international art festivals or other Indian fairs and                     
    festivals celebrated in these countries. The Council                      
    received 36 visitors from Ghana, Syria, Indonesia,                        
    Pakistan, Chile, Surinam, Kuwait, Tunisia, Fiji,                          
    Costa Rica, Bangladesh, Vietnam, Botswana, Sri Lanka,                     
    Australia the United                                                      
                                                                              
    States, Kenya, Iraq, Brazil, Federal Republic of                          
    Germany, the Soviet Union and Turkey. The Council                         
    gave more attention to incoming visitors from Latin                       
    and South America, South East Asia, Africa and West                       
    Asia. The third annual meeting of the Indo-US                             
    Sub-Commission on Educated & Culture was held in New                      
    York on May 15, 1978 16 May 1978. The meeting                             
    reviewed past activities under the aegies of the                          
    Sub-Commission. Exchanges concerning academicians,                        
    personnel from the field of museology, performing                         
    arts, films, television and radio were also discussed                     
    as well as programmes for future joint seminars,                          
    exchange of exhibitions and joint workshops. Under                        
    the aeigies of the Sub-Commission an exhibition on                        
    technology of American experiences was held in                            
    Bangalore, Calcutta, Hyderabad, Delhi, and Madras.                        
    The joint seminar was organised in Now York in June                       
    1978, in Srinagar in September 1978 and another in                        
    New York in November 1978. The Indo-US fellowship                         
    programme of the Sub-Commission was implemented and                       
    16 fellows were received from the United States and                       
    13 were sent to that country. Under the programmes of                     
    exchange 14 middle level museum personnel from each                       
    side, two persons were received while the Indian                          
    Curator of the National Museum of Natural History                         
    went to the United States to work with Carnegie                           
    Museum of National History in Chicago. The meeting of                     
    the two Chairmen of Sub-Commission held in Septem-                        
    ber 1978 expressed satisfaction at the work done so                       
    far. The Council brought out 9 publications during                        
    the period. 8 magazines and publications are in the                       
    Press and 5 manuscripts approved by the publication                       
    committee are under active prepara- tion for                              
    submission to the Press. Its publications were sent                       
    to fairs and exhibitions in a number of countries. A                      
    new cultural centre was set up in Suriname and its                        
    Director assumed charge of his office in early                            
    November. Steps were also taken to improve the staff                      
    and equipment at cultural centres in Fiji and Guyana.                     
    Action was also taken to provide equipment and depute                     
    the required scholars to countries like Fiji,                             
    Mauritius. Suriname, Medico, Rumania and Bulgaria                         
    from where the Council had received specific                              
    indications of their requirements.                                        
                                                                              
    Under the bilateral are exchange, programmes, the                         
    Council sponsored the visit of a number of troupes to                     
    give performances in India. These included a                              
    39-member folk dance ensemble from the GDR, a                             
    40-member Tadjic opera ballet from the Soviet Union                       
    and a 80-member Pyongyong school students and                             
    children                                                                  
                                                                              
    are group from the Democratic Republic of Korea.                          
    Other spon- sored programmes included concerts of                         
    three artists from Britain, two artists from                              
    Australia, a 20-member visiting group from Japan, a                       
    5-member troupe from Cuba and a 24-member visiting                        
    troupe of national dance from Sri Lanka.                                  
                                                                              
    The Council continued to look after the foreign                           
    students and foreign visitors. It received informal                       
    offers of land on partial finance for putting up                          
    hostels for foreign students in Maharashtra,                              
    Karnataka, U.P. and Tamil Nadu. This was, however, on                     
    the condition that the Central Government, through                        
    the Council, would meet the major portion of the                          
    expenditure for putting up these hostels and for                          
    their staff and maintenance. Under instructions from                      
    the President of the Council, steps were taken to                         
    reorganise the offices of the Foreign Students                            
    Advisers in various Universities all over India. It                       
    is proposed that these advisers should be changed                         
    once every three years to ensure that the foreign                         
    students community gets fresh and dynamic attention                       
    to its needs in different educational institutions.                       
                                                                              
    The editorial boards of the manuscripts being                             
    published by the ICCR were reconstituted consisting                       
    of eminent scholars. The Hindi magazine was placed                        
    under Shri Bhowani Prasad Mishra, and Shri Ashok                          
    Mehta headed the editorial board for AFRICA                               
    QUARTERLY. The Chairman of the publications                               
    committee, Dr. Karan Singh agreed to take an active                       
    part in bringing out other publications and magazines                     
    and it was hoped that this would bring about a                            
    qualitative change in the publication programme of                        
    the organisation.                                                         
                                                                              
    The Ministry entrusted the Council with the task of                       
    coordi- nating activities relating to the                                 
    commemoration of the United Nations International                         
    Anti-appartheid Year in India. The Council evolved                        
    discussions on the programme at seminars, meetings                        
    and exhibitions to focuss attention on the problem                        
    and also to under- take a number of monographs and                        
    pamphlets on the subject in English, Hindi and other                      
    major Indian languages. The Ministry provided a                           
    separate grant of Rs. 9.8 lakhs to the Council for                        
    this purpose. The Council is also undertaking similar                     
    work on behalf of the Arab League and the United                          
    Nations. The Council is also the secretariat of the                       
    Jury of Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International                          
    Understanding. The Award for 1976 to Dr. Giuseppe                         
    Tucci of Italy was presented to him in Rome in                            
    October 1978; the Award for 1977 to Shri Tulsi                            
                                                                              
    Mehrji Shristha in Kathmandu in September 1978 and                        
    the Award for 1978 to Most Venerable Nichidatsu Fujii                     
    of Japan in New Delhi in January 1979. The scheme for                     
    providing educational facilities in the field of                          
    medicine and engineering to self-financing students                       
    from developing countries was continued during the                        
    year. From the 1159 applications for admission to                         
    medical courses received from nearly 35 countries, 68                     
    students were selected and nominated to various                           
    medical colleges in India. Similarly, 200 students                        
    from 679 applicants were selected and nominated to                        
    various engineering colleges including the IITs.                          
    Requests for admission to different polytechnic                           
    institutions for diploma courses were also received                       
    during the year and 20 foreign students were                              
    nominated to such courses. These, of course, did not                      
    include nomination of students from Nepal and Bhutan                      
    whose cases were considered separately. A statement                       
    showing countrywise allocation of medical and                             
    engineering seats under the scheme for self-financing                     
    foreign students is at Appendix. In addition to                           
    nominating self-financing students to engineering and                     
    medical courses, the Council also coordinated the                         
    grant of scholarships under the Schemes of General                        
    Cultural Scholarships Commonwealth Scholarship and                        
    Reciprocal Scholarship of the Department of                               
    Education.                                                                
                                                                              
    May 15, 1978                                                              
    Protocol                                                                  
                                                      Top                     
    CHAPTER XII PROTOCOL                                                      
                                                                              
    The Heads of Missions of the following 19 countries                       
    on com- pletion of their assignment left India during                     
    the year :-- Ambassadors of Oman, Burma, Japan,                           
    Mongolia, Afghanistan, Ireland, Sudan, Jordan,                            
    People's Democratic Republic of Yemen, Democratic                         
    People's Republic of Korea, Austria, The Netherlands,                     
    France, and Italy and High Commissioners of Tanzania,                     
    Malaysia, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and New Zealand.                          
                                                                              
    The new Heads of Missions of the following 25                             
    countries arrived in Delhi and presented their                            
    credentials : Ambassadors of Iraq, Syria, USSR,                           
    Belgium, Libya, Burma, Pakistan, Japan, Afghanistan,                      
    Sudan, Maldives, Liberia, Somalia, Lebanon, Oman,                         
    Jordan, Democratic People's Republic of Korea,                            
    Indonesia, Mongolia, Laos and Ireland, the High                           
    Commissioners of Tanzania, Malaysia, Sri Lanka and                        
    Bangladesh. Two countries, Maldives and Liberia,                          
    accredited their first Ambassadors to India. Mr.                          
    Mohamed Musthafa Hussain con- currently accredited as                     
    Ambassador of Maldives to India (stationed at New                         
    York) presented his Credentials on the Sep 12, 1978.                      
    Mr. C. Copper, concurrently accredited Ambassador of                      
    Liberia (Stationed at Tokyo) presented his                                
    Credentials on the 19 September 1978.                                     
                                                                              
    Sep 12, 1978                                                              
    Passport, Emigration & Consular Services                                  
                                                      Top                     
    CHAPTER XIII PASSPORT, EMIGRATION & CONSULAR SERVICES                     
    There was all-round growth of the Central Passport                        
    and Emigration Organisation during the year. The                          
    staff in the existing Passport Offices was                                
    strengthened and new Passports Offices were opened.                       
    The number of passports issued also increased                             
    considerably as compared to the previous year. The                        
    passport fee was revised from Rs. 25.00 to Rs. 50.00                      
    and proportionately there was increase in the                             
    prescribed fees for various services rendered for the                     
    passports. There was also simplification and                              
    standardisation of the procedure regarding the issue                      
    of passports. With the establishment of new Passport                      
    Offices at Bangalore, Kozhikode, Jaipur and Bhopal,                       
    the total number of such offices in the country rose                      
    to 13. It was proposed to establish before the middle                     
    of 1979 six more Passport Offices at Bhubaneshwar,                        
    Gauhati, Jullunder, Patna, Simla and Srinagar.                            
                                                                              
    There was considerable increase in the number of                          
    passports issued during the year ; 12.13 lakhs                            
    passports being issued as compared to 9.07 lakhs                          
    issued during 1977. The number of applications                            
    received and the number of passports issued in each                       
    of the Passports Offices during the year 1978 are                         
    given at Appendix VII. This statement also gives                          
    details of diplomatic and official passports issued                       
    or serviced by the Ministry during the year.                              
                                                                              
    A concerted drive was undertaken to clear the arrears                     
    of passport applications. As a result of this, the                        
    arrears were reduced from 4.36 lakhs at the beginning                     
    of the year to 81.568 by Dec 31, 1978. Of this a                          
    total of 64,626 applicants who had not supplied                           
    essential data for inclusion in the passport or had                       
    not remitted the revised passport fee were informed                       
    that if they did not comply with the requirement by a                     
    particular date their cases would be treated as                           
    closed.                                                                   
                                                                              
    Steps were taken to improve and streamline the                            
    working of the Central Passport and Emigration                            
    Organisation through                                                      
                                                                              
    standardisation of procedure and strengthening of the                     
    staff of such organisations. During the year 1978, 32                     
    additional posts of officers and 334 additional posts                     
    of supporting staff were created. The total strength                      
    in different grades in Central Passport and                               
    Emigration organisations at the end of 1978 is given                      
    at Appendix VIII.                                                         
                                                                              
    The policy of granting leberalised endorsement at                         
    passports announced by the Minister of External                           
    Affairs last year, was given full implementation. The                     
    authority for signing verification certificates in                        
    support of passport applications was extended to MLAs                     
    of State/Union Territories and MLC and Members of                         
    Metropolitan Council of Delhi and a total of 5.44                         
    lakhs applica- tions had been so verified                                 
    representing 52 per cent of the total applications                        
    received during the year. Several measures for                            
    streamlining the procedure and cutting down delays                        
    were intro- duced following the conference of                             
    Regional Passport Offices held in Delhi in January                        
    1978. These included centralised receipt of passport                      
    applications and production of a new bilingual                            
    enquiry slips that would inform the applicants of the                     
    latest Position regarding progress of action on their                     
    applications, a standardised                                              
    acknowledgement-cum-difficiency slip; a standard                          
    letter to policy/authorities concerned narrowing down                     
    and unambiguously defining the list of enquiries; the                     
    scheme of distribution of passport forms through Post                     
    Offices was extended to cover Head Post Offices in                        
    Gujarat, Kerala, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and North-                       
    Western circle. The sworn affidavit system under                          
    which an application would be exempted from prior                         
    police verification before grant of passport was                          
    popularised in all the regions. As a result of these                      
    measures it was possible to prescribed a time- limit                      
    of five weeks for issue of passport in respect of                         
    applications supported by verification certificates                       
    or, the sworn affidavits. Proposals are also under                        
    consideration to introduce a simple and rational                          
    passport application form as well as a passport fee                       
    stamp.                                                                    
                                                                              
    In 1978, the total revenue earned by Passport Offices                     
    was Rs. 483.56 lakhs as compared to a revenue of Rs.                      
    346.79 lakhs in 1977. The expenditure in 1978 was Rs.                     
    145.03 lakhs com- pared to Rs. 104.20 lakhs in 1977.                      
    There was considerable increase of emigration of                          
    Indian workers for employment abroad during the year.                     
    The bulk of the emigrants wanted to go to West Asia,                      
    particularly to the countries of the Gulf. The                            
    government took various measures to ensure better                         
    terms and conditions of employment for Indian                             
                                                                              
    workers abroad and to protect workers from                                
    exploitation both in India and abroad at the hands of                     
    unauthorised agents and/or their touts. In February                       
    1978, an inter-ministerial committee was appointed by                     
    the Labour Minister to go into the question of                            
    overseas employment of Indian workers in all its                          
    aspects and to suggest measures for streamlining                          
    recruitment and procedure for emigra- tion. The                           
    Committee in its report submitted in September 1978                       
    recommended inter alia that a new Act should be                           
    adopted to replace the Emigration Act of 1922.                            
    Pending acceptance of the recommendations of the                          
    Inter- Ministerial Committee, the Government adopted                      
    certain measures to rationalise the procedure that                        
    would help emigrants. Individual emigrants who                            
    obtained jobs through their own efforts were allowed                      
    to emigrate on the completion of similar registration                     
    formalities without payment of required security                          
    deposit. Two more embarkation points with airports at                     
    Trivandrum and Amritsar were declared lawful for                          
    emigration in order to help emigrants from States of                      
    Kerala and Punjab. Besides the emigrants could obtain                     
    emigration clearance from any of the protectors of                        
    emigrants of India and could depart from any of the                       
    notified embarkation points declared lawful by the                        
    Govern- ment. The staff of the officers of protectors                     
    of emigrants were strengthened to enable them to                          
    grant emigration clearance to intending emigrants                         
    within 72 hours. A 24-hours emigration check was                          
    introduced at important emigrants left only after                         
    obtaining the emigration clearance from the                               
    authorities concerned. This helped in ensuring better                     
    terms and conditions of employ- ment for Indian job                       
    seekers. As a result foreign employers are now                            
    approaching the government for necessary permission                       
    to recruit workers from India which was earlier being                     
    done directly through the open market in violation of                     
    the prescribed procedure and provisions of the                            
    Emigration Act 1922.                                                      
                                                                              
    With nearly 3 million Indians living abroad and their                     
    number still increasing, there was a great increase                       
    in the Consular work of various Missions,                                 
    particularly those in West Asia and North Africa.                         
    During the year Indian Missions/Posts extended such                       
    assistance to 41 Indian nationals who were stranded                       
    there. In addition 1378 destitute Indians were                            
    repatriated from abroad, the number being more than                       
    double that of the previous year. Cases of 354                            
    Indians who died abroad and settlement of death                           
    compensation and other claims against employers were                      
    also looked into.                                                         
                                                                              
    The Consular Wing also assisted foreign Missions in                       
    India in tracing the whereabouts of their missing                         
    nationals and disposal of their bodies and their                          
    states.                                                                   
                                                                              
    An all time record of 89,524 judicial, commercial and                     
    educational documents were authenticated to                               
    facilitate their production abroad.                                       
                                                                              
    Dec 31, 1978                                                              
    Organisation And Administration                                           
                                                      Top                     
    Jan 01, 1978 CHAPTER XIV ORGANISATION AND                                 
    ADMINISTRATION                                                            
                                                                              
    Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee and Shri Samarendra Kundu                       
    were the Minister for External Affairs and Minister                       
    of State for External Affairs respectively during the                     
    year. Shri J. S. Mehta was the Foreign Secretary. The                     
    Administration was headed by Shri Thomas Abraham till                     
    June 1978 and thereafter by Shri N. P. Jain as                            
    Additional Secretary. The total strength at the                           
    Headquarters was 542 officers and 2010 non-gazetted                       
    staff. The strength of the various Cadres of the                          
    Ministry is at Appendix XIV. The implementation of                        
    the Cadres review of IFS was completed during the                         
    year. Cadres review of IFS(B) is in progress and is                       
    expected to be finalised in 1979. This would lead to                      
    a more rational staffing of IFS'B' personnel in                           
    Missions abroad.                                                          
                                                                              
    The number of resident Missions/Posts during the year                     
    was 127, including the Consulate General at Karachi                       
    which it was decided to set up during the year. In                        
    addition, India had con- current accreditation in 47                      
    countries. The strength of the staff in                                   
    Missions/Posts abroad was 650 Diplomatic Officers and                     
    2584 non-diplomatic staff including local employees.                      
    Several steps were taken to streamline representation                     
    abroad so as to strike the right balance between                          
    India's international objectives and its limited                          
    financial resources. The strength of the Mission in                       
    London was brought down by reducing the staff in the                      
    Supply Wing from 123 to 114. A study has also been                        
    commenced to streamline the procedure of the Supply                       
    Wing in Washington as also computerisation of its                         
    work in the interest of economy and efficiency.                           
    India's Consular Representation in the Gulf region                        
    was strengthened to meet India's increased                                
    responsibility in that region. Further progress was                       
    made towards development of language expertise in the                     
    Ministry. Recruitment Rules of the Interpreter Cadre                      
    were notified in June 1978 and action initiated                           
    regarding the formation of the Cadre. It is expected                      
    that with the com- mencement of recruitment of                            
    Interpreters in 1979, the Ministry                                        
                                                                              
    will soon have the services of highly qualified                           
    linguists. Extensive language training continued to                       
    be provided for IFS officers and the Ministry has now                     
    language expertise available in as many as 23                             
    languages. A comprehensive list of number of officers                     
    which have qualified in various languages is given at                     
    Appendix XV.                                                              
                                                                              
    The inflationary trend in all countries resulted in                       
    an inevitable increase in the cost of financing the                       
    activities of Indian Missions abroad. The total                           
    expenditure of the Ministry during the financial year                     
    1978-79 was estimated to be of an order of Rs. 138.28                     
    crores. Out of this Rs. 33.55 crores is for financing                     
    Missions/Posts abroad; Rs. 6.26 crores for                                
    expenditure at United Nations and other International                     
    Organisations. The balance is mainly to meet the cost                     
    of cooperation projects and programmes with respect                       
    to Nepal, Bhutan and Bangladesh. Details of                               
    expenditure are given at Appendices XII and XIII.                         
    Since the increase in the cost of Missions abroad is                      
    largely due to heavy expenditure on rental of offices                     
    and residential buildings, great stress was placed on                     
    purchase and construction of India's own property.                        
    Embassy residences were purchased in six countries                        
    (Sweden, Spain, Poland, Denmark, Norway and Ireland)                      
    and more are under active consideration.                                  
    Office-buildings were purchased in Syria and Belgium.                     
    Further progress was made in the construction of                          
    office-buildings and residential apartments in                            
    countries where the Government of India already own                       
    land. These included Thailand, Zambia, Canada,                            
    Indonesia, Nigeria and Turkey. Preliminary planning                       
    is also in hand for construction in Nepal, Pakistan,                      
    Malawi, Australia and Kuwait! The total expenditure                       
    during 1978-79 on acquisition and cons- truction of                       
    property abroad is estimated at Rs. 6.00 crores for                       
    the next financial year. A sum of Rs. 10 crores has                       
    been ear- marked for this purpose. The Government of                      
    India now owns residences in 52 countries;                                
    office-buildings in 21 countries and                                      
    office-cum-residences in 4 countries. A separate                          
    Section of the Ministry is responsible for watching                       
    and monitoring the implementation of the Reservation                      
    orders in respect of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled                       
    Tribes. Details regarding the number of Scheduled                         
    Castes/Scheduled Tribes in the total strength of the                      
    Ministry, vacancies reserved for Scheduled                                
    Castes/Scheduled Tribes and appointments made in                          
    these vacancies are given in Appendices X and XI.                         
                                                                              
    Jan 01, 1978                                                              
    Use Of Hindi In Official Work                                             
                                                      Top                     
    CHAPTER XV USE OF HINDI IN OFFICIAL WORK In                               
    accordance with the Government's policy, there was                        
    progressive increase in the use of Hindi in the work                      
    of the Ministry. Efforts were made to use Hindi in as                     
    many spheres of activity as possible and the Official                     
    Language Implementation Committee in the Ministry                         
    kept a watch over the implementation of the orders                        
    and instructions issued in this regard. The bigger                        
    Indian Missions were also asked to constitute                             
    Official Language Implementation Committees to see                        
    that orders and instructions relating to the subject                      
    were carried out in right earnest. As during the last                     
    year, the Minister for External Affairs delivered his                     
    speech in Hindi at the 33rd Session of the United                         
    Nations General Assembly in October 1978, thus giving                     
    Hindi its rightful place in the comity of nations.                        
                                                                              
    There was regular use of Hindi in protocol matters                        
    and work relating to international relations.                             
    Documents Eke "Letters of Credence", "Letters of                          
    Recall" and "Commissions of Appoint- ment" as well as                     
    other protocol documents were prepared in Hindi.                          
    Heads of Missions were advised that, while presenting                     
    credentials, they may, as far as possible, make their                     
    introductory speeches in Hindi. Apart from the above,                     
    international treaties and agreements were also                           
    prepared in Hindi for signature. The Ministry also                        
    rendered assistance to other Ministries and                               
    Departments of Government in preparing Hindi texts of                     
    such legal and formal documents. The tradition                            
    established during 1977 was continued in that on                          
    important occasions like visits of Heads of States                        
    and Heads of Governments from foreign, countries                          
    where the visiting digni- tary spoke in his own                           
    language, speeches on the Indian side were made in                        
    Hindi. A number of joint declarations were also                           
    issued in Hindi.                                                          
                                                                              
    The Ministry issued a large number of notifications                       
    and office orders in Hindi. Letters received in Hindi                     
    from the State 6 EA/78--6                                                 
                                                                              
    Governments and from members of public were                               
    invariably replied to in that language. The Ministry                      
    also sent letters in Hindi to Indian Missions abroad                      
    and to the Regional Passport Offices to the extent                        
    possible and some of the Ambassadors also correspond                      
    in Hindi with the Ministry.                                               
                                                                              
    Efforts were made to equip more Indian Missions                           
    abroad with Hindi typewriters and Hindi-knowing                           
    typists/stenographers. Twenty-two Missions were                           
    supplied with Hindi typewriters during the year and                       
    efforts are being made that all Indian Missions are                       
    supplied with such typewriters by the end of the next                     
    financial year. Instructions were issued to Regional                      
    Passport Offices located in Hindi-knowing areas to                        
    ensure that Hindi should be invariably used in                            
    addition to English in all correspondence work. The                       
    Ministry took some positive steps to create a                             
    favourable atmosphere in the propagation of Hindi                         
    abroad. They included posting of Hindi officers in                        
    the Missions in Mauritius and Trinidad and in the                         
    High Commission in Fiji. Efforts are being made to                        
    create more posts of Hindi Officers abroad. Hindi                         
    translators have already been posted to Indian                            
    Missions in London and Kathmandu. Under the scheme                        
    for the propagation of Hindi abroad, Hindi books and                      
    equipment worth nearly Rs. 3 lakhs were sent abroad                       
    during the year to libraries in Indian Missions and                       
    to voluntary organisations to enable them to meet the                     
    requirements of local people, particularly of the                         
    people of Indian origin. The Ministry also sent some                      
    Hindi newspapers and journals regularly to our                            
    Missions abroad. A Hindi newspapers exchange                              
    programme was continued under which Hindi newspapers                      
    published in foreign countries are sent to Hindi                          
    newspapers of India and vice versa.                                       
                                                                              
    The Ministry, with the help of its Missions abroad,                       
    rendered necessary assistance to those foreign                            
    nationals and non-Hindi speaking employees who learnt                     
    Hindi through correspondence courses. Efforts were                        
    made to renew and widen contacts with eminent foreign                     
    Hindi writers and to popularise Hindi in foreign                          
    countries.                                                                
                                                                              
    The "Children's Hindi Classes" scheme, started in                         
    1977 was continued and full use of it was made by the                     
    children of the employees posted abroad of the                            
    Government of India and public sector undertakings.                       
                                                                              
    The Award Committee constituted under the                                 
    chairmanship of the Minister of External Affairs met                      
    on Dec 20, 1978 and decided to award "Vishwa Hindi                        
    Puraskar" to five foreign Hindi writers :-- (1) Prof.                     
    Odolen Smekal--Czechoslovakia. (2) Dr. R. S.                              
    McGregor--Britain. (3) Prof. K. Doi--Japan. (4) Pt.                       
    Kamla Prasad Mishra--Fiji. (5) Mr. Somdath                                
    Buchkory--Mauritius. The awards, which carried no                         
    money, were presented in the form of an art piece and                     
    a citation by the Prime Minister on 24 January, 1979.                     
                                                                              
    The Indian Council of Cultural Relations financed                         
    chairs of Indian studies abroad for which                                 
    Professors/lecturers were deputed for teaching Hindi                      
    and other Indian languages. These included visiting                       
    professors of Hindi language in the University of                         
    Bucharest in Romania, a visiting lecturer of Hindi at                     
    Sofia in Bulgaria and two in the Tashkent University                      
    in the Soviet Union. For the propagation of Hindi                         
    abroad, lecturers were deputed to Trinidad, Surinam                       
    and Guyana. The Professor of Dravidian Languages in                       
    Daker (Senegal) also conducted classes in Hindi.                          
                                                                              
    The Indian Council of Cultural Relations continued to                     
    publish its quarterly Hindi publication "Gaganachal"                      
    to cater to the needs of the vast Indian community                        
    living abroad. The Council also sent regularly Hindi                      
    books for presentation to the cultural institutions                       
    and arranged to project Hindi films in foreign                            
    countries. In the cultural centres maintained by the                      
    Council in foreign countries, arrangements were made                      
    for teaching Hindi besides arranging instruction in                       
    Indian music, classical dance etc.                                        
                                                                              
    Dec 20, 1978                                                              
    Appendix I Major International                                            
    Conferences/Meetings/Seminars                                             
                                                      Top                     
    APPENDIX I                                                                
                                                                              
    Major International Conferences/                                          
    Meetings/Seminars etc. organised                                          
    by Inter-Governmental                                                     
    Organisations at which Government                                         
    of India was represented in 1978-79                                       
    -----------------------------------                                       
    S.No. Title of Conference etc.(with                                       
    venue & date)  Foreign Exchange                                           
     component of ex-                                                         
     penditure in Rs.                                                         
    -----------------------------------                                       
    1     2         3                                                         
    -----------------------------------                                       
    Commonwealth Secretariat                                                  
                                                                              
    1. Workshop on Irrigation Management,                                     
     Hyderabad, Nil.                                                          
       Oct 10, 1978 -20-10-78.                                                
                                                                              
    2. Fourth Conference of Commonwealth                                      
    Postal Ad-  4,615.00                                                      
    ministration, Kuala Lumpur, 9--22-7-78.                                   
                                                                              
    Economic and Social Commissions for                                       
    Asia and the Pacific                                                      
                                                                              
    1.  Seminar on statistics for Rural                                       
    Development, New                                                          
                                                                              
     Nil.                                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Delhi, 5--10-4-78.                                                        
                                                                              
    2.  UN-ESCAP on Adaptation Administration                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    to                                                                        
                                                                              
     NA                                                                       
      Rural Development, New Delhi,16--18-8-78.                               
                                                                              
    3.  Consultative Panel on Survey of Energy                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Resources,                                                                
                                                                              
    N.A.                                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Hanover and Committee Meetings on Natural                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Resources, Bangkok, 30-10-78--6-11-78.                                    
                                                                              
    4.  National Workshop for promotion and                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Training Nil.                                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
    of Rural Women in Income Generating                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Activities,Bangalore, 20--23-11-78.                                       
                                                                              
    5.  Int-governmental Consultative Group                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Meeting on                                                                
                                                                              
       N.A.                                                                   
       establishment of Regional Industries,                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Bangkok, 23--28-11-78.                                                    
                                                                              
    6.  Regional Consultation on                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    International Year of  N.A.                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Child for Asia & Pacific,                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Manila, 25-11-78--3-12-78.                                                
                                                                              
    7.  Expert Group Meeting on Tropical                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Hardwoords, Expenditure met by                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Pattaya, 11--15-12-78.   ESCAP.                                           
                                                                              
    8.  Technical cooperation among                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Developing Coun-  8,584.00                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
    tries Regional Working Group                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Meeting, Bangkok,18--21-12-78.                                            
    -------------------------------------                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    -------------------------------------                                     
    1      2      3                                                           
    -------------------------------------                                     
    Food and Agriculture Organisation                                         
                                                                              
    1.  2nd Expert Consultation on cross                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    breeding and Nil.                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
    breed evaluation, Hissar,                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    12--16-2-78.                                                              
                                                                              
    2.  Study Tour on Acquaculture,                                           
       China, 2-5-78--1-6-78                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
       Expenditure met by]                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     UNDP/FAO                                                                 
                                                                              
    3.  Regional Expert Group Meeting on                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Agarian Re-                                                               
                                                                              
      -do-                                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
    form and Rural Development, Bangkok,                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    8--   13-5-78.                                                            
                                                                              
    4.  4th Session of FAO Committee on                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Forestry, Rome,                                                           
                                                                              
       2,196.00                                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
    15--19-5-78.                                                              
                                                                              
    5.  Study Tour on Azolla Propagation                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    and Small Scale                                                           
                                                                              
      Expenditure                                                             
       met by Bio-Gas Production, China,                                      
       21-5-78--11-6-78.                                                      
                                                                              
      UNDP/FAO                                                                
                                                                              
    6.  12th Session of Committee on                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Fisheries, Rome,  3,660.00                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
    7--16-6-78.                                                               
                                                                              
    7.  Seminar on Action oriented follow-up                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    of 1974                                                                   
                                                                              
       Expenditure met by                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Forestry Education Planning, Manila                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
    26--10-6-78.                                                              
                                                                              
      UNDP/FAO.                                                               
                                                                              
    8.  14th Session of FAO Regional Conference                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     for Asia                                                                 
                                                                              
      50,228.00                                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
    and Far East, Kuala Lumpur,                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     25-7-78--3-8-78.                                                         
                                                                              
    9.  22nd Session of FAO Desert Locust                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Committee,  1,424.00                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Rome, 26--28-7-78.                                                        
                                                                              
    10. Technical Consultation among Developing                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Coun- Nil.                                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
    tries to develop Food and Agriculture                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Products Conservation and Processing                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    industries, Mysore, 7--15-8-78.                                           
                                                                              
    11. Study Tour on Integrated Wood                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
    processing In-Expenditure met by                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
    dustries, China, 17-8-78--22-9-78.                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    FAO/UNDP.                                                                 
                                                                              
    12. Development of Complementary use of                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Mineral   Nil.                                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Fertilizers and Organic Materials,                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    New Delhi, 14--19-9-78.                                                   
                                                                              
    13. 11th Session of Plant Protection                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Committee for2,761.00                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
    South East Asia & Pacific Region,                                         
       Kathmandu,   22--29-9-78.                                              
                                                                              
    14. 4th Session  of IGG on Jute, Kenaf and                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Allied 4,392.00 Fibres, Rome,                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
    11--13-10-78.                                                             
                                                                              
    15. 3rd Meeting of Advisory Committee                                     
       of Project for Small Scale Fisheries,                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Chittagong, 7--11-11-1978.                                                
                                                                              
    16. SIDA Workshop on Fishery Development                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Plan-                                                                     
                                                                              
    Nil.                                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    ning, Project preparation and,                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Administration,                                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Bangalore, 16-11-78--6-12-78.                                             
    ----------------------------------------                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    ----------------------------------------                                  
    1      2      3                                                           
    ----------------------------------------                                  
    17.  SIDA follow-up Seminar on Animal                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Re-production,                                                           
                                                                              
     Nil.                                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Tirupathi, 19-11-78--8-12-78.                                            
                                                                              
    18.  SIDA Seminar on Forest Resources                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Appraisal  Nil.                                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     in Forestry and Land use Planning, New Delhi,                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     27-11-78--16-12-78.                                                      
                                                                              
    19.  74th Session of FAO Council, Rome,                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     27-11-78--                                                               
                                                                              
       11,875,00                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     8-12-78.                                                                 
                                                                              
    20.  SIDA Seminar on Buffallo Reproduction                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     and Arti-                                                                
                                                                              
     Nil.                                                                     
       ficial Insemination, Karnal,4--15-12-78.                               
                                                                              
    International Atomic Energy Agency                                        
                                                                              
    1.   22nd General Conference of IAEA,                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Vienna, 18--                                                             
                                                                              
       35,619.00                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     22-9-78.                                                                 
                                                                              
    2.   1st Plenary Conference on                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
    International Nuclear                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    26,181.00 Fuel Cycle Evalution                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (INFCE), Vienna, 27-11-78--                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     1-12-78.                                                                 
                                                                              
    International Labour Organisation                                         
                                                                              
    1. Seminar on "BACHUE" Series of                                          
       Population and Expenditure met by                                      
       Employment Planning Models,New                                         
       Delhi 11-                                                              
                                                                              
     ILO.                                                                     
       12-5-78.                                                               
                                                                              
    International Telecommunication Union                                     
                                                                              
    1.  Meeting of International Consultative                                 
       Committee                                                              
                                                                              
      58,888.00                                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
    on Telephone and Telegraphs, Geneva,                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    2-4-78-15-4-78.                                                           
                                                                              
    2.  International Seminar on Switching                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
    and Signalling                                                            
                                                                              
    5,409.00                                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    by ITU, Singapore, 17-28-4-78.                                            
    3.  CCPS Steering Committee Meeting,                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Berne, 9-5-78-                                                            
                                                                              
      1,985.00                                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
    12-5-78.                                                                  
                                                                              
    4.  Meeting on International Consultative                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Committee                                                                 
                                                                              
      2,332.00                                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
    on Telephone and Telegraphs, Belgium,                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
    22-5-78- 25-5-78.                                                         
                                                                              
    5.  Third International Conference on                                     
       Software Engi-                                                         
                                                                              
    45,871.00                                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    neering for Telecommunication                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Switching System,Helsinki,                                                
       June 1978.                                                             
                                                                              
    6.  Meeting on International                                              
       Consultative Committee                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    19,355.00                                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    on Telephone and Telegraphs,                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Geneva, 5-6-78-  23-6-78.                                                 
    ---------------------------------------                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    ---------------------------------------                                   
    1       2      3                                                          
    ---------------------------------------                                   
    7.  Meeting on International Consultative                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Committee                                                                 
                                                                              
       12,905.00                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    on Telephone and Telegraphs, Geneva,                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    26-6-78--7-7-78.                                                          
                                                                              
    8.  International Seminar on Rural                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Telecommuni-   848100.00                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    cation, New Delhi, 11--22-9-78.                                           
       Incurred by UNDP,                                                      
      GOI  contribution                                                       
      was Rs. 1,00,000                                                        
                                                                              
    9. Meeting of International                                               
       Consultative Committee                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    23,668.00 on Telephone and                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Telegraphs, Geneva, 13-9-78-                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    30-9-78.                                                                  
                                                                              
    10. Meeting of EC of AOPU, Manila,                                        
       30-10-78--2,628.00 5-11-78.                                            
                                                                              
    11. Meetings of Consultative Council                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    for Postal Studies   19,437.00                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
    of UPU, Berne 13--24-11-78.                                               
                                                                              
    12. Meeting of International                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Consultative Committee                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    4,435.00 on Telephone and                                                 
       Telegraphs, London, 4--11-12-78.                                       
                                                                              
    13. Meeting of International Consultative                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Committee3,512.00                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
    on Telephone and Telegraphs,                                              
       West Germany,  11--17-12-78.                                           
                                                                              
    14. Meeting of the International                                          
       Telecommunication                                                      
                                                                              
    858.00                                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Union, Paris, 17--21-12-78.                                               
                                                                              
    United Nations Children Fund                                              
                                                                              
    1.  Executive Board 1978 Session,                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
    New York, 15-- Nil.                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
    26-5-78.                                                                  
                                                                              
    2.  Seminar on Monitoring and Evaluation                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    in Social                                                                 
                                                                              
       N.A.                                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Development, Manila.                                                      
    3.  International Congress on Nutrition,                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rio-de- Expenditure met by                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Janerio, 27-8-78--1-9-78.   UNICEF                                        
                                                                              
    4.  Conference on Primary Health, Care                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Alma Atta Nil.                                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (USSR), 6--12-9-78.                                                       
                                                                              
    5.  National Seminar on Special Nutrition                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Programme,                                                                
                                                                              
     Expenditure met by                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Srinagar, 19--21-10-78.                                                   
                                                                              
    UNICEF                                                                    
                                                                              
    United Nations Development Programme                                      
                                                                              
    1.  Workshop on Efficient use and                                         
       maintenance of                                                         
                                                                              
    Expenditure                                                               
       met by Irrigation systems at                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Farm Level, China, 24-8-78--UNDP                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
    6-9-78.                                                                   
    -------------------------------------                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    -------------------------------------                                     
    1     2     3                                                             
    -------------------------------------                                     
    United Nations Economic & Social Council                                  
                                                                              
    1.  6th & 7th Session of International                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Governmental                                                              
                                                                              
       64,586.00                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Group on Code of Conduct on                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Transnational Co-operations,                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    New York, 8--19-1-79.                                                     
                                                                              
    2.  35th Session of Human Rights                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Commission, N.A.                                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Geneva, 12-2-79--16-3-79.                                                
                                                                              
    3.  27th Session of the UN Commission                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
    on Status of15 328.00                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Women, New York, 20-3-78--5-4-78.                                         
                                                                              
    4.  1st Regional Session of Ecosoc,                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Geneva, 11-4-78-42,501.00                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    5-5-78.                                                                   
                                                                              
    5.  Regional Preparatory Committee                                        
       Meeting for Asia5,218.00                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
    and Pacific Region to prepare for                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
    the 6th World Congress on                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Prevention of Crime and Treatment                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
    of Offenders, Manila,15--19-5-78.                                         
                                                                              
    6.  4th Session of UN Commission on                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Transnational                                                             
                                                                              
     12,880.00                                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Corporation,Geneva,16--26-5-78.                                           
                                                                              
    7.  2nd Regular Session of Ecosoc,                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Geneva, 5-7-78--   35,610.00                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    4-8-78.                                                                   
                                                                              
    8.  5th Session of International                                          
       Governmental Work-  29,325.00                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
    ing Group of Code of Conduct                                              
       on Transnational Corporations,                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
    New York, 18--23-9-78.                                                    
                                                                              
    9.  Experts Meeting to prepare for                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     6th World Congress                                                       
                                                                              
     Nil.                                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
    on Prevention of Crime and                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Treatment of Offenders                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
    UK, 11--15-12-78.                                                         
                                                                              
    United Nations Educational,                                               
    Scientific and Cultural Organisation                                      
                                                                              
    1.  Seminar on Family Planning                                            
     Communication,  No Expenditure                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
    New Delhi, 1978.                                                          
                                                                              
    2.  6th European Conference on                                            
       Thermo-Physical Pro-Met by                                             
       UNESCO perties of Material,                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Dubrovnik, 26--29-6-78.                                                   
                                                                              
    3.  Regional Seminar on Training                                          
       in Cultural Admini-   -do-                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
    stration, Tokyo,                                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
    31-7-78--12-8-78.                                                         
                                                                              
    4.  Regional & Consultative Seminar                                       
       on Future                                                              
                                                                              
    Expenditure                                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
    met by Directions of Population                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Education, Manila, 14-- UNESCO                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
    21-8-78.                                                                  
                                                                              
    5.  Regional Meeting for Asia for                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
    involvement of-do-                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Youth in Kathmandu,17--22-9-78.                                           
    -----------------------------------                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    -----------------------------------                                       
    1        2         3                                                      
    -----------------------------------                                       
    6.  20th Session of General                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Conference, Paris, 24-10-78                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
    3,01,838.00 --28-11-78.                                                   
                                                                              
    7.  Meetings of Incharges of Centres                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    or Institute for                                                          
                                                                              
     Expenditure                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    met by Studies, Research and                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Documentation on Cultural                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    UNESCO Development, Berlin,                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
    5--8-12-78.                                                               
                                                                              
     United Nations General Assembly                                          
                                                                              
    1.  UN Conference on Carriage                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
    of Goods by Sea,                                                          
                                                                              
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Hamburg, 6--31-3-78.                                                      
                                                                              
    2.  17th Session of Legal                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Sub-Committee of UN Con-                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    20,332.0 ference on Peaceful                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    uses of Outer Space, Geneva,                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    13-3-78--7-4-78.                                                          
                                                                              
    3.  7th Session of the UN Conference                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    on the Law of                                                             
                                                                              
       3,40,899.00                                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Sea, Geneva, 28-3-78--19-5-68.                                            
                                                                              
    4.  Working Group of Experts on                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Environmental Law, Expenditure                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
    met by Geneva, 3--12-4-78. UN                                             
                                                                              
    5.  7th Session of 3rd UN Conference                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    on Law of Sea,                                                            
                                                                              
      1,29,640.00                                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Geneva, 11-4-78--13-5-78.                                                 
                                                                              
    6.  Special Session of UN General                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Assembly on Nam-  1,19,000.00                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
    bia, New York, 24-4-78--3-5-78.                                           
                                                                              
    7.  1st Substantive Session of the                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Committee of the                                                          
                                                                              
    28,690.00                                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Whole, New York, 3--12-5-78.                                              
                                                                              
    8.  Meeting of Foreign Ministers of                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Non-aligned Co-50,500.00                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    ordinating Bureau, Havana,                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
    15-5-78--20-5-78.                                                         
                                                                              
    9.  Special Disarmament Session of                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    the UN General                                                            
                                                                              
    2,27,098.00                                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Assembly, New York,                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
    23-5-78--28-6-78                                                          
    10. 11th Session of UN Conference                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
    of International                                                          
                                                                              
    24,529.00                                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Trade Law UNCITRAL, New Delhi,                                            
       30-5-78-- 16-6-78.                                                     
                                                                              
    11. International Civil Service                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Commission Meeting,28,450.00                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Paris, 1--29-7-78.                                                        
                                                                              
    12. Conference of Ministers of Foreign                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Affairs of Non-   1,71,000.00                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
    aligned Countries, Belgrade,                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    25-7-78--29-7-78.                                                         
                                                                              
    13. Resumed Session of UN Conference                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    on Succession 25,029.00                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
    of States in respect of Treaties,                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Vienna, 31-7-78--24-8-78.                                                 
                                                                              
    14. World Conference to Combat Racism                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
    and Racial   11,927.00                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Discrimination, Geneva,14--25-8-78.                                       
    ---------------------------------------                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    ---------------------------------------                                   
    1             2            3                                              
    ---------------------------------------                                   
    15.  Resumed 7th Session of the 3rd UN                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Conference 17,128.00                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on Law of Sea, New York,                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     18-8-78--18-9-78.                                                        
                                                                              
    16.  Resumed Session of UN Conference                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on Law of                                                                
                                                                              
     --                                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Sea, New York, 21-8-78--15-9-78.                                         
                                                                              
    17.  2nd Substantive Session of the                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     UN Committee of                                                          
                                                                              
       10,400.00                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     the Whole, New York, 5--15-9-78.                                         
                                                                              
    18.  UN Conference on Technical                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Cooperation among   42,501.00                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Developing Countries including                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Pre-Conference Meeting, Buenos                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Aires, 5--15-9-78.                                                       
                                                                              
    19.  UN Seminar on National and Local                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Institutions,                                                            
                                                                              
       39,496.00                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Geneva, 18--29-9-78.                                                     
                                                                              
    20.  33rd Session of the General                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Assembly, New York,                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     2,27,098.00                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     19-9-78--Dec. 78.                                                        
                                                                              
    21.  AALCC's 20th Annual Session,                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Seoul, Oct. 78 N.A.                                                      
                                                                              
    22.  Conference on future of Small                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Scale Mining, Expenditure met by                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Jurica, Mexico, 27-11-78--5-12-78.                                       
      UNDP.                                                                   
                                                                              
    23.  UN Disarmament Commission, New                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     York, 9--                                                                
                                                                              
     7,385.00                                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     12-12-78.                                                                
                                                                              
    24.  Working Group on Negotiable                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Instruments of  N.A.                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     UNCITRAL, New York, Jan., 1979.                                          
                                                                              
    25.  Study Group Meeting of UNIDROIT                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on Ware-                                                                 
                                                                              
    N.A.                                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     house Contacts, Rome, Jan. 1979.                                         
                                                                              
    26.  Preparatory Meeting on Law of Sea,                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Questions,                                                               
                                                                              
       15,490.00                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Mexico,  4--12-1-79.                                                     
                                                                              
    27.  International Sessional Meeting of                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     the Law of Sea,  N.A.                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Geneva, Feb. 79.                                                         
                                                                              
    28.  Preparatory Committee for new                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    International De-                                                         
                                                                              
     N.A.                                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     velopment Strategy, New York,                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     1--2-2-79.                                                               
                                                                              
    29.18th Session of, Legal Sub-Committee                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on Outer                                                                 
                                                                              
       N.A.                                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Space, New York, 12-3-79--6-4-79.                                        
                                                                              
    United Nations Industrial Development                                     
    Organisation                                                              
                                                                              
    1.   22nd Session of International                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Lead and Zinc Study 45,850.00                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Group, Vienna, 3--6-7-78.                                                
                                                                              
    2.   23rd Session of International                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Lead and Zinc Study   25,000.00                                           
       Group, Geneva, 23-11-78--1-12-78.                                      
    -------------------------------------                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    -------------------------------------                                     
    1     2     3                                                             
    -------------------------------------                                     
    World Tourism Organisation                                                
                                                                              
    1.  International Conference on Tourism                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     and Air3,460.00                                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Transport, Mexico, 15--26-4-78.                                           
                                                                              
    2.  5th Session of WTO Commission for                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
    South Asia,                                                               
                                                                              
      3,921.00                                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Tehran, 28-5-78--6-6-78.                                                  
                                                                              
    3.  WTO Research Meeting of Statistics,                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Medrid, 2--                                                               
                                                                              
    N.A.  8-12-78.                                                            
    ---------------------------------------                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
      Oct 10, 1978                                                            
    Appendix IA                                                               
                                                      Top                     
    APPENDIX IA                                                               
                                                                              
    Information received from various                                         
    Ministries/Departments                                                    
                                                                              
    ----------------------------------                                        
    1        2              3                                                 
    ----------------------------------                                        
    1. ISSA Regional Training Seminar,                                        
       New Delhi,Nil.                                                         
       Nov 04, 1978 -18 December, 1978.                                       
                                                                              
    2. ESCAP Trade Ministers' Conference                                      
       in Delhi--                                                             
                                                                              
    Rs. 3,67,713.00                                                           
       16th to 23rd Ausust, 1978.                                             
                                                                              
    3. Under the Auspices of International                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Trade Centre/                                                             
                                                                              
     Rs. 3,27,564.36                                                          
       UNCTAD/GATT, Geneva, a Seminar on                                      
       the promotion of trade by State                                        
       Trading Corporation was held in                                        
       New Delhi from 6--24 November,                                         
       1978 in cooperation with Indian                                        
       Institute of Foreign Trade/State                                       
       Trading Corporation.                                                   
                                                                              
    4. Meeting of Regional Panel of                                           
       Experts for Research                                                   
                                                                              
     Nil.                                                                     
       & Training in Literacy held                                            
       at Delhi from 19-25                                                    
       September, 1978.                                                       
                                                                              
    5. Sub-Regional Workshop on                                               
       Laboratory Procedures   Nil.                                           
       and Maintenance of School Science                                      
       Equipment with special reference                                       
       to Biology Education held at New                                       
       Delhi from 23rd Nov., to 2nd                                           
       December, 1978                                                         
       (Sponsored by UNESCO).                                                 
                                                                              
    6. Commonwealth Conference on                                             
       Non-formal Edu-                                                        
                                                                              
    Nil.                                                                      
       cation for Development held                                            
       at New Delhi from                                                      
       22nd January to 2nd Feb., 1979.                                        
                                                                              
    7. International Training Course-cum                                      
       -saminar on--                                                          
       Drugs Abuse Control and Enforcement                                    
       organised by the Directorate of                                        
       Training Customs and Central                                           
       Excise, New Delhi, in collaboration                                    
       with the Central Training Unit of                                      
       the United Nations Division on                                         
       Narcotics Drugs, Geneva.  It                                           
       was held at Vigyan Bhavan, New                                         
       Delhi/India from 6-3-78 to 17-3-78                                     
       Shri R.N. Kaul, Dy. Supdt. of Police,                                  
       CB1/N&CC,New Delhi attended the                                        
       Course-cum-saminar.                                                    
                                                                              
    8. Round Table on Adaptation of                                           
       Administration to   Nil.                                               
       Rural Development 16--18                                               
       August, 1978, New Delhi                                                
       (Collaboration Govt. of                                                
       India--UN ESCAP)                                                       
                                                                              
    9. Tenth Session of the Textile                                           
       Committee of ILO,Rs. 7,768.30                                          
       Geneva from 4--13 April, 1978.                                         
    ----------------------------------                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    ----------------------------------                                        
    1            2          3                                                 
    ----------------------------------                                        
    10.  Regional Seminar Organised by                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     ILO/Switzerland  Nil.                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     for vocational Training                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     System--Design etc.,                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Indonesia, from 17-4-78 to                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     12-5-1978.                                                               
                                                                              
    11.  First Conference of the Labour                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Ministers of non-Rs. 7,248.63                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     aligned and other developing                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     countries on the Theme                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Employment and Human Resources,                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Tunis from the 24th to 27th                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     April, 1978.                                                             
                                                                              
    12.  ARPLA High level meeting on                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Labour Adminis-                                                          
                                                                              
     Nil.                                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     tration Manila 8--12-5-1978.                                             
                                                                              
    13.  206th Session of the Governing                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Body of ILO and  Rs. 14,264.55                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     its various Committee                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     meeting, Geneva from                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     25-5-78 to 3-6-78.                                                       
                                                                              
    14.  64th Session of the International                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Labour Confer-                                                            
                                                                              
    Rs. 2,85,582.50                                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     ence of ILO Geneva from 7th to                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     28th June, 1978.                                                         
                                                                              
    15.  ILO DANIDA/Seminar on Financial                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Management                                                               
                                                                              
       Nil                                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of Rural Cooperatives.Copenhagan,                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     (Denmark)from 16-8-78 to 7-9-1978.                                       
                                                                              
    16.  ARPLA Seminar on Extending Labour                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Ministry's                                                               
                                                                              
     Nil.                                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Service to Rural Areas Dacca                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (Bangladesh) from 18--23-9-78.                                            
                                                                              
    17.  Tripartite Advisory meeting on                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Night work Gen- Nil.                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     eva, 26-9-78 to 3-10-78.                                                 
                                                                              
    18.  Second Tripartite Technical                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Meeting for the Food                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 7,878.48 Products, and                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Drink Industries of ILO,                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Geneva from 17--26                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     October, 1978.                                                           
                                                                              
    19.  208th Session of the Governing                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Body of ILO  Rs. 29,259.17                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     and its various Committee                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     meetings Geneva, from                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     6--17 Nov. 1978.                                                         
                                                                              
    20.  ILO/ARPLA Workshop on Making                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Labour Ins-                                                              
                                                                              
      Nil.                                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     pection Mere effective                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Bangkok, from 13--18th                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     November, 1978.                                                          
                                                                              
    21.  ILO/SIDA Project on Strengthening                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Inter Coope-   Nil.                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     rative Relations Workshop,                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Singapore from 15-1-79                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     to 26-1-79.                                                              
                                                                              
    22.  Commonwealth Ministerial Meeting                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on common                                                                
                                                                              
      Rs. 9,326.00                                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     fund at London on 13th and 14th                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     April, 1978.                                                             
                                                                              
    23.  Second Regional Preparatory meeting                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of the UN  Rs. 2,154.00                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Conference on Science and                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Technology, Bangkok,                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     17--21 July, 1978.                                                       
    -----------------------------------------                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    -----------------------------------------                                 
    1          2               3                                              
    -----------------------------------------                                 
    24.  Consultative meeting on a convention                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of Inter-   Rs. 3,880.00                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     national Multi-Model Transport,                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Bangkok, 24--28  July 1978.                                              
                                                                              
    25.  18th Session (First Part of the                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Trade and Develop- Rs. 5,475.00                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     ment Board of the UNCTAD)                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     at Geneva from 29th August to                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     15th September, 1978.                                                    
                                                                              
    26.  Third Session of the ESCAP                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Committee on Industry                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 5,090,00                                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Housing and Technology,                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Bangkok--September,                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     19--25, 1978.                                                            
                                                                              
    27.  ECWA Conference in Amman                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (2-10-1978 to Nil.                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     6-10-1978).                                                              
                                                                              
    28.  Third Session of ESCAP Committee                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on Statistics,                                                           
                                                                              
     Rs. 5,090,00                                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Bangkok, 17--23 Oct., 1978.                                              
                                                                              
    29.  Second Part of the 8th Session                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of the Committee on                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 10,400.00                                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Invisibles and Financing related                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     to Trade at Geneva from 23rd                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     October, to 3rd November, 1978.                                          
                                                                              
    30.  Fifth Session of ESCAP Committee                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on Natural  Rs, 10.296.00                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Resources, Bangkok 31st                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     October, to 6th Novem-                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     ber, 1978.                                                               
                                                                              
    31.  Second Session of ESCAP Committee                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on shipping                                                              
                                                                              
    Rs. 14,870.00                                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Transport and Communication,                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Bangkok 14--22 November, 1978.                                           
                                                                              
    32.  Resumed Session of the Second                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Nagotiating Con-Rs. 11,750.00                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     ference on the Common Fund at                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Geneva from 14th                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     to 27th November, 1978.                                                  
                                                                              
    13.  Inter-Governmental Consultative                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Group Meeting                                                            
                                                                              
     Rs. 6,860.00                                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     among National Planning Bureaux                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     with partici- pation of Dev.                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Banks on the establishment of                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     regional industries, Bangkok,                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     November, 23--28 1978.                                                   
                                                                              
    34.  Second Session of the Committee                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on Social De-velopment at Bangkok,                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     6--12 December, 1978. Rs.2,745.00                                        
    35.  Second Session of the Committee                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on Population                                                            
                                                                              
      Rs. 5,190.00                                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     at Bangkok, 13--19 Dec., 1978.                                           
                                                                              
    36.  Meeting of the Ad-hoc Group of                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Ministers of                                                             
                                                                              
    Rs. 7,090.00                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     ESCAP, Bangkok, January 30--31,                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     1979.                                                                    
                                                                              
    37.  Sixth Session of the Standing                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Committee of Bang-Rs. 4,050.00                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     kok Agreement, Jan. 30--Feb.                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     2, 1979.                                                                 
                                                                              
    38.  Thirty-Fifth Session of the                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     ESCAP Bangkok,Rs. 50,000.00                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     March 5--46, 1979 (to be held).                                          
    -------------------------------------                                     
    6 EA/78--7.                                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    -------------------------------------                                     
    1             2             3                                             
    -------------------------------------                                     
    39.  CCIR Plenery Assembly held at                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Kyoto Japan dur-Rs.13,290.00                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     ing May-June, 1978 attended                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     by Chief Engineer                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     and Additional Chief Engineer.                                           
                                                                              
    40.  Meeting of Indo-U.S. Sub-Commission                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
      on Edu-   Rs. 3,359.23                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     cation & Culture May 13-17, 1978                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     at New York                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     USA (Sanction conveyed vide Deptt.                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of Culture letter No.                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     F.11-11/78-CII (I) dated 12-5-78).                                       
                                                                              
    41.  Special Preparatory Meeting of                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     CCIR for WARC- Rs. 20,150.00                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     79 held at Geneva from 23rd                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    October, to 17th November, 1978                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
    attended by Chief Engineer, All                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     India Radio.                                                             
                                                                              
    42.  20th Session of the General                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Conference of UNES-                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Rs. 750. 00                                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     CO at Paris (France)                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (from 24-10-1978 to 28-11-78)                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Shri G.S. Bhargava, Principal                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     information Officer attended from                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     11-11-1978 to 18-11-1978.                                                
                                                                              
    43.  Seminar on the teaching about                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Commonwealth                                                             
                                                                              
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     held at Kenya (Nairobi) from                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     August 20 to Septem-                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     ber 1, 1978.                                                             
                                                                              
    44.  Inter-country Mobile Training                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Programme in Popu-                                                       
                                                                              
      --                                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     lation Education from September                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     11--25, 1978sponsored by UNESCO                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Programme. (Bangkok).                                                    
                                                                              
    45.  International Congress on the                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Teaching of Human Rs. 4,302.75                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rights held at Vienna from 12-16                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
    September,  1978.                                                         
                                                                              
    46.  Second Regional Workshop of                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Pupil Evaluation with particular                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     reference to Moral Education spon-                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     sored by UNESCO from September                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     12 to October                                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     10, 1978 held at Tokyo (Japan).                                          
                                                                              
    47.  Study Group meeting on the                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Development of Curri-                                                     
                                                                              
      --                                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     culum Materials, Teacher                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Education Materials and Science                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Instructional Materials organised                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     by UNESCO held at Bangkok from                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     December 4--19,                                                          
                                                                              
    1978.                                                                     
                                                                              
    48.  Technical Working Group Meeting                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on Alternative--                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Structures Linking Formula and                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Non-formal Edu-cation with Special                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Emphasis on Universalization                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of Education held at Bangkok from                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     October 2--14,                                                           
                                                                              
    1978.                                                                     
                                                                              
    49.  Commonwealth Regional In-service                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Teacher Edu- --                                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     cation Workshop for Asia in                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Colombo (Sri Lanka) from October                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     23 to November 3, 1978.                                                  
    -------------------------------------                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    -------------------------------------                                     
     1         2      3                                                       
    -------------------------------------                                     
    50.  Technical Working Group Meeting                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on Selection, Maintenance and                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Repair of Science Equipment                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     organised jointly by the APEID                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     and the SEAMEO Regional Centre                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of Education in Science and                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     mathematics held at Penang from                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     November 2--11,                                                          
                                                                              
    1978.                                                                     
                                                                              
    51.  Asian Sub-Regional Workshop                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     in Educational   --                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Technology held at Kathmandu,                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Nepal from 7th to 21st                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     November, 1978.                                                          
                                                                              
    52.  UNESCO Regional Training                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Workshop--System Approach to                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Education and Teacher                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     In-service programme held                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     at Bangkok from Nov. 20 to                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Dec. 2,1978.                                                             
                                                                              
    53.  Study Group meeting on the                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Development of Curri-  --                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     culam Materials, Teacher                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Education Materials and                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Science Instructional                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Materials organised by UNE-                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     SCO held at Bangkok from                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     December 4--19,1978.                                                     
                                                                              
    54.  Regional Meeting for Policies                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Studies in Training of                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Educational Personnel held at                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Bangkok from 3rd to 6th                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     January, 1979 ((Sponsored                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     by UNESCO).                                                              
                                                                              
    55.  Regional Workshop on the                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Development of Low                                                       
                                                                              
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     cost aids for Science Teaching                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     at the first level of                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Education to be held at NIER,                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     JAPAN from January 18 to                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     February 17, 1979.                                                       
                                                                              
    56.  Regional Workshop for a Joint                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Study on Moral --                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Education in Asia to be                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     organised by NIER, Japan                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     from 2-31 March, 1979.                                                   
                                                                              
    57.  First Symposium on prevention                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of unlawful inter-                                                       
                                                                              
     --                                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     ference with Civil Aviation                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     held at Paris on 1-3-78                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     to 3-3-78.                                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Shri T.V. Rajeshwar, Director                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Civil Aviation --                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Security, Ministry of Tourism                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
    and Civil Aviation, New Delhi.                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     AND                                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Shri MK.  Baroah, DD/MHA, New                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Delhi attended the conference.                                            
                                                                              
    58.  "improving methods of planning                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     for comprehensive                                                        
                                                                              
     Nil.                                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     regional development" held                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     in Japan--16th May                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     to 12th June, 1978                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (UN Centre for Regional                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Development, Nagoya Japan).                                              
    ------------------------------------                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    ------------------------------------                                      
     1           2           3                                                
    ------------------------------------                                      
    59.  First International Symposium on                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Crime Preven- tion held at Paris                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     from 30th May 1978 to 1st June,                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     1978                                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Shri E.N. Rension, Jt.Director/CBI                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     attended the                                                             
                                                                              
      Rs. 13,705.00                                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Symposium.                                                               
                                                                              
    60.  Tripartite review meeting of the                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Asian PacificNil.                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Development Administration                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Centre, Kuala Lum-pur (UNDP)                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (held on 11 October, 1978).                                               
                                                                              
    61.  47th General Assembly Session                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     at Panama from 19-10-78 to                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     26-10-78.                                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     (i) Shri John Lobo, Director/CBI                                         
      Rs. 25,836.60                                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (ii) Shri P.V. Hingorani, Addl.                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
       Director/CBI as                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
       Leader.   Rs. 22,150.00                                                
                                                                              
       (iii) Shri R.K. Kapoor, JD/IB--as                                      
     member  not known                                                        
                                                                              
       (iv) Shri P.A. Rosha, IGP, Haryana                                     
    --as membernot known                                                      
                                                                              
       (v) Shri M.S. Mehta, Director,                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
       Revenue Intelligence                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
      not known  --as member.                                                 
                                                                              
    62.  Meeting of the Heads of the                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
      National Drug Depart-                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     ments in Kuwait from 8.1.79                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     to 9.1.79                                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     (i)  Shri J. S. Baba, Jt.                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
      Director/CBI                                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     (ii) Shri M.L. Wadhawan, Narcotics                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
      Commissioner of India attended                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     the meeting.                                                             
                                                                              
      Rs. 5631.90                                                             
                                                                              
    63.  Meeting of the operational Heads                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of National Uarbotic Law                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     enforcement Agencies for East                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Re-gion held at Sri Lanka.                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Shri P.C. Srivastava, AIG/CBI                                            
       Rs. 4602.00                                                            
                                                                              
    64.  Seventh Session of the United                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Nations Conference Rs.9430.00                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on the Law of the sea at                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Geneva from 22-4-78 to                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     20-5-78 attended by Rear                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Admiral FL Fraser,                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Chief Hydrographer to the                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Govt. of India.                                                          
                                                                              
    65.  Resumed Seventh Session of                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     the United Nations                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Conference on the Law of                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     the Sea at New York                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     from 21-8-78 to 15-9-78                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     attended by Rear Admiral                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     RL Fraser, Chief Hydrographer                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     to the Govern-ment of India                                              
     Rs. 5215.00                                                              
                                                                              
    66.  Nineteenth Session of the IMCO                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Sub-Committee on Radio                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Communications in London                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     from 3-9-78 to 9-9-78, attended                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     by LT Cdr RG Chitnis, Notices                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     to Mariners Officers                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 3115.00                                                              
    -------------------------------------                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    -------------------------------------                                     
    1       2           3                                                     
    -------------------------------------                                     
    67.  Seventh Session of the Third                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     United Nations Con-ference on                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     the Law of the Sea held at                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Geneva-attended by Commodore                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     O. P. Sharma J.A.G.(Navy)                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     from 27 Mar to 23 Apr 78 vide                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Government of India, Ministry                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of External Affairs Memoran-                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     dum No. L/122(10)/78 of 22 Mar                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     1978.                                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Cash Allowance plus tips for                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     the period 27 Mar 78                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 9431.85 to 23 Apr 78                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     paid by PMI Geneva and expended.                                         
                                                                              
    68.  Seventh UN Conference on the                                         
      Law of the Sea Indian delegation                                        
                                                                              
      Geneva from 26-3-78 to 29-4-78.                                         
      case processed by the Ministry of                                       
      External Affairs.                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
    69.  Fourth Ophiolite Field Conference                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of the IGCP                                                              
                                                                              
      Rs. 15,016.00                                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Project (UNESCO), USSR from                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     30-7-78 to 15-8-78                                                       
                                                                              
    70.  Indo-Australian Workshop on                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Phosphorites un-NIL (Expenses                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     were der IGCP (UNESCO) Project,                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Canberra (Aus-met by the or-                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     tralia) from 13-8-78 to                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     24-8-78. ganisers).                                                      
                                                                              
    71.  UNESCO sponsored Symposium on                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Run off Gla-                                                             
                                                                              
    Rs. 3,684.00                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     cier at Tbilisi (USSR) from                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     2-9-78 to 12-9-78 and                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     UNESCO workshop on World                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Glacier Inventory at Valais                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (Switzerland) 13-9-78                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     to 25-9-78.                                                              
                                                                              
    72.  IGCP (UNESCO) Project 26 and                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     I.M.A. meetingsRs. 17,498.00                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     at NOVOSIBIRSK and MOSCOW                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     from 4-9-78 to   16-9-78.                                                
                                                                              
    73.  RMRDC meeting of the ESCAP,                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Bandung from  Rs. 3,944.97                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     19-9-78 to 26-9-78.                                                      
                                                                              
    74.  Annual meeting of the IGCP                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (UNESCO)Project Rs. 14,619.00                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     No. 107.  Vienna from                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     20-9-78 to 28-9-78.                                                      
                                                                              
    75.  International workshop                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     meeting of UNESCO                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 2,048.00                                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     sponsored  IGCP Project Nos.                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     4 and 106. Budapest from                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     2-10-78 to 6-10-78.                                                      
                                                                              
    76.  Field Conference of the LGCP                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Project No.118 Rs. 10,923.00                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     (UNESCO) USA from 8-10-78                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     to 22-10-78.                                                             
                                                                              
    77.  Third working Group meeting                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on Stratigraphic Correlation                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
    of Sedimentary basins of ESCAP.                                           
       Bangkok from 8-11-78 to 17-11-78.                                      
      Rs. 7,612.20                                                            
                                                                              
    78.  Meeting of the Sub-commission                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     for S.E. Asia (Total amount for                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of Commission for the Geological                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Map of the Bangkok meetings                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     World. Bangkok from 11-11-78                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     to 18-11-78.   from  Sl. Nos.                                            
                                                                              
    79.  The Regional meeting of the                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     head of the National 77--80).                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Committees of IGCP and                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     GEOSEA Conference. Bangkok                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     from 10-11-78 to 17-11-78.                                               
    ------------------------------------                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    ------------------------------------                                      
    1         2       3                                                       
    ------------------------------------                                      
    80. COGEODATA Seminar on IGCP Project                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     No. 98. Bangkok from 8-11-78                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     to 14-11-78.                                                             
                                                                              
    81.  Meeting of the IGCP Project                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     No. 129. Bahia NIL  (Expenses                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     (Brazil) from 24-11-78 to                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     4-12-78. were  met by the                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     host country).                                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
    82.  Conference on the Future of                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Small Scale Mining                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     NIL  (Expenses                                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     (Sponsored by the UNITAR).                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Jurica (Mexico)                                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     were  met by the                                                         
                                                                              
      from 27-11-78 to 5-12-78. UNDP).                                        
                                                                              
    83.  To attend 9th Session of Inter-                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Governmental Mari-  Rs.  5,043                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     time Consultative Organisation's                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (IMCO) Marine Environment                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Protection Committee at U.K. from                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     30-4-78 to 5-5-78.                                                       
                                                                              
    84. To attend 15th Session of                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Technical Cooperation  Rs. 17,096                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Committee and 40th Session of                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Council (IMCO) at U.K. from                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     17-5-78 to 26-5-78.                                                      
                                                                              
    85.  Training in Model oil combating                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     skills at the Cen-Expenditure was                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    tre in Meneal Islands, Established                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     under IMCO                                                               
                                                                              
       borne  by  Inter                                                       
    -                                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
    administration for the mediteranean                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Region, atGovernmental Mar                                               
    i-                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Malta from 4-6-78 to 14-6-78.                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     time  Consultati                                                         
    ve                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Organisation.                                                            
                                                                              
    86. To attend International Conference                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on Training                                                              
                                                                              
    Rs. 34,883                                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     and Certification of Seafarers at                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     U.K. from 14-6-78  to 7-7-78.                                            
                                                                              
    87.  To attend the Inter-Governmental                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     consultative  Rs. 1,054                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     meeting on the Convention on                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     International Multi-modal                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Transport meeting at Bangkok                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     from 24-7-78 to 28-7-78.                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     (Organised by ESCAP).                                                    
                                                                              
    88. To attend 2nd Course for maritime                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     administration  Entire expenditu                                         
    re                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on prevention and Control of                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Pollution at Sweden                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     borne by Swedish                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     from 9-8-78 to 17-8-78.                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     (Organised by IMCO).                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     International  D                                                         
    e-                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    velopment  Authority.                                                     
                                                                              
    89.  To attend 19th Session of                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     IMCO Sub-Committee                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
      Rs. 2,770                                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on Radio Communication at                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     U.K. from 4-9-78 to 8-9-78.                                              
                                                                              
    90.  ESCAP Workshop on shippers                                           
      (Cooperation at  No  expenditure                                        
                                                                              
       Bangkok from 18-9-78 to 22-9-78).                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    was  involved  as                                                         
       all  the  expend                                                       
    i-                                                                        
      ture  on  travel                                                        
                                                                              
      and daily allow-                                                        
                                                                              
      ance  etc.  was                                                         
                                                                              
       borne  by  the                                                         
                                                                              
       ESCAP, Bangkok.                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    ------------------------------------                                      
    1         2          3                                                    
    ------------------------------------                                      
    91.  To attend 5th Session of I.P.G.                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Multimodal Trans-                                                        
                                                                              
     Rs, 7,420                                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     port Convention at Geneva from                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     18-9-78 to 6-10-78                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     (Organised by UNCTAD).                                                   
                                                                              
    92.  To attend 41st Session of IMCO                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Council at Lon-                                                          
                                                                              
     Rs. 11,163                                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     don from 20-10-78 to 29-10-78.                                           
                                                                              
    93.  To attend Second Meeting of                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     ESCAP Committee Rs. 3,900                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     approx on shipping, Transport                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     and Communication held                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     at Bangkok from 14-11-78                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     to 22-11-78.                                                             
                                                                              
    94.  To attend IMCO's 10th Session                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of Marine Envi-                                                          
                                                                              
    Rs. 2,733                                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     ronment Protection Committee                                             
       at U.K.from 4-12-78 to 8-12-78.                                        
                                                                              
    95.  To attend IMCO's 11th Session                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of Sub-Committee   Rs. 2.733                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on Standards of Training and                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Watchkeeping at U.K. from                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     21-1-79 to 26-1-79.                                                      
                                                                              
    96.  Tokyo  Seminar on Tanker                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Safety and Pollution                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (Total expenditure                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Prevention at Tokyo from                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     19-2-1979 to 23-1-79                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     will be borne by                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     (Organised by IMCO).                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     IMCO Japan).                                                             
                                                                              
    97.  To attend IMCO's 13th Session                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of Sub-committee,   Rs. 2,733                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on Life Saving Appliances at                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     U.K. from 26-2-1979 to 2-3-79.                                           
                                                                              
    98.  To attend IMCO's Session of                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     sub-committee on Rs. 2,733                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Radio Communications at                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    U.K. from 26-3-79 to 30-3-79.                                             
    ----------------------------------                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
      Nov 04, 1978                                                            
    Appendix II Major International                                           
    Conferences/Meetings/Seminars                                             
                                                      Top                     
    APPENDIX II                                                               
                                                                              
    Major International Conferences                                           
    /Meetings/Seminars organised by                                           
    Non-Govern-Menial Organisations                                           
    ,at which India was represented                                           
    with Government assistance                                                
    in 1978-79                                                                
                                                                              
    --------------------------------                                          
    S.No. Title of Conference                                                 
    (with venue & date)Foreign                                                
    \ Exchange component of ex-                                               
     penditure in  Rs.                                                        
    --------------------------------                                          
    1     2      3                                                            
    --------------------------------                                          
    1.   Pata Development Authority                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Meeting, Sen Fran-                                                       
                                                                              
    Nil.                                                                      
     cisco, Jan 16, 1979 -24-1-1979.                                          
                                                                              
    2.   Finance Workshop of Pata,                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Hongkong, 11--18-2-                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     2779.00                                                                  
                                                                              
    1979.                                                                     
                                                                              
    3.   IUFRO International Symposium                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on Tiger, New   Nil.                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Delhi, 22--24-2-1979.                                                    
                                                                              
    4.   5th Session of Committee on                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Food Aid Policies  6124.00                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     and Programmes, Rome,                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     10--21-4-1978.                                                           
                                                                              
    5.   Meeting of the Sub-Committee                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of ISO on Spices                                                         
                                                                              
     1250.00                                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     and Condiments, Sri Lanka,                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     24--26-4-1978.                                                           
                                                                              
    6.   Symposium of Livestock                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Development Programme                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Expenditure  met                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     for Asian Small Farmers,                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Sydney, 14--19-5-1978.                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     by Australia.                                                            
                                                                              
    7.   Seminar on guidelines for                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Agriculture and Rural 10374.00                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Development, UK and USSR,                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     20-5-78 to 5-6-78.                                                       
    8.   46th General Session of the                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Committee of Epizoo-   Nil.                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     tice (OIE), Paris,                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     22--27-5-78.                                                             
                                                                              
    9.   Tenth International Congress                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on Irrigation and   6500.00                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Drainage, Athens, 24-5-78                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     to 3-6-78.                                                               
                                                                              
    10.  9th International Seminar                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on Integrated Rural                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Expenses  met Cooperation                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Development, Tokyo,                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     9--22-6-78.   by  AARRO.                                                 
                                                                              
    11.  SEAFDOC Conference on                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Asian Aquaculture                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Expenses met by                                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Planning, Manila, 7--13-8-78.                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
      SEAFOC.                                                                 
                                                                              
    12.  Sussex university Women                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Project Conference,                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Expenses met by                                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Manila, 7--13-8-78.                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Susses  University.                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    13.  Regional Training Seminar on                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Development Plan- Expenses                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     met by ning, Bangkok,                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     14-9-78 to 25-10-78. UNADI.                                              
                                                                              
    14.  16th World Poultry Congress,                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Brazil, 17--21-9-78.6190.00                                              
    ---------------------------------                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    ---------------------------------                                         
    1    2       3                                                            
    ---------------------------------                                         
    15.  Annual Conference of                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    International Research                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Nil. Group on Wood                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Preservation in Peebles, UK,                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     17--22-9-78.                                                             
                                                                              
    16.  IX International Heart                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Congress of International                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     600.00 Society for Heart                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Research, New Delhi, 28-9-78-                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     2-10-78.                                                                 
                                                                              
    17.  Technical Meeting on Social                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Welfare Aspect of                                                        
                                                                              
     Nil.                                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Family Planning, Manila,                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     2--13-10-78.                                                             
                                                                              
    18.  18th & 19th Meeting of                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Executive Committee of                                                   
     10802.00                                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     AARRO, Cairo, 6--15-10-78.                                               
                                                                              
    19.  World Travel Conference of                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     ASTA Acapulco,   6711.00                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     (USA), 12--22-10-78.                                                     
                                                                              
    20.  8th World Forestry Congress,                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Indonesia, 16-Expenditure met                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     28-10-78.                                                                
                                                                              
      by FAO/SIDA                                                             
                                                                              
    21.  6th Session of Committee on                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Food Aid Policies and                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     5392.00 Programmes, Rome,                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     23--31-10-78.                                                            
                                                                              
    22.  Grouped meetings or the                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Committees and sub.                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
      28832.00 Committees in                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Iron ore, Sydney, 27-10-78                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     to   17-11-78.                                                           
                                                                              
    23.  Fifth International                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Congress on Hormonal                                                      
       1050.00 Steroids, New                                                  
       Delhi, 29-10-78--4-11-78                                               
                                                                              
    24.  3rd Session of APRACA                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Executive Committee,                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     1000.00 Kathmandu,                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     5--8-11-78.                                                              
                                                                              
    25.  Study Meeting on                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Distribution of Agriculture                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
    In-                                                                       
                                                                              
     Expenditure  met                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     puts, Tokyo, 7--15-11-78.                                                
                                                                              
     by APO,  Tokyo.                                                          
                                                                              
    26.  4th Meeting of Sub-                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Commission for South                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    East 2274.00                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Asia of CG, Map of                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     World, Bangkok,                                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
    11--16-11-78.                                                             
                                                                              
    27.  7th International                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Fisheries Fair and                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Technical Expenditure                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     met Seminar, Oslo,                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     20-23-11-78. by Export                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Council of Norway.                                                        
                                                                              
    28.  PATA Development Authority                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Meeting, Hawaii,  5409.00                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Tokyo, Hongkong, 4-14-12-78.                                             
                                                                              
    29.  Meeting of the Joint                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Coordination Committee of                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Expenditure  met                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     the Project on Rural                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Markets in Asia, Bangkok,                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     by FAO.   6-9-12-78.                                                     
                                                                              
    30.  10th International Congress                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of Anthropological 400.00                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     and Ethnological Sciences,                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     New Delhi, 10-16.12.78                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    --------------------------------                                          
    1        2      3                                                         
    --------------------------------                                          
    31.  Seminar on Visual Com. in                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Asia organised in Bom-Nil.                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     bay on November, 13--16,                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     1978 by Asian Mass                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Communication Research                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     & Information Centre                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     in Cooperation with Bombay                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     University and Bharatiya                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Vidya Bhavan.  Shri H.Y.                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Sharada Prasad, Director                                                 
      delivered the Keynote address.                                          
                                                                              
    32.  International Council for                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Correspondence edu-  Nil.                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     cation held at New Delhi                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     from November 8--15, 1978.                                               
                                                                              
    33.  Asian Regional Seminar on                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Education held at Jai- Nil.                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     pur from October 30 to                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     November 3, 1978 (Orga-                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    nised by Indian Council                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
    for International Amity).                                                 
                                                                              
    34.  Conference on Integrated                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Science Education held                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 5,428.60                                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     at Netherland from March                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     28 to April 7, 1978.                                                     
                                                                              
    35.  12th Annual Conference of                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     the Law of the Sea Nil.                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Institute at The Hague                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     from 23-10-78 to 27-10-78                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (Under  arrange-attended by                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Rear Admiral FL Fraser,                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Chief Hydro-ments by the Law                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     grapher to the Govt. of                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    India. of the Sea Insti-                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    tute, Netherlands).                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
    36.  Group meetings of the                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     International Standards                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 5,137 Organisation                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     held at Sydney (Australia)                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     from 31-10-78 to 10-11-78.                                               
                                                                              
    37.  IIFT study of freight                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     tariffs and conference                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     practi-   No expenses to                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     ces at Geneva, London,                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     New York,Govt. All expen-                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Washington  and  San-                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Francisco from diture                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on travel 25-6-78 to                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     31-7-78. and subsistance                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     allowance  was borne by UNDP                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     under ITC/SIDA fellowship.                                               
    38.  To attend the meeting of                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Working Group on Rs. 5,043                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Cross Trades under the Indo                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     -Soviet Joint Committee on                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Shipping held at Moscow from                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     3-4-79 to 9-4-1978.                                                      
                                                                              
    39.  To discuss the Indo-GDR                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Bilateral Shipping                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 4,000 approx.                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Agreement in Berlin from                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     27-8-78 to 2-9-78.                                                       
                                                                              
    40.  To attend Second Meeting                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of Indo-Soviet Joint                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 6,167. Committee on                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Shipping in Moscow from                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     19-9-78   to 25-9-78.                                                    
                                                                              
    41.  To attend Meeting of the                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Competent Authority                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 375 under Protocol                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on Inland Water Transit                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     & Trade between Govt. to                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     India and Bangladesh in                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Dacca (Bangladesh) in                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     June 1978 (12-6-78 to                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     17-6-78).                                                                
    ------------------------------                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Jan 16, 1979                                                              
    Appendix III Miscellaneous International Conferences                      
                                                      Top                     
    APPENDIX III                                                              
                                                                              
    Miscellaneous International                                               
    Conferences etc. in 1978-79                                               
    at which Government of                                                    
    India was represented or                                                  
    at which India was                                                        
    represented with Government                                               
    of India's assistance                                                     
                                                                              
    -------------------------------                                           
    S.No. Title of Conference (with                                           
    venue and date) Foreign Exchange                                          
    component of expenditure in Rs.                                           
    -------------------------------                                           
    1       2  3                                                              
    -------------------------------                                           
    1.   Regional Seminar on                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Institution Building and                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     2473.00 Technological                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Education, Kathmandu,                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
    May 08, 1978  12-5-78.                                                    
                                                                              
    2.   Preparatory Committee Meeting                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     'Role of Women'                                                          
                                                                              
    13059.00                                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     in Development, Baghdad,                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     3-5-6-78.                                                                
                                                                              
    3.   Preparatory Committee Meeting                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
      for World Con-                                                          
                                                                              
    20085.00                                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     ference, Vienna, 19-30-6-78.                                             
                                                                              
    4.   UNIDO Workshop on Management                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of Transfer                                                              
                                                                              
    Nil.                                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     and Development of Technology                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     in Public Enter- prises,                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Lubljana,Yugoslavia,19-24-6-78.                                           
                                                                              
    5.   XIII International Congress                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
    on Diseases of Chest,4476.00                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Kyoto, 2-7-7-78.                                                         
                                                                              
    6.   2nd Australia-Asian Pacific                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Foresenic Sciences                                                       
                                                                              
      Nil.                                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Congress, Australia, 19-28-                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     7-78.                                                                    
    7.   4th Regional Conference of                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Ministers of Educa-12292.00                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     tion, Colombo, 24-7-78 to                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     1-8-78.                                                                  
                                                                              
    8.   First Foundation Assembly                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Session of ICPE,   2685.00                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Lubljana, Yugoslavia,                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     July 1978.                                                               
                                                                              
    9.   Annual Convention of Society                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of American Travel  3345.00                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Writers, USA, 30-8-78 to                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     3-9-78.                                                                  
                                                                              
    10.  25th Anniversary of Foundation                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of Scientific Board                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Expenditure met                                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of International Potash                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Institute, Berne, 4-8-9-78.                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     by IPI.                                                                  
                                                                              
    11.  XXIV World Conference of                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     the International  1857.00                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Union Against Tuberculosis,                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Brussels, 5-9-9-78.                                                      
                                                                              
    12.  1st Meeting of the Council                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of ICPE, Lubljana, 3797.00                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Yugoslavia, Oct 1978.                                                    
    ---------------------------------                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    ---------------------------------                                         
      1   2   3                                                               
    ---------------------------------                                         
    13.  FAO Expert Consultation on                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Increasing Agricul-Expenditure                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     met tural Production, Bali,                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     9-14-10-78.                                                              
                                                                              
       by FAO.                                                                
                                                                              
    14.  Conference of Indo-Soviet Group                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
      of Non-Ferrous                                                          
                                                                              
      1794.00                                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Metallurgy, Moscow, 7-23-10-78.                                          
                                                                              
    15.  FAO Workshop on Organic                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Materials and Social                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Expenditure met                                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Productivity, Alexandria,                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     9-18-10-78.                                                              
                                                                              
    by FAO.                                                                   
                                                                              
    16.  XIV World Congress of                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     SICOT, Kyoto,6171.00                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     15-20-10-78.                                                             
                                                                              
    17.  International Workshop on                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Information System 440.00                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     by the Evaluation of                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Business Efficiency in                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Public Enterprises in                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Developing Countries,                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Lubljana, November 1978.                                                 
                                                                              
    18.  International Workshop                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on Planning in Public                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     440.00 Enterprises,                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Lubljana, November 1978.                                                 
                                                                              
    19.  85th Annual Meeting of                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     the Association of Mili-                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     4875.00 tary Surgeons of                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     the United States,                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Washington,26-30-11-78.                                                  
                                                                              
    20.  4th Enlarged Winter                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Council Meeting, ISMA,                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Expenditure met Turkey,                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     5-8-12-78. by  ISMA  of                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     France.                                                                  
                                                                              
    21.  Xth International  Congress                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of Anthropological                                                       
                                                                              
    Nil.                                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Sciences, Delhi and Ranchi,                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     10-20-12-78.                                                             
                                                                              
    22.  FAO Meeting on Farm                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Mechanisation, Rome,                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Expenditure met 14-16-12-78                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     by FAO                                                                   
                                                                              
    23.  Regional Seminar on                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Broadcasting and Law,                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Nil. Kuala Lumpur,                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     8-19-1-79                                                                
    24.  Asian and Pacific Regional                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Seminar on Managerial Nil.                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Services by ICPE, Kuala                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Lumpur, 15-24-1-79                                                       
                                                                              
    25.  Meeting of Organisational                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Council of South East Nil.                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Asian Ministers of                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Education, Chingmai,Thailand,                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     18-22-1-79.                                                              
                                                                              
    26.  17th Session of the Council                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of International Bureau of                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Education, Geneva, 23-26-1-79                                            
                                                                              
    27.  The first meeting of the                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Experts Group on SATE- --                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     LLITE in Broadcasting held                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     at New Delhi from 5th                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     August to 7th August, 1978                                               
                                                                              
    28.  Asian Broadcasting Union                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Engineering Committee --                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     and Working parties meetings                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     held at New Delhi from 14th                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     to 21st October, 1978                                                    
    ----------------------------------                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    ----------------------------------                                        
    1   2      3                                                              
    ----------------------------------                                        
    29.  15th Asian Broadcasting Union                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     General Assembly                                                         
                                                                              
     --                                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     held at New Delhi from 14th to                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     29th October,  1978                                                      
                                                                              
    30.  Film Symposium organised by                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Indian institute of   --                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Mass Communication at Vigyan                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Bhavan to concide                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     with 7th International Film                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Festival of India on                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     January 9, 10 and 11, 1979                                               
                                                                              
    31.  ABU/AIB Engineering Seminar                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     relationg to WA-   --                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     RC-79 held at Kuala Lumpur                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     from April 4th to 12th, 1978.                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Attended by Station Engineer                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Frequ- ency Assignment                                                   
                                                                              
    32.  Meeting of the Governing                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Council of the Asia-                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 1.304.00 Pacific                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Institute for Broadcasting                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Development held at Kuala                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Lumpur from 10th to 12th                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     April, 1978 attended by                                                  
       Deputy Director General AIR                                            
                                                                              
    33.  To participate in the                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     V-International Film                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Festi- Rs. 30,130.00                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     vals of Asian.  African                                                  
      and Latin American Count-ries                                           
                                                                              
    34.  First Meeting of the Group                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of Experts on WARC                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 1,604.00 Preparations                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     constituted by the                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Committee for co-operation                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of the Broadcasting                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Organisations of non-                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     aligned countries held at                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Algiers from 13th to 15th                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     May, 1978.  Attended by                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Director,  Frequency                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Assignment, AIR.                                                         
                                                                              
    35.  For Participating in the                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Public Television and In-                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 500. 00                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     dependent Film Seminar                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     held in New York from                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     28-5-1978 to 2-6-1978.                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Shri Mushir Ahmad (Chief                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Producer)                                                                
                                                                              
    36.  To Participate in Cannes                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     International Film Festi-                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 34,662.00                                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     val Capass from 15-5-1978                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     to 27-5-1978                                                             
                                                                              
    37.  Asian Broadcasting Union                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Administrative Council                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 6,959.00                                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     meeting held in Port                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Moresby (Papua New Guinea)                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     from 13th to 15th June,                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     1978.  Attended by two                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Deputy Director Generals                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of AIR                                                                   
                                                                              
    38.  To participate in Cannes                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     International Film Fes-                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 23,568.00                                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     tival, Czechoslovakia                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     from 29-6-1978 to 12-7-1978                                              
                                                                              
    39.  International Symposium                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on Radiowaves and the                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 4,930.00 Ionosphere                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     organised by International                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Union of Radio Science                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (URSI) at Helsinki (Finland)                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     from 31-7-1978 to 8-8-78.                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Attended by Asstt. Station                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Engineer.                                                                
    ---------------------------------                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    ---------------------------------                                         
    1  2  3                                                                   
    ---------------------------------                                         
    40.  Discussion on Committee Rules                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of procedure as well                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 822.00 as action to be                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     taken on the conclusion of                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     the Se-cond Meeting of the                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Committee of Co-operation at                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Belgrade (Yugoslavia) from                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     6-8-1978 to 20-8-1978 attended                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     by Deputy Director General AIR                                           
                                                                              
    41.  The Second International Meeting                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of HF Broad-                                                             
                                                                              
      Rs. 2,473.00                                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     casters held at Geneva from                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     6th to 8th September,1978                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     attended by Engineer in Charge                                           
                                                                              
    42.  XXX Session of Prix Italia                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Competition held at                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 5,507.00 Milan (Way)                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     from 11th to 24th Sept.,                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     1978 atten-ded by Producer                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     (Drama)                                                                  
                                                                              
    43.  To participate in San                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Sabastian International                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Film                                                                     
                                                                              
       Rs, 23,996.00                                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Festival, San Sabastian                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     from 13-9-1978 to 20-9-78                                                
                                                                              
    44.  Second Meeting of the Group                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of Experts on Sate-                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 1,058.00                                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     llites in Broadcasting held                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     at Zadar (Yugoslavia)                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     from 26th September to                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     28th September, 1978                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     attended by Chief Engineer                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     and 3 other Engineers.                                                   
                                                                              
    45.  Second Meeting of the Group                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of Experts on WARC                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 1,933.20                                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Preparations held at Lusaka                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     (Yambia) from 9th October                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     to 14th October, 1978                                                    
                                                                              
    46.  Third Meeting of the Committee                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     for Co-operation                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 24,450.00 amongst                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Broadcasting Organizations                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of Non- aligned countries                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     held in Arusha (Tanzania)                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     from 13-10-78 to 21-10-78                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     attended by Deputy                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Director Generals, AIR and                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     one Station Director,                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Doordarshan                                                              
                                                                              
    47.  Third meeting of Committee                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     for Co-operation of                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 3,307.00 Broadcasting                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Organisation of Non-aligned                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     count-tries held in Arusha                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     (Tanzania) from 16th to                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     19th October, 1978                                                       
                                                                              
    48.  Commonwealth Broadcasting                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Association General                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 13,300.00                                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Conference held in                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Mauritius from 7th to 16th                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     November, 1978                                                           
                                                                              
    49.  CBA General Assembly held                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     at Mauritius from                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 6,377.00                                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     7th to 14th November,                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     1978 attended by one Depu-                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     ty Director General and                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Additional Chief Engineer                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of AIR                                                                   
                                                                              
    50.  Third International Meeting                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of HF Broadcasters                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 2,272.00                                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     held at Geneva from 18th to                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     20th November, 1978,                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     attended by Chief Engineer                                               
    ---------------------------------                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    ---------------------------------                                         
    1    2   3                                                                
    ---------------------------------                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs.                                                                      
    51.  To participate in the                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     International Leipzing Film                                              
     It is stated that acco-                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Festival from 24-11-78 to                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     1-12-1978, attended by                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     rding to the official                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Shri D. R. Haldankar (Cameraman)                                         
     records the officer                                                      
      concerned was nei-                                                      
       ther granted any                                                       
     TA/DA. advance                                                           
       nor he submitted                                                       
       his claim so far                                                       
    regarding this tour.                                                      
    However the details                                                       
      of expenditure in-                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
      curred by the Official                                                  
       concerned towards                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
      the airfreight charges                                                  
      and contingent ex-                                                      
    penditure for conve-                                                      
    ance are as fallows:                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
       1. Airfreight charges                                                  
       Rs. 12,427.00                                                          
    2. Contingent Expen-                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
      diture                                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
       Rs. 36.00                                                              
      ---------------                                                         
       Rs. 12,463.00                                                          
      ---------------                                                         
                                                                              
    52.  Conference on "Local                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Administration-Training  Nil.                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Trainers" at Manila from 20th                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     November to 9th December,1978.                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (German Foundation Interna-                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     tional Development in                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Cooperation with the College                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    of Public Administration,                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Manila)                                                                   
                                                                              
    53. Third Meeting of the Groups of                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Experts on 'Sate-   17,952.00                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     llites in Broadcasting and                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     WARC preparations to be held                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     at CUBA from 2nd February to                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     6th Feb- ruary,  1979, to                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     be attended by Chief Engineer                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     and  other 3 Engineers                                                   
                                                                              
    54. 7th UN Conference on the                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Law of the Sea Geneva,                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Case processed by                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     from 26-3-78 to 29-4-78                                                  
      the Ministry of External Affairs.                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
    55.  1978 Plenary Assembly of the                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Commission for Geo-                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 7,500. 00                                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     logical Map of the World,                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Paris from 10-3-78 to                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     22-3-1978                                                                
                                                                              
    56.  International conference on                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     geological information                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 2,735.00                                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     and GEOREF Workshop, London                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     from 9-4-78 to                                                           
                                                                              
    14-4-78                                                                   
                                                                              
    57.  7th International Geochemical                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Exploration Sympo-                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 7,808.00 sium,                                                       
       USA from 14-4-78 to 23-4-78                                            
    ----------------------------------                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    ----------------------------------                                        
    1         2           3                                                   
    ----------------------------------                                        
    58.  12th International Symposium                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on Remote Sensing                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 5,463.38 of Environment,                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Manila from 19-4-78 to 29-4-78                                            
                                                                              
    59.  International conference on                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Computer Mapping                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 2,218.40 for resource                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     analysis, Mexico from 7-5-78                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     to   16-5-78                                                             
                                                                              
    60.  International symposium                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     "GEOANALYSIS 78"                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 6,489.81 Ottawa, from                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     12-5-78 to 24-5-78.                                                      
                                                                              
    61.  Archaean Geochemistry Field                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Conference Canada                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 13,270.51                                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     from 2-8-78 to 17-8-78.                                                  
                                                                              
    62.  Circumpacific and Mineral                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Resources Conference,                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Nil. All expenses                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Honolulu from 28-7-78 to                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     8-8-78.                                                                  
                                                                              
     were borne by                                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
      the organisers.                                                         
                                                                              
    63.  Inter-Union Commission on                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Geodynamics and                                                          
                                                                              
      Nil.                                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Annual Conference, USA from                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     9-8-78 to 18-8-78.                                                       
                                                                              
    64.  4th International Conference                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on Geochronology,Rs. 6,895.00                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     isotope Geology and                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Cosmochronology, Denver                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     (USA) from 19-8-78 to 1-9-78                                             
                                                                              
    65.  International Congress on                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Engineering Geology                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Rs. 31,313.00                                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     and International Symposium                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on Water in Mining                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
     and underground works,                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Spain from 1-9-78 to                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     23-9-78.                                                                 
                                                                              
    66.  8th International Congress                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of the F.I.P. Federation                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Internationals de la                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Precontrainte held at                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     London  Rs. 12,350.00                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     from 30th April to 5th                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
     May, 1978.                                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     The expenditure                                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     was met by                                                               
    the Conference                                                            
    67.  First Technical Workshop                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     on Planning Construc-                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     the conference tion and                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Maintenance of Rural Roads                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (RICA-authorities                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     RU) held in Mexico from                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     16-10-78 to 21-10-78.                                                    
    -------------------------------                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     May 08, 1978                                                             
    Appendix IV International Oranisations                                    
                                                      Top                     
    APPENDIX IV                                                               
                                                                              
    International Oranisations of                                             
    which INDIA became a Member                                               
    or ceased to be a member                                                  
    during the year 1978-79.                                                  
                                                                              
    -----------------------------                                             
    S.No.  Name of international                                              
    Organisation  Name of                                                     
    International Organisa- of                                                
    which India became a Member                                               
    tion of which India ceased                                                
    to be a during the year                                                   
    1978-79. member during the                                                
    year 1978-79.                                                             
    -----------------------------                                             
    1. International Centre for                                               
       Public Enter-prises in                                                 
       Developing Countries at                                                
       Ljubljana (Yugoslavia)                                                 
                                                                              
    2. Member of Executive Board                                              
       of UNICEF w.e.f. Aug 01,                                               
       1978                                                                   
                                                                              
    3. The Asian Cultural Centre                                              
       for UNE-SCO meeting for                                                
       the Third Photo Con-test                                               
       in Aisa. Director, Photo                                               
       Division represented                                                   
       India to attend the Third                                              
       Photo con-test in Asia                                                 
       organised by the Asian                                                 
       Cultural Centre for UNESCO,                                            
       in Tokyo in June, 1978.                                                
    -------------------------------                                           
    6 EA/78--8.                                                               
                                                                              
      Aug 01, 1978                                                            
    Appendix V Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded                      
    or renewed by India                                                       
                                                      Top                     
    APPENDIX V                                                                
                                                                              
    Treaties/Conventions/Agreements                                           
    concluded or renewed by India                                             
    with other countries in 1978*                                             
                                                                              
    --------------------------------                                          
    Sl.No.Title of Convention/Treaty                                          
                                                                              
    Date of Signature Date of                                                 
    Ratification Date on which                                                
    Remarks Agreement & entered                                               
    into Acceptance                                                           
                                                                              
    force                                                                     
                                                                              
    --------------------------------                                          
    1   2  3 4 5 6                                                            
    --------------------------------                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
       MULTILATERAL                                                           
                                                                              
    Code of Conduct for Liner                                                 
    Conferences--1974                                                         
                                                                              
    1. Convention on a Code of Conduct                                        
       Jun 25, 1975  14th Feb., 1978                                          
       Yet to enter into                                                      
                                                                              
     --                                                                       
       for Liner Conferences, 1974.                                           
      force.                                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
      Prevention and Punishment of                                            
      Crimes against Internationally                                          
      Protected Persons                                                       
    , including Diplomatic                                                    
      Agents--1973                                                            
                                                                              
    2.  Convention on the Prevention                                          
       and -- 11th April,1978                                                 
       11th May, 1978                                                         
                                                                              
     --                                                                       
       Punishment of Crimes against                                           
       Inter-nationally Protected                                             
       Persons, includ-                                                       
       ing Diplomatic Agents adopted                                          
       by the General Assembly of                                             
       the United Nations on 14th                                             
       December, 1973.                                                        
                                                                              
    Prohibition of Military or any                                            
    other hostile use of                                                      
    environmental modification                                                
    techniques--1976                                                          
                                                                              
    3. Convention on the prohibition                                          
       of 15th Dec.,1977 15th Dec.,                                           
       1978                                                                   
                                                                              
    15th Dec., 1978 --                                                        
       military or any other                                                  
       hostile use of                                                         
       environmentalmodification                                              
       tech-niques, 1976.                                                     
                                                                              
     *[This list is not exhaustive]                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Inter-Governmental Maritime                                               
    Consultative organization                                                 
    (IMCO)                                                                    
                                                                              
    4. Amendments to the Convention                                           
    on  Not Required 1st May,1978                                             
    Not yet in force                                                          
                                                                              
       --                                                                     
       the Inter-Governmental Maritime                                        
       Consultative Organization, 1948.                                       
                                                                              
       [Resolution A 358 (IX) 14th Nov.                                       
       1975].                                                                 
                                                                              
    International Sugar Agreement-1977                                        
                                                                              
    5. International Sugar Agreement,                                         
    1977 30th Dec., 1977   15th Feb.,                                         
    1978   1st January, 1978                                                  
                                                                              
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
    Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic                                             
    Development                                                               
                                                                              
    6. Loan Agreement between India and                                       
      4th July, 1978                                                          
                                                                              
    16th Dec.,                                                                
      1978                                                                    
                                                                              
    Not                                                                       
       yet in force                                                           
                                                                              
    --                                                                        
       Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic                                          
       Development regarding Kopili                                           
       Hydro-                                                                 
       Electric Project (Loan Number:                                         
       121).                                                                  
                                                                              
    Organisation of Petroleum Exporting                                       
     Countries special Fund (OPEC)                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
     --                                                                       
                                                                              
    7. Loan Agreement with the OPEC                                           
      16th Dec., 1977   13th March,                                           
      1978  24th March, 1978                                                  
      Special Fund.                                                           
                                                                              
    United Nations Children's Fund                                            
      (UNICEF)                                                                
                                                                              
    8. Revised Basic Agreement between                                        
       5th April, 1978  --                                                    
                                                                              
      5th                                                                     
       April, 1978                                                            
                                                                              
    --                                                                        
       India and United Nations                                               
       Children's                                                             
       Fund (UNICEF).                                                         
    ---------------------------------                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    ---------------------------------                                         
    (1)  (2)   (3)  (4)  (5)   (6)                                            
    ---------------------------------                                         
       BILATERAL                                                              
                                                                              
    BELGIUM                                                                   
                                                                              
    9. Agreement between India and                                            
    Bel-   12th Dec., 1978                                                    
                                                                              
    --                                                                        
     12th Dec., 1978   --                                                     
     gium relating to the granting                                            
     of Financial Assistance.                                                 
     BF 350 Million.                                                          
                                                                              
    CANADA                                                                    
                                                                              
    10. Development Loan Agreement                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
    bet-   22nd Feb., 1978                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    --  22nd Feb., 1978                                                       
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    ween India and Canada for                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    C $ 10.0 Million for                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    import of fertilizer and                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    fertilizer materials from                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Canada.                                                                   
                                                                              
    11. Exchange of Letters between                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
    India 10th April, 1978                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
    --  10th April, 1978                                                      
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    and Canada regarding                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    amendment of the Loan                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Agreement dated 23rd Nov.                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    1972 for fertilizer Bulk                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Handling Equipment for                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
    the Port of Haldia.                                                       
                                                                              
    ETHIOPIA                                                                  
                                                                              
    12. Agreement between India and                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
    25th Nov., 1976  20th                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
    4th Jan., 1978 --                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Ethiopia regarding the                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
    avoidance of                                                              
                                                                              
    Dec.,                                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
    double taxation of profits                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
    from the1978                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    operation of aircraft.                                                    
                                                                              
    GERMANY, FEDERAL REPUBLIC                                                 
    OF (FRG)                                                                  
    13. Exchange of Letters between                                           
    India 10th March, 1978 --  10th                                           
    March, 1978                                                               
     --                                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
    and Federal Republic of                                                   
       Germany regarding amendment                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
    to the Loan Agreement                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
    dated 27th Dec., 1977.                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
    14. Agreement between India and                                           
    the                                                                       
                                                                              
       13th April, 1978                                                       
     --  13th April, 19                                                       
    78   --                                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Federal Republic of Germany                                               
       con- cerning Commodity Aid                                             
       in 1978.                                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    FRANCE                                                                    
                                                                              
    15. Financial Protocol between                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
    India and   24th Feb., 1978                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     --  24th Feb., 197                                                       
    8                                                                         
                                                                              
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    France relating to the                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
    alleviation of the Indian                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    External Debt.                                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    IRAN                                                                      
                                                                              
    16. Agreement between India and                                           
    Iron on                                                                   
                                                                              
    25th Feb., 1977                                                           
    --  24th January,                                                         
    1978  --                                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Cooperation regarding the                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    utilisation of Atomic                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Energy for Peaceful Pur-                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    poses.                                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    JAPAN                                                                     
                                                                              
    17. Exchange of Letters between                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
    India and  22nd Sept., 1978                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     --  22nd Sept., 19                                                       
    78                                                                        
                                                                              
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Japan for Japanese Grant Aid                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    for   1978-79.                                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    LIBYAN ARAB JAMAHIRIYA                                                    
                                                                              
    18. Memorandum of Understanding                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
    bet-                                                                      
                                                                              
       19th July, 1978                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     -- 19th July, 1978                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
      --                                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    ween India and the Socialist                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    People's Libyan Arab                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Jamahiriya on Co-                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
    operation regarding the                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Utilisation of Nuclear Energy                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
    for Peaceful                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Purposes.                                                                 
    ------------------------------------                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    ------------------------------------                                      
    (1)   (2)   (3)  (4) (5)    (6)                                           
    ------------------------------------                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    MALDIVES                                                                  
                                                                              
    19. Agreement between India, and                                          
    Mal-28th Dec., 1976                                                       
    8th June, 1978 8th June, 1978                                             
    --                                                                        
     dives on Maritime Boundary in the                                        
       Arabian Sea and related matters.                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    NEPAL                                                                     
                                                                              
    20. Treaty of Trade between India                                         
    and17th March, 1978   --                                                  
      25th March, 1978                                                        
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Nepal.                                                                    
                                                                              
    21. Protocol to the Treaty of                                             
    Trade bet-  17th March, 1978                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
      25th March, 1978                                                        
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    ween India and Nepal.                                                     
                                                                              
    22. Treaty of Transit between                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
    India and                                                                 
                                                                              
      17th March,                                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     1978                                                                     
                                                                              
       --                                                                     
      25th March, 1978                                                        
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Nepal.                                                                    
                                                                              
    23. Protocol to the Treaty of                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Transit17th March,                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    1978                                                                      
                                                                              
       --                                                                     
      25th March, 1978                                                        
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    between India and Nepal.                                                  
                                                                              
    24. Memorandum for detailed                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Procedure 17th                                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     March, 1978 --                                                           
      25th March, 1978                                                        
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    regarding traffic-in-transit                                              
       with refe-rence to the                                                 
       Protocol to the Treaty of                                              
       Transit between India and                                              
       Nepal.                                                                 
                                                                              
    25. Agreement of Cooperation                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    between  17th March, 1978                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
       25th March, 1978                                                       
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    India and Nepal to Control                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Un-authorized Trade.                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    NETHERLANDS                                                               
                                                                              
    26. Loan Agreement between                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
    India and 26th                                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
    April, 1978--                                                             
      26th April, 1978                                                        
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Doe Nederlandse Investerings                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    bank Voor Ontwikkelingslanden                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
    N.V. for HFL 125,000,000.                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    27. Loan Agreement between India                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
    and 26th April, 1978                                                      
                                                                              
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     26th April, 1978                                                         
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    De Nederlandse Investeringe                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
    bank Voor Ontwikkelingslandon                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
    N.V. for HFL 82,000,000.                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    PAPUA NEW GUINEA                                                          
                                                                              
    28. Application of Extradition                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Procedure                                                                 
                                                                              
     --                                                                       
                                                                              
     --                                                                       
      l7th August, 1978                                                       
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    to Papua New Guinea on                                                    
       Reciprocal   Basis.                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    SRILANKA                                                                  
                                                                              
    29. Exchange of Notes between                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     India and                                                                
                                                                              
      8th                                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     May, 1978                                                                
                                                                              
     8th May,                                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    1978                                                                      
                                                                              
     4th Nov., 1975                                                           
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Shri Lanka regarding                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    amendments to Loan Agreement                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    dated 4th Nov. 1975.                                                      
                                                                              
    30. Application of Extradition                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Procedure  ----                                                           
      17th August, 1978                                                       
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    to Sri Lanka on Reciprocal                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
    basis.                                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    SWEDEN                                                                    
                                                                              
    31. Agreement between India and                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Sweden                                                                    
                                                                              
      16th June, 1978                                                         
       --                                                                     
      16th June, 1978                                                         
    --                                                                        
    regarding development Corporation                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
    1978.                                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    SWITZERLAND                                                               
                                                                              
    32. Exchange of Letters between                                           
       India                                                                  
                                                                              
       19th April, 1978                                                       
       19th April 1978 1st Jan,1978                                           
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    and Switzerland regarding                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Develop-ment Loan of 35                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
    million Swiss Francs dated                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
    9th October, 1973 and its                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Pro- tocol of Application.                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
    --------------------------------                                          
    (1)  (2) (3) (4)  (5)   (6)                                               
    --------------------------------                                          
                                                                              
    33. Exchange of Letters between                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
    India                                                                     
                                                                              
      19th April, 1978                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    19th April, 1978                                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    1st January, 1978                                                         
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    and Switzerland on the                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
    granting of Credits of                                                    
       49,50 million Swiss Francs                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
    dated 9th October, 1973.                                                  
                                                                              
    34. Exchange of Letters between                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
    India                                                                     
                                                                              
       19th April,                                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
    1978                                                                      
                                                                              
       19th April,                                                            
     1978                                                                     
                                                                              
     1st January, 1978                                                        
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    and Switzerland on the                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
    granting of transfer                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    credits of 63 million                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Swiss Francs dated 7th                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
    March, 1966.                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    THAILAND                                                                  
                                                                              
    35. Agreement between India and                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Thai-                                                                     
                                                                              
      22nd June, 1978                                                         
     15th Dec.,1978 15th Dec,, 1978                                           
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    land on the delimitation                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    of sealed boundary between                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
    the two countries                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
    in the Andaman Sea.                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                                                  
                                                                              
    36. Agreement between India                                               
    and United 27th January, 1978                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     --                                                                       
                                                                              
    27th January, 1978                                                        
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    States of America regarding                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
    sales of agricultural                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
    commodities.                                                              
                                                                              
    37. Memorandum of Understanding                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
    bet- 18th July, 1978                                                      
       --   18th July, 1978                                                   
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    ween India and United States                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    regard-ing Space Vehicle                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    launchings and associated                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    services for the Indian                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
    National  Satellite System                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
    I (INSAT-I)                                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    38. AID grant agreement between                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
    India  26th August, 1978                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     --                                                                       
                                                                              
    26th August, 1978                                                         
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    and USA for US $ 2 million                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
    for Tech- nologies for Rural                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Poor (Application of Science                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    and Technology to rural poor).                                            
                                                                              
    39. AID Loan No. 386-T-223                                                
       (Project 26th August, 1978                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
    --                                                                        
      26th August, 1978                                                       
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    No. 386-0464) between India                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
    and USA for US $ 30 million                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
    for Gujarat Medium Irrigation                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Project.                                                                  
                                                                              
    40. AID Loan No. 386-U-224 [Project                                       
     26th August, 1978   --                                                   
      26th August, 1978                                                       
    --                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    No. 386-0455] between India                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
    and USA for US $ 28 million                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
    for Malaria Control Programme.                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
      JOINT COMMUNIQUE                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    COMMONWEALTH                                                              
                                                                              
    41. Joint Communique issued at                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Sydney on 16th February                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
    1978, at the Con-clusion                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    of the meeting of the Com-                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
    monwealth Heads of                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Government of the Asian                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
    and Pacific Region.                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Jun 25, 1975                                                             
    Appendix VI Number of seats allotted to various                           
    countries in Engineering and Medical                                      
                                                      Top                     
    Jan 01, 1978                                                              
                                                                              
    APPENDIX VI                                                               
                                                                              
    Number of seats allotted to                                               
     various  countries in                                                    
    Engineering and Medical                                                   
       Colleges during 1978-79                                                
                                                                              
    ----------------------------                                              
    Sl.No. Name of the country                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Engineering   Medical                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
      seats seats                                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
    allotted                                                                  
                                                                              
      allotted                                                                
    ----------------------------                                              
    1.  Rhodesia                                                              
                                                                              
       3   1                                                                  
    2.  Kenya  2   5                                                          
    3.  Malawie                                                               
                                                                              
       --   1                                                                 
    4.  South Africa   1   4                                                  
    5.  Tanzania                                                              
                                                                              
      13   5                                                                  
    6.  Angola--  --                                                          
    7.  Uganda 1  --                                                          
    8.  Zambia 2   2                                                          
    9.  Ethiopia                                                              
                                                                              
      ..  ..                                                                  
    10. Lesotho                                                               
                                                                              
       --  --                                                                 
    11. Sudan  1  --                                                          
    12. Nigeria2   1                                                          
    13. A.R.E.--  --                                                          
    14. Mauritius                                                             
                                                                              
     22  15                                                                   
    15. Afghanistan                                                           
                                                                              
    4  --                                                                     
    16. Y.A.R.--  --                                                          
    17. Iran  23   5                                                          
    18. Iraq   5   1                                                          
    19. Jordan22   1                                                          
    20. Palestine                                                             
                                                                              
      7   1                                                                   
    21. Kuwait--  --                                                          
    22. U.A.E. 1   1                                                          
    23. PDRY  --   1                                                          
    24. Lebnon 1   --                                                         
    25. Syria --   --                                                         
    26. Bahrain2   --                                                         
    27. Indonesia.                                                            
                                                                              
     3   --                                                                   
    28. Fiji   8                                                              
                                                                              
    2                                                                         
    29. Malaysia .                                                            
                                                                              
    43   12                                                                   
    30. Thailand                                                              
                                                                              
       2                                                                      
                                                                              
    3                                                                         
    31. Sri Lanka                                                             
                                                                              
     21                                                                       
                                                                              
    5                                                                         
    32. Guyana--                                                              
                                                                              
    2                                                                         
    33. Bangla Desh                                                           
                                                                              
    4   --                                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
    DIPLOMA                                                                   
                                                                              
       20   --                                                                
    ----- ----                                                                
     213                                                                      
                                                                              
    68                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
      Jan 01, 1978                                                            
    Appendix VII REGIONAL PASSPORT OFFICES                                    
                                                      Top                     
    APPENDIX VII                                                              
                                                                              
      REGIONAL PASSPORT OFFICES                                               
                                                                              
    I. Statement showing number                                               
    of Passport applications                                                  
    received and number of                                                    
    Passports issued in the                                                   
    year 1978                                                                 
    ------------------------------                                            
    Sl.No. Station Number of                                                  
    Number applica-of Pass-                                                   
    tions  ports  received                                                    
    issued in in 1978   1978                                                  
    ------------------------------                                            
    1.  Ahmedabad                                                             
                                                                              
    65,378  81,385                                                            
    2.  Bangalore*   17,500  17,116                                           
    3.  Bhopal**                                                              
                                                                              
      2,670   1,561                                                           
    4.  Bombay                                                                
                                                                              
     1,96,499 2,00,572                                                        
    5.  Calcutta                                                              
                                                                              
     32,433   30,489                                                          
    6.  Chandigarh 1,12,364 1,38,692                                          
    7.  New Delhi  1,05,363 1,43,330                                          
    8.  Ernakulam  2,01,016 2,57,464                                          
    9.  Hyderabad                                                             
                                                                              
    63,095   75,117                                                           
    10. Jaipur(pound)11,253                                                   
                                                                              
    7,394                                                                     
    11. Kozhikode                                                             
      (double pound) 38,443   37,677                                          
    12. Lucknow                                                               
                                                                              
      69,264   75,874                                                         
    13. Madras                                                                
                                                                              
     1,30,616 1,46,003                                                        
    ---------------------------------                                         
      TOTAL   10,45,894   12,12,674                                           
    ---------------------------------                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     *Opened on Jun 12, 1978.                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    **Opened on 17-10-1978.                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (pound)Opened on 22-9-1978                                                
     (db pound)Opened on 17-6-1978.                                           
                                                                              
    II.Details of Official/Diplomatic                                         
    Passports issued/serviced by                                              
    Passport,Visa Division of Ministry                                        
    during 1978                                                               
    (a) Number of Official Passports                                          
    issued 4,00                                                               
    5                                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (b) Number of Official                                                    
    Passports serviced  2,26                                                  
    9                                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (c) Number of Diplomatic                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
       Passports issued   91                                                  
    5                                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (d) Number of Diplomatic                                                  
    Passports serviced 90                                                     
    3                                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
      Jun 12, 1978                                                            
    Appendix VIII Passport Offices-Sanctioned Strength                        
                                                      Top                     
    APPENDIX VIII                                                             
                                                                              
    Passport Offices-Sanctioned                                               
    Strength as on Dec 31, 1978                                               
    -----------------------------                                             
    I. GROUP `A' POSTS:                                                       
       (Passport Officer/                                                     
       Asstt.  Passport                                                       
       Officer)                                                               
    (a) For existing 13 Passport                                              
     offices 27                                                               
    (b) For 5 new Passport Offices                                            
    : (To be set up before middle                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
    of 1979 at Bhubaneswar,                                                   
     Gauhati, Patna, Simla and Sri-                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
    nagar) 5                                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     -----                                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
       32                                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     -----                                                                    
                                                                              
    II. GROUP `B' POSTS:                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (Public Relation Officer/                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Supdtt.)                                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (a) For existing 13 Passport                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Offices  56                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (b) For 5 new Passport Offices                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
       5                                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     -----                                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
      61                                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     -----                                                                    
                                                                              
    III. GROUP 'C' POSTS:                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     (Asstt./UDCs/Steno/                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     LDCs)                                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
     (a) For existing 13 Passport                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
      Offices 798                                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (b) For 5 new Passport Offices                                            
    26                                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
      -----                                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
       824                                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
      -----                                                                   
    IV. GROUP 'D' POSTS :                                                     
    (Record Sorter/Daftry/                                                    
    Peon/Watchman/Sweeper                                                     
    etc.)                                                                     
    (a) For existing 13 Passport                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Offices147                                                                
    (b) For 5 new Passport Offices  15                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
      -----                                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
       162                                                                    
    -------------------------------------                                     
    NOTE :--One more Passport Office is                                       
    to be set up before the middle of                                         
    1979 in Punjab at Jullundur and                                           
    proposal for creation of posts of                                         
    all cate-gories for this office                                           
    is under submission.                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Appendix IX Passport Offices in India and their                           
    jurisdiction                                                              
                                                      Top                     
    APPENDIX IX                                                               
                                                                              
     Passport Offices in India                                                
     and their jurisdiction                                                   
       (As on Dec 31, 1978)                                                   
    -----------------------------                                             
    Sl.No. Station  Jurisdiction                                              
    -----------------------------                                             
    1.  AHMEDABAD  State of                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Gujarat and Union                                                         
     Territory of                                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
      Dadra & Nagar Haveli.                                                   
                                                                              
    2.BANGALORE  State of Karnataka.                                          
                                                                              
    3.BHOPAL State of Madhya Pradesh.                                         
                                                                              
    4.  BOMBAY State of Maharashtra.                                          
                                                                              
    5.  CALCUTTA States of West                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Bengal, Bihar, Orissa,                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya,                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Tripura, Manipur and Sikkim                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
    and Union Terri-tories of                                                 
     Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh.                                           
                                                                              
    6.  CHANDIGARH  States of                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Punjab, Haryana and                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Himachal Pradesh and                                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Union Territory of                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Chandi-garh.                                                              
                                                                              
    7.  NEW DELHI Union Territory                                             
     of Delhi and State of                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
      Jammu & Kashmir.                                                        
                                                                              
    8.  ERNAKULAM   State of Kerala                                           
     and Union Territory of                                                   
      Lakshadweep.                                                            
    9.  HYDERABAD State of Andhra                                             
    Pradesh.                                                                  
                                                                              
    10. JAIPUR State of Rajasthan.                                            
                                                                              
    11. KOZHIKODE Four northernmost                                           
     districts of Kerala,                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
    viz., Cannanore, Kozhikode,                                               
       Malapu-ram and Palghat.                                                
                                                                              
    12. LUCKNOW State of Uttar Pradesh.                                       
                                                                              
    13. MADRAS State of Tamil Nadu                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
    and Union Territory                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
    of Pondicherry.                                                           
                                                                              
    14. CHIEFSEC, Govt. of Goa,                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Union Territory of Goa,                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Daman & Diu.                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Daman & Diu                                                               
                                                                              
    15. CHIEF COMMISSIONER,                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Union Territory of Andaman                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
    and Nico- Union Territory                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     of Anda-                                                                 
                                                                              
     bar Islands.                                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
    man & Nicobar Islands,                                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Port Blair.                                                               
    -------------------------------                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
      Dec 31, 1978                                                            
    Appendix X Statement showing the total number of                          
    Government servants                                                       
                                                      Top                     
    APPENDIX X                                                                
                                                                              
      STATEMENT A                                                             
    Statement showing the total                                               
    number of Government servants                                             
    and the number of Scheduled                                               
    Castes and Scheduled Tribes                                               
    amongst them as on Dec 31,1978.                                           
    --------------------------------                                          
    Class Total Scheduled Percentage                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
    Scheduled Percentage Remarks                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    number of                                                                 
                                                                              
    Castes of total                                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Tribes of total Employees                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
     employees                                                                
                                                                              
    employees                                                                 
    --------------------------------                                          
    (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)  (7)                                              
    --------------------------------                                          
    Class I                                                                   
                                                                              
     643   47 7.3% 25                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
       3.90%                                                                  
    Class II   1544   92 5.9% 10                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    .06%                                                                      
    Class III   683   71 10.4%16                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
       2.30%                                                                  
    Class IV                                                                  
                                                                              
    484   49 10.1%                                                            
      (Excluding sweepers)                                                    
    Class IV                                                                  
                                                                              
     55   55 100%                                                             
    (Sweepers)                                                                
    --------------------------------                                          
    NOTE: --The statistics above                                              
    relate to posts in the Ministry                                           
    of External Affairs  only.                                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
      Dec 31, 1978                                                            
    Appendix XI Statement showing the number of                               
    appointments                                                              
                                                      Top                     
    Jan 01, 1978                                                              
                                                                              
    APPENDIX XI                                                               
                                                                              
       STATEMENT B                                                            
                                                                              
    Statement showing the number                                              
    of appointments (both direct                                              
    recruitment and by promotion)                                             
    made to various groups                                                    
    of posts and reserved                                                     
    vacancies filled by Scheduled                                             
    Castes and Scheduled T                                                    
    ribes during the year 1978.                                               
    -------------------------------                                           
    Class of posts Total No.                                                  
    No. of vacancies reserved                                                 
    No. of reserved candi-                                                    
    No. of vacancies de-of vacancies                                          
    dates appointed reserved                                                  
    consequent to filled                                                      
                                                                              
    -----------------   -------------                                         
    non-availability of                                                       
    Sch.  Castes Sch.Tribes                                                   
    Sch.Castes   Sch.Tribe                                                    
    reserved candidates                                                       
                                                                              
    s -----------------------                                                 
                                                                              
    Sch. Castes   sch.Tribes                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    -------------------------------                                           
    (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)(8)                                            
    -------------------------------                                           
    1. Group A   63 3   2  3  2                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     ....                                                                     
    2. Group B                                                                
                                                                              
     121 17  9  ....                                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     ....                                                                     
    3. Group C                                                                
                                                                              
     184 33  .. 20 4                                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     .. ..                                                                    
    4. Group D                                                                
                                                                              
      .. ..  .. .. ..                                                         
                                                                              
                                                                              
     .. ..                                                                    
       (excluding sweepers)                                                   
    5. Group D   37 5  ..   5 ..                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     .. ..                                                                    
      (sweepers) -------------------                                          
    NOTE: -- The above statistics                                             
    relate to posts in the M.E.A.                                             
     only                                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Jan 01, 1978                                                             
    Appendix XII Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry                          
                                                      Top                     
    Jan 01, 1978                                                              
                                                                              
    APPENDIX XII                                                              
                                                                              
    Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry                                       
    during the Financial Year 1978-79                                         
    ----------------------------------                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     R.E.                                                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
     1978-79                                                                  
       -----------                                                            
    Rs. in Lakhs                                                              
    ----------------------------------                                        
       Headquarters   626.39                                                  
                                                                              
    Missions/Posts abroad 3185.79                                             
                                                                              
       Supply Wings   169.38                                                  
                                                                              
    Other Items                                                               
                                                                              
    Contribution to the U.N.                                                  
    Commonwealth  Secretariat                                                 
    and  other  International                                                 
    Institutions                                                              
                                                                              
     289.50                                                                   
                                                                              
    Central Passport and                                                      
    Emigration Organisation  259.70                                           
                                                                              
    Other Miscellaneous                                                       
    Items   2171.04                                                           
                                                                              
    Subsidies and Aid                                                         
                                                                              
    Subsidy to Bhutan                                                         
                                                                              
       3513.84                                                                
                                                                              
    Aid to Nepal                                                              
                                                                              
    1104.19                                                                   
    Aid to other developing                                                   
    countries in Asia and                                                     
     Africa  650.00                                                           
                                                                              
    Aid to Bangladesh365.51                                                   
                                                                              
    Social Security & Welfare 16.08                                           
       --------                                                               
    TOTAL   12351.42                                                          
    ------------------------------                                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
      Jan 01, 1978                                                            
    Appendix XIII Expenditure on Headquarters and                             
    Missions/Posts abroad                                                     
                                                      Top                     
    Jan 01, 1978 APPENDIX XIII                                                
                                                                              
    Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad                     
    during 1978-79                                                            
                                                                              
    The expenditure during 1978-79 on Headquarters of                         
    this Ministry is ex-pected to be of the order of Rs.                      
    626.39 lakhs; a sum of Rs. 158.44 lakhs is towards                        
    establishment charges, a sum of Rs. 89.80 lakhs for                       
    Allowances, other than T.A., a sum of Rs. 227.15                          
    lakhs for publicity, cables, diplomatic bags service                      
    etc., a sum of Rs. 149.90 lakhs for travelling                            
    expenses and a sum of Rs. 1.10 lakhs for Departmental                     
    Canteen.                                                                  
                                                                              
    The expenditure on Missions/Posts abroad including                        
    the Supply Wings at London and Washington is Rs.                          
    3355.17 lakhs, out of which a sum of Rs. 1411.60                          
    lakhs is spent on Establishment Charges including                         
    Foreign and other Compensatory Allowances, a sum of                       
    Rs. 345.43 lakhs on passages for transfers and local                      
    tours, Rs. 169.30 lakhs for Publicity Contingencies                       
    and Rs. 1428.84 lakhs. for official and residential                       
    accommodation, P&T Charges and other Office                               
    Contigencies. The average annual expenditure per                          
    Mission comes to Rs. 25.31 lakhs.                                         
                                                                              
    The expenditure mentioned above (viz. Rs. 3981.56                         
    lakhs=Rs. 626.39 lakhs+3355.17 lakhs) as per details                      
    below on Headquarters and Missioins/ Posts abroad                         
    included expenditure on External Publicity Programme                      
    acti- vities; The break-up of this expenditure is as                      
    under :--                                                                 
                                                                              
      Rs. in Lakhs)                                                           
    --------------------------------                                          
    (a) Headquarters                                                          
    (i) Salaries (Officers 24, Staff 44)                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
       8.40                                                                   
                                                                              
       (ii) Travelling Expenses                                               
                                                                              
    3.50                                                                      
                                                                              
       (iii) Publicity Contingencies                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
       Charges 69.72                                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
     -------                                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
       81.62                                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
     -------                                                                  
    (b) Missions/Posts abroad                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (i)   Salaries (Officers 52,                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
      Staff 237)                                                              
                                                                              
       46.05                                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (ii)  Foreign Allowances,                                                 
              Compensatory Allowance                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
       32.18                                                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (iii) Passages & Travelling                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
     Expenses   6.48                                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (iv)  Publicity Contingencies                                             
               71.17                                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (v)   Other Charges including                                             
                                                                              
                                                                              
     renting of Residential                                                   
                       Accommo-                                               
      dation & Other Office                                                   
                      Contingencies  13.42                                    
    -------                                                                   
      TOTAL 169.30                                                            
    -------                                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
      Total External Publicity  250.92                                        
    ------------------------------------                                      
                                                                              
                                                                              
     The expenditure on External                                              
              Publicity as detailed  above                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
      comes to 6.3% of the expenditure                                        
              on Headquarters and Missions/                                   
              Posts abroad.                                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
    (in lakhs of Rupees)                                                      
    -----------------------------------                                       
                                                                              
    Establish-  Travelling   Office  Total                                    
                                                                              
    mentExpenses                                                              
                                                                              
     Expenses                                                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
       Charges                                                                
    --------------------------------------                                    
                                                                              
    Secretariat                                                               
                                                                              
    Headquarters                                                              
                                                                              
    240.94                                                                    
                                                                              
      146.40                                                                  
                                                                              
     157.43   544.77                                                          
                                                                              
                                                                              
    External Publicity Division                                               
    8.403.50                                                                  
                                                                              
      69.72                                                                   
                                                                              
      81.62                                                                   
                                                                              
     --------------------------------------                                   
                                                                              
    249.34                                                                    
                                                                              
      149.90                                                                  
                                                                              
     277.15                                                                   
                                                                              
    626.39                                                                    
                                                                              
    ---------------------------------------                                   
                                                                              
    Overseas Establishment                                                    
                                                                              
    (a)  Missions/Posts abroad (ex-                                           
                                                                              
                                                                              
     cluding Publicity Wings)                                                 
    1217.46                                                                   
                                                                              
      317.75   1481.28  3016.49                                               
                                                                              
    (b)  Publicity Wings                                                      
    78.236.48                                                                 
                                                                              
    84.59   169.30                                                            
                                                                              
     --------------------------------------                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     TOTAL                                                                    
    1295.69                                                                   
                                                                              
      324.23                                                                  
                                                                              
    1565.87   3185.79                                                         
                                                                              
    ---------------------------------------                                   
                                                                              
     GRAND TOTAL                                                              
     1545.03                                                                  
                                                                              
    474.13   1793.02   3812.18                                                
                                                                              
    ---------------------------------------                                   
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
      Jan 01, 1978                                                            
    Appendix XIV Strength of IFS & IFS (B) Cadres,                            
    Combined Research Cadre                                                   
                                                      Top                     
    Jan 01, 1978 APPENDIX XIV Strength of IFS & IFS (B)                       
    Cadres, Combined Research Cadre and                                       
                                                                              
    Interpreters Cadre IFS Cadre Strength                                     
                                                                              
    Grade I                                                                   
                                                                              
    18 (excluding I post temporarily upgraded from Grade                      
    III.)                                                                     
                                                                              
    Grade II                                                                  
                                                                              
    21 (excluding 2 posts temporarily up- graded from                         
    Grade IV.)                                                                
                                                                              
    Grade III                                                                 
                                                                              
    80 (excluding one ex-Cadre post of JS (China) one                         
    Post of JS (Pers) and FA(EA).                                             
                                                                              
    Grade IV                                                                  
                                                                              
    78                                                                        
                                                                              
    Senior Scale240 (excluding 1 Post created in lieu of                      
    Jr. Scale post at E.I. Jeddah).                                           
                                                                              
    Junior Scale 97 (excluding 1 Post kept in abeyance in                     
    lieu of creation of 1 Sr. Scale pos t at E.I.                             
    Jeddah).                                                                  
                                                                              
    Training Reserve 50                                                       
                                                                              
    (Junior Scale)                                                            
                                                                              
    Leave Reserve19                                                           
                                                                              
    Training Reserve 19                                                       
                                                                              
    Deputation Reserve                                                        
                                                                              
    20 IFS (B) Cadre Strength General Cadre                                   
                                                                              
    Grade I                                                                   
                                                                              
    111 (including 1 ex-cadre post).                                          
                                                                              
    Grade II & III 294                                                        
                                                                              
    Grade IV                                                                  
                                                                              
    923                                                                       
                                                                              
    Grade V                                                                   
                                                                              
    123                                                                       
                                                                              
    Grade VI                                                                  
                                                                              
    574 Cipher Sub Cadre                                                      
                                                                              
    Grade II                                                                  
                                                                              
    180 Stenographer Sub Cadre                                                
                                                                              
    Selection Grade 49                                                        
                                                                              
    Grade I                                                                   
                                                                              
    74                                                                        
                                                                              
    Grade II                                                                  
                                                                              
    512                                                                       
                                                                              
    Grade III                                                                 
                                                                              
    87 Combined Research Cadre                                                
                                                                              
    27 Interpreters Cadre 28                                                  
                                                                              
    Jan 01, 1978                                                              
    Appendix XV Foreign Language Chart                                        
                                                      Top                     
    Jan 01, 1978                                                              
                                                                              
    APPENDIX XV                                                               
                                                                              
      Foreign Language Chart                                                  
                                                                              
     (INDEX)                                                                  
                                                                              
    ---------------------------                                               
    S.No. Language Total No.of                                                
      officers passed/                                                        
    knows the language                                                        
    ---------------------------                                               
    1.   Arabic   39                                                          
    2.   Burmese Nil                                                          
    3.   Chinese  26                                                          
    4.   Czech   Nil                                                          
    5.   Dutch                                                                
                                                                              
     1                                                                        
    6.   French   64                                                          
    7.   German   24                                                          
    8.   Gorkhali  5                                                          
    9.   Hungarian 1                                                          
    10.  Bahasa-Indonesia  9                                                  
    11.  Italian   3                                                          
    12.  Japanese 12                                                          
    13.  Kiswahili 8                                                          
    13A. Malay-Babasa                                                         
                                                                              
      1                                                                       
    14.  Persian   9                                                          
    15.  Polish                                                               
                                                                              
    1                                                                         
    16.  Portuguese8                                                          
    17.  Pushtu  Nil                                                          
    18.  Rumanian  1                                                          
    19.  Russian  36                                                          
    20.  Serbo-Croation.   2                                                  
    21.  Spanish  37                                                          
    22.  Swedish   1                                                          
    23.  Thai                                                                 
                                                                              
      1                                                                       
    24.  Tibetan   2                                                          
    25.  Turkish   1                                                          
    26.  Vietnamese1                                                          
    ---------------------------                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
    MGIPRRND--Sec.  VII--6 M                                                  
    of EA/78--21-3-79----3,000                                                
                                                                              
      Jan 01, 1978                                                            
                                                                              
   External       External       External       External       External       
   website that   website that   website that   website that   website that   
   opens in a new opens in a new opens in a new opens in a new opens in a new 
   window         window         window         window         window         

    Address : Patiala House, Annexe - BNew Delhi                              
   -110001                                           Page last updated on: 09 
    Telephone: 23389073, 23382694, 23073685;                  December, 2013  
   Fax: 23386340, 23387700;Feedback :            Site designed and maintained 
   dirlibmea.gov.in                                  by: National Informatics 
    Officer In-charge:-                                         Centre (NIC), 
    (c)Content Owned by MEA Library Ministry of   DeitY, MoCIT, Government of 
   External Affairs, Government of India                               India. 
   Terms & Conditions | Privacy Policy |         Visitors:                    
   Copyright Policy | Hyperlinking Policy |      
   Accessibility Statement | Help                

   java script is required for this page
   MEAs App twitter Facebook Google plus YouTube flickr
   loading
