   java script is required for this page java script is required for this
   page java script is required for this page java script is required for
   this page java script is required for this page java script is required
   for this page

   Fri, February 06, 2015 at 05:16:50 IST Indian Flag
   Ministry of                      Print Content Small Font Medium Font      
    External       MEA Library      Large Font                                
    Affairs,   Ministry of External   * Sitemap                               
   Government  Affairs, Government    * Contact Us                            
    of India         of India         * Feedback                              
                                      * _____________________           [  ]  

     * Home
     * Director's Office
          * Director Lib & Info
          * Library Officers & Staff
     * Journals
          * Current Journals
          * Online Journals
          * CD-ROMs Databases
     * Online Services
          * Business Monitor Online
          * EIU
          * JSTOR
          * Janes Online Services
          * Kessing World News Archive
          * Marketline MDIC
          * Online Service Links
     * Newspapers
          * E-Newspapers
          * Subscribed Print Newspapers
     * Library Bulletins
          * Foreign Affairs Documentation Bulletin
          * Recent Additions
          * Chronicle of Events
     * Alert
          * Book Alert
          * Article Alerts
     * Important Abbrevations

 Annual Reports Prior to 1999                                                                      
   * Home >   Annual Reports Prior to 1999 >   Annual Report 1977-78               * Home          
 Annual Report 1977-78                                                             * Director's    
                                                                                     Office        
 Contents                                                                          * Journals      
 CHAPTERS  Introduction                                                   PAGES    * Online        
 I.        India's Neighbours                                             1          Services      
 II.       South-East Asia                                                8        * Newspapers    
 III.      East Asia                                                      10       * Alert         
 IV.       West Asia and North Africa                                     12       * Important     
 V.        Africa (South of the Sahara)                                   14         Abbrevations  
 VI.       Europe                                                         17       * Back          
 VII.      The Americas                                                   23                       
 VIII.     United Nations and International Conferences                   27                       
 IX.       Technical and Economic Cooperation                             35                       
 X.        External Publicity                                             43                       
 XI.       Cultural Relations                                             46                       
 XII.      Protocol                                                       50                       
 XIII.     Passport, Visa and Consular Services                           51                       
 XIV.      Administration and Organisation                                54                       
 XV.       Hindi in official work                                         56                       
  APPENDICES                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 NUMBER                                                   Page                                     
                                                                                                   
 I. Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars                                              
    etc. organised by Inter-Governmental Organisations at                                          
    which Government of India was represented in 1977-78   59                                      
                                                                                                   
 II. Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars                                             
     organised by Non-Governmental  Organisations, at                                              
     which India was represented with Government assistance                                        
     in 1977-78                                           69                                       
                                                                                                   
 III. Miscellaneous  International  Conferences etc. in                                            
      1977-78 at which Government of India was represented                                         
      or at which India was represented with Government of                                         
      India's assistance.                                  71                                      
                                                                                                   
 IV.  International Organisations of which India became a                                          
      Member or ceased to be a Member  during the year                                             
      1977-78                                             74                                       
                                                                                                   
 V.   Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or renewed                                         
      by India with other countries in 1977               75                                       
                                                                                                   
 VI.  Number of seats allotted to various countries in Engin-                                      
      eering and Medical Colleges                          86                                      
                                                                                                   
 VII. Statement of number of applications received and pass-                                       
      ports issued in 1977                                 88                                      
                                                                                                   
 VIII.Total sanctioned strength of Central Passport and                                            
      Emigration Organisation                              90                                      
                                                                                                   
 IX.  Statement showing the total number of employees (both                                        
      permanent and temporary) in the Ministry under various                                       
      groups and the representations of Scheduled Castes and                                       
      Scheduled Tribes therein (Position as on 31-12-1977) 91                                      
                                                                                                   
 X.   Statement showing the number of appointments                                                 
      (both by direct recruitment and by promotion) made to                                        
      various groups of posts and reserved vacancies filled by                                     
      Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes during 1977     92                                     
                                                                                                   
 XI.  Revenue expenditure of the Ministry during the financial                                     
      year 1977-78                                       93                                        
                                                                                                   
 XII. Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad                                        
      during 1977-78                                      94                                       
                                                                                                   
 XIII.List of Indian Missions/Posts opened in the year 1977-78                                     
                                                          96                                       
                                                                                                   
 Introduction                                                                                      
 Jan 01, 1977                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 INTRODUCTION                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 The year under review was by any criterion a historic land- mark in the                           
 progress of India since independence. The smooth transfer of authority from the                   
 political party in power to the Opposition, through a peaceful democratic                         
 revolution, elicited the admiration of freedom-loving people everywhere. It was                   
 an unequivocal demonstration of the maturity and wisdom of the Indian                             
 electorate. The ordinary Indian voter showed a capacity for discrimination                        
 between competing political and economic con- cepts and policies; he also                         
 reaffirmed in unmistakable fashion the commitment of the Indian people to                         
 democratic ideals. While burning domestic controversies dominated the election,                   
 it was noticed, both within India and abroad, that foreign policy had not been                    
 a matter of controversy in the campaign. This was possible because, during the                    
 years immediately before indepen- dence and subsequently when India played a                      
 dominant role in the political process of decolonisation, a consensus on                          
 foreign policy had developed within the country cutting across party lines.                       
 Against this background, it was only natural that on frequent occasions, during                   
 the months after the formation of the new go- vernment, the basic continuity of                   
 India's foreign policy was re-asserted in no uncertain terms.                                     
                                                                                                   
 This did not, however, mean that this major political trans- formation did not                    
 have any influence on the content and style of foreign policy. It was, for                        
 instance, recognised that there was need and scope to pay greater attention to                    
 relations with immediate neighbours in order to realise the aim of easing ten-                    
 sions and reaching agreements and generally creating a climate of confidence so                   
 essential for greater concentration on the develop- mental priorities. India                      
 can play an effective and useful role in the world community only if it has                       
 peaceful, friendly and productive relations with the neighbouring countries.                      
 Purpose- ful efforts were put under way on neighbourhood diplomacy and this, in                   
 turn, greatly facilitated the pursuit of preserving and invigorating beneficial                   
 relations with rest of the world. By fol- lowing a policy of genuine                              
 non-alignment in unequivocal terms. India has commanded respect for expressing                    
 its independence of judgement in effect pursuing policies in the best interest                    
 of the country and extending support to the cause of international peace and                      
 cooperation. It should be a matter of satisfaction that the                                       
                                                                                                   
 (i)                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 (ii)                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 stress on genuine non-alignment and the decision to pursue the policy with                        
 vigour has been understood and appreciated in it, proper perspective by                           
 different sections of the, world Community-                                                       
                                                                                                   
 Apart from the several fresh initiatives taken to foster a cli- mate of peace                     
 and cooperation in the region, an attempt was made to establish a meaningful                      
 relationship with the two Super powers and friendly relations with all                            
 countries based on beneficial coo- peration. The resurgence of democratic                         
 vigour was recognised as an example of India's faith in and practice of respect                   
 for human rights. If anything, this enabled India to maintain and even im-                        
 prove its support for democratic rights, especially in the struggle against the                   
 white-dominated minority regimes in Zimbabwe and South Africa. Attention was                      
 focussed on economic dimensions of world problems, both at the United Nations                     
 and in dialogue between the developed and the developing countries. Stressing                     
 the indivisibility of peace and prosperity, India called upon all nations to                      
 share their resources and technology and, through an equitable and just                           
 international order, work for the creation of a better and stable world.                          
                                                                                                   
 The year witnessed significant internal political changes in a number of                          
 countries but there was no marked change in the inter- national situation.                        
 Relations between the United States and the Soviet Union showed a mutual                          
 recognition of the logic of detente, rather than confrontation but the pace of                    
 progress was halting and not free of suspicion. The Belgrade Conference re-                       
 viewing the work of the Helsinki Agreement demonstrated their desire to                           
 continue to strive for strengthening the climate of se- curity and cooperation                    
 in Europe but also the slow progress in advancing it. The same spirit was                         
 reflected in their continued negotiations in a new SALT treaty and their mutual                   
 discussions regarding the problem relating to the Indian Ocean area. Their                        
 agreement to accept the co-chairmanship of the Geneva Confe- rence indicated                      
 their common interest in resolving the West Asia problem but differences                          
 developed in their approach on whether separate bilateral attempts could reach                    
 that goal.                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 The spirit of detente, however, did not extend to all parts of the world.                         
 Certain areas of tension and conflict remained en- couraging external                             
 intervention, promoting international rivalry and thus posing a threat to peace                   
 and security. In South East Asia, border conflict between Cambodia and Vietnam                    
 threatened to upset the newly-found stability and normalcy in that area follow-                   
 ing the liberation of the states of Indo-China. In West Asia, direct talks                        
 between President Sadat and the Prime Minister of                                                 
                                                                                                   
 (iii)                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Israel failed to overcome hurdles in the way of a lasting solution of the                         
 Arab-Israel problem. The integrity of Cyprus still re- mained a matter of                         
 concern, the Greek and Turkish Cypriots hav- ing failed to resolve their                          
 differences. In Africa, relations between Ethiopia and Somalia erupted into an                    
 open conflict which threatens peace and security in the Horn of Africa and                        
 carries danger of jeopardising international peace. In Southern Africa, the                       
 denial of freedom and equal rights to the majority of the people by the                           
 white-dominated governments of Zimbabwe and South Africa created an explosive                     
 situation. In the economic sphere, the energy crisis, inflation, the monetary                     
 instability, the divisive effects of trade barriers and protectionism continued                   
 to dominate international economic problems. The dialogue bet- ween the                           
 developed and the developing countries did not yield the results which had been                   
 hoped from the Conference on Inter- national Economic Cooperation (CIEC).                         
                                                                                                   
 India, in pursuit of the belief that detente should extend to all parts of the                    
 world, considered the development of relations with its neighbours, based on                      
 trust and cooperation, as fundamental to the promotion of peace and security on                   
 the sub-continent. Its policies in this direction acquired a new vitality and                     
 dynamism. The visits of the Minister of External Affairs to Burma, Nepal,                         
 Bhutan, Afghanistan and Pakistan aimed at establishing high-level contacts to                     
 promote understanding, find a solution to unresolved problems and strengthen                      
 economic cooperation. A meaningful and constructive approach was given to                         
 relations with Bangladesh by reaching an agreement on sharing of the Ganga                        
 waters in a spirit of shared sacrifice and mutual accommodation. The visit of                     
 the Minister of External Affairs to Nepal followed by that of the Prime                           
 Minister developed mutual trust and goodwill by India's agreeing to the request                   
 of Nepal to replace the earlier Treaty of Trade and Transit by two separate                       
 treaties. The initial- ling of the Treaties of Trade and Transit and the                          
 agreement for cooperation to control unauthorised trade in early March marks a                    
 historic step in the evolution of the relationship, so that with mutual                           
 respect, trust and sensitivity to each other's aspirations, independent policy,                   
 beneficial cooperation and confidence can grow to the advantage of each and                       
 reinforce their traditional interdependence. The visit to Bhutan resulted in                      
 greater under- standing which provided a basis for further cooperation. During                    
 the visit of the Minister of External Affairs to Burma in August 1977, the                        
 willingness of the two sides to hold negotiations for demarcating the maritime                    
 boundaries in the Andaman Sea and the Gulf of Martaban reflected a constructive                   
 approach to resolve                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 (iv)                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 problems through bilateral discussions. The assurance given by Burma to                           
 expedite the process of granting Burmese citizenship to persons of Indian                         
 origin augured well for the future of the Indo-Burmese relations. The visit to                    
 Afghanistan underlined the close ties with that country and the common desire                     
 to intensify cooperation among non-aligned states. The cultural agreement                         
 signed with Sri Lanka in November and the credit extended to that country in                      
 January 1978 showed India's desire to work for greater understanding and                          
 cooperation with that country. As regards Pakistan, the, Minister of External                     
 Affairs, during his goodwill visit in February 1978, assured that country not                     
 only that India adhered to the policy of non-interference in the internal                         
 affairs of other countries, but it cherished the hope of good neighbourly                         
 relations, so that both countries may prosper econo- mically in mutual                            
 confidence. The visit helped in both countries understanding each other's                         
 points of view and discussions held opened up greater prospects of increase in                    
 trade and cultural ex- changes between the two countries.                                         
                                                                                                   
 With China, its northern neighbour, notwithstanding the un- resolved boundary                     
 question, India continued to work for step-by- step improvement in bilateral                      
 relations between the two countries. The initiative taken to resume severed                       
 trade links, the conclusion of agreements between the two sides at the Canton                     
 Fair and the exchange of goodwill visits at the unofficial level reflected                        
 India's positive approach in that direction.                                                      
                                                                                                   
 Besides developing closer relations with its neighbours, India worked for                         
 greater cooperation and friendly ties with the countries of South East Asia and                   
 West Asia. The policy of non-alignment shared by India with most countries of                     
 these regions provided a sound basis for promoting such relations. At the                         
 conference of Indian envoys in South and South East Asia, held at New Delhi in                    
 August 1977, concrete steps to invigorate closer economic, political and                          
 cultural ties with the countries in the region were identified. The                               
 establishment of joint ventures in Malaysia and Indonesia and a more active                       
 programme of economic cooperation demonstrated India's intention to share and                     
 be a partner in the development of the region. Relations with Vietnam developed                   
 rapidly during the year culminating in the visit of the Vietnamese Prime                          
 Mniister at the end of February 1978. India considers it a privilege to respond                   
 to the utmost of its capacity in joining in with gigantic task facing that                        
 country to rehabilitate its devastated economy and looks forward to the                           
 establishment of even closer cooperative relations with Vietnam. India welcomed                   
 ASEAN as an organisation for promoting regional cooperation. The                                  
                                                                                                   
 (v)                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 participation in a regional Commonwealth Conference held in Australia in                          
 February 1978, the first of its kind within the Com- monwealth, reflected                         
 India's belief that regional members of the Commonwealth, through mutual                          
 discussions, could help to pro- mote functional cooperation without in any way                    
 disturbing the existing network of well-established institutions. It also                         
 provided an opportunity to India to offer its cooperation with the South                          
 Pacific countries which have indeed very special problems of development. While                   
 relations with Japan have always been cor- dial, India would like to forge                        
 closer links with this great Asian country, which has emerged as the third                        
 leading economic power in the world. Particular significance was, therefore,                      
 attached to in the world. Particular significance was, therefore, attached to                     
 1977.                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 In West Asia, India noted the initiative taken by President Sadat of holding                      
 direct talks with the Prime Minister of Israel and kept close watch over                          
 developments in the region. India would welcome a peaceful solution and                           
 favoured an early conven- ing of the Geneva Peace Conference. It, however,                        
 believed that any just and lasting settlement could only be reached on the                        
 basis of the withdrawal of Israel from the Arab territories under its illegal                     
 occupation and restoration of legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. At                     
 the same time, it maintained that boun- daries between states should be settled                   
 through negotiations and not by force and all states in the region, including                     
 Israel, should have the right to exist in peace within secure boundaries. With                    
 the other individual states of West Asia, India followed a dynamic policy of                      
 increasing contacts to find avenues for greater coopera- tion on the basis of                     
 equality and mutual benefit. The visit of the Minister of Works, Housing &                        
 Supply as Special Envoy of the- Prime Minister to United Arab Emirates, Qatar,                    
 Bahrein, Egypt and Algeria and that of the Minister of Industry to Libya,                         
 Kuwait, Jordan, Syria and Iraq in October marked India's desire to ex- pand                       
 cultural and economic relations with these countries. A protocol was signed                       
 with Libya in October providing for coopera- tion in industrial field. A loan                     
 of Rs. 45 crores was received from Kuwait Fund for the Kalanadi hydroelectric                     
 project. The meetings of the Indo-Iranian Joint Commission in September and                       
 Indo-Iraq Joint Commission in November resulted in agreements for cooperation                     
 with these countries in various developmental activities. During the visit of                     
 the Deputy Prime Minister of Egypt in January 1978, India agreed to extend                        
 scientific, technical and industrial cooperation to that country for some of                      
 its deve- lopmental projects. The visit of the Shahenshah of Iran in                              
                                                                                                   
 (vi)                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 February 1978 was of far-reaching significance. It symbolised the steady                          
 improvement in India's relations with Iran and led to major fresh commitments                     
 in our economic cooperation and proof of the concrete confidence in relations                     
 which can be of benefit in the search for stability and progress of the region                    
 to which both countries belong. Through a technical and economic agreement                        
 signed with Yemen, India agreed to participate in the develop- ment plans of                      
 that country.                                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 The developments in Africa received India's close attention. There was great                      
 concern about the conflict in the Horn of Africa. India made known its concern                    
 and urged that the fighting between Somalia and Ethiopia should cease and while                   
 respecting establish- ed frontiers, a solution should be found under UN, OAU or                   
 any other mutually acceptable auspices. In Southern Africa the racist policy of                   
 white-dominated minority regimes and opposi- tion to such policies by the black                   
 majority created dangers of war and conflict. Wedded to the policy of                             
 anti-colonialism and anti- racialism, India wanted full international pressure                    
 to be brought on these white-dominated regimes through sanctions and other                        
 means to change their oppressive policies. Favouring a solution to the problem                    
 through peaceful means, India welcomed the posi- tive elements in the proposals                   
 put forward by Britain and the United States for majority rule and independence                   
 of Zimbabwe. If the white regimes did not change their policies, India believed                   
 that the black majority had no option but to resort to an armed struggle. In                      
 that context, India urged unity amongst the libera- tion movement and that                        
 minority rule must be replaced, and through a basis of adult suffrage,                            
 independent Zimbabwe should come into being after a limited transition. It                        
 denounced the illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa and expressed its                     
 support for the SWAPO in its struggle for realising the indepen- dence of                         
 Namibia.                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 At the same India, India continued to strengthen bilateral re- lations with the                   
 independent countries of Africa. The Indo- Tanzanian Commission, which met in                     
 July/August 1977, agreed to strengthen cooperation in industry, agriculture and                   
 many other fields. The need for further development of trade with Zambia                          
 received emphasis during the visit of the Zambian Minister of Commerce to India                   
 in October. Various industrial projects, on which India and Uganda could                          
 cooperate, were identified during the visit to India by the Uganda Minister for                   
 Power and Industry in November 1977. India welcomed the relaxation of tension                     
 in Europe and growing cooperation between countries of Western and Eastern                        
                                                                                                   
 (vii)                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Europe and maintained relations with them on the basis of equa- lity and                          
 beneficial cooperation. Fruitful economic relations were established with a                       
 number of countries of Western Europe. India and the Federal Republic of                          
 Germany identified projects for industrial collaboration and joint ventures in                    
 third countries. The European Economic Community continued to be India's                          
 largest trading partner and one of the main sources of developmental                              
 assistance. India, however, wanted the Community to take a more cooperative and                   
 accommodating attitude in matters of trade with the developing countries. This                    
 was impressed on the British Prime Minister and the President and Foreign                         
 Minister of Ireland during their visit to India. They appreciated India's point                   
 of view. The Danish Minister of Economic Cooperation, during her visit, assured                   
 that Denmark would take a liberal attitude to- wards developing countries. It                     
 was India's hope that the EEC would adopt a less protectionist and more                           
 forward-looking approach in its trade relations with the developing countries.                    
 The visit of the British Prime Minister in January 1978 resulted in injecting                     
 greater understanding and cordiality in Indo-British relations. It underlined                     
 the common ideals and aspirations shar- ed by both countries. The visit opened                    
 up prospects of increased trade and greater economic and technical                                
 collaboration. The Irish President's visit resulted in the reiteration of the                     
 ties of friendship and consideration of greater cooperation with that country                     
 in different fields.                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 With the socialist countries of Eastern Europe, India, through high-level                         
 exchanges, worked to promote cultural contacts and economic cooperation in                        
 various fields. The visit of the Minister of Education to Poland and the German                   
 Democratic Republic and the visit of a Czechoslovak cultural delegation to                        
 India indicated efforts towards promotion of greater culture relations. The                       
 meetings of the Indo-Polish Joint Commission and Indo-German Democratic                           
 Republic Joint Commission and the visits of trade delegations from Poland and                     
 Bulgaria marked the trend towards developing greater trade and economic                           
 cooperation with the coun- tries of of Eastern Europe. Particularly close                         
 relations were maintained with Yugoslavia which equally subscribed to the                         
 policy of non-alignment in its foreign relations. Discussions held during the                     
 visit of the Minister of External Affairs to Yugo- slavia in September 1977                       
 highlighted the common approach of the two countries towards international                        
 problems and their desire for greater economic, scientific and cultural                           
 cooperation.                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 A genuinely non-aligned country opposed to the concepts of blocs in                               
 international relations, India did not believe that friendly                                      
                                                                                                   
 (viii)                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 relations with any one country should come in the way of its developing such                      
 relations with any third country. The visit of the Prime Minister to the Soviet                   
 Union highlighted the fact that different social and economic systems did not                     
 constitute a hurdle to developing good relations. Friendly ties with the Soviet                   
 Union had stood the test of time and were based on national in- terests and                       
 enlightened common purpose. The Soviet Union re- cognised that India's policy                     
 of non-alignment could make a great contribution towards the common struggle                      
 against imperialism, colonialism and racialism. India believed that cooperation                   
 with the Soviet Union on the basis of equality, mutual benefit, non-                              
 interference in each other's internal affairs with the right of each other to                     
 choose their own political and social systems and the renunciation of the use                     
 of force, would strengthen the cause of peace and stability in Asia and the                       
 world. Growing trade and economic cooperation in various fields reflected the                     
 close ties between the two countries.                                                             
                                                                                                   
 A meaningful dialogue was opened to promote understanding with the United                         
 States, the second largest democracy in the world, whose outlook on world                         
 affairs could not be ignored in the inter- est of world peace and stability.                      
 Mutual exchanges between the Prime Minister of India and the President of the                     
 United States marked a good beginning for developing greater understanding. The                   
 visit of President Carter to India in January 1978 gave a meaningful direction                    
 to relations with that country. As in the case of the Soviet Union, India,                        
 during this visit, reaffirmed the right of each people to determine its own                       
 form of government and its own political, social and economic policies. Though                    
 the views of India and the United States did not coincide on all issues, the                      
 two countries shared the common goal of working towards demo- cracy, human                        
 development, social justice and peace. This was spelt out in the Delhi                            
 Declaration issued at the conclusion of the- visit. The Declaration was seen as                   
 not merely an affirmation of cherished common values by two friendly nations                      
 but also as a restatement of the fundamental principles which should govern the                   
 conduct of relations between nations in an increasingly com- plex international                   
 environment which can remain valid through time. India hoped that, through the                    
 three sub-commissions,-- economic and commercial, education and culture,                          
 science and technology-, the two countries would be able to further bilateral                     
 cooperation for their mutual benefit.                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Friendship with all countries did not preclude India from tak- ing an                             
 independent stand on issues it considered vital for peace and security. India                     
 was critical of the large amounts spent on                                                        
                                                                                                   
 (ix)                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 stock-piling of arms, their development and sale, and felt that even a small                      
 percentage of expenditure met on them. if diverted towards economic progress                      
 and welfare, would greatly contribute towards human progress and development.                     
 Advocating complete and universal disarmament, India openly announced its                         
 decision of not carrying out any nuclear tests or developing nuclear wea- pons.                   
 It refused to yield to outside pressure to sign the non- proliferation treaty.                    
 The Treaty was regarded discriminatory as the nuclear powers themselves were                      
 not prepared to accept the conditions they wanted to lay down for the                             
 non-nuclear powers. India stood for the utilisation of nuclear energy on the                      
 basis of sovereignty, equality and non-discrimination and the acceptance by all                   
 powers, including the major powers, of the need for ulti- mate elimination of                     
 all nuclear weapons. While welcoming the Soviet-US talks on the Indian Ocean,                     
 India wanted the elimina- tion of all bases from the area and hoped that the                      
 major powers would cooperate with the littoral states to make the Indian Ocean                    
 an area of peace free from great power rivalry.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 India recognised that friendly relations with other countries should focus                        
 attention on global interdependence and the need for a new international                          
 economic order that would remove eco- nomic disparity among nations and bring                     
 them together to work for the welfare of all humanity constituting as one                         
 world. The growth and prosperity of the developed world was closely linked with                   
 the growth and development in the developing countries and it was necessary for                   
 the developed countries to understand the social and economic problems                            
 confronting the developing countries and to narrow the gap between them and the                   
 deve- loping countries. Both at the Conference on International Eco- nomic                        
 Cooperation held in Paris in May-June and at the forum of the United Nations,                     
 India emphasised the need for sharing of technological development and                            
 resources by nations in order to bring about an equitable and just                                
 international economic order. Conscious of the half-hearted support by the                        
 developed count- ries towards, this end, India impressed upon the non-aligned                     
 nations within the Group of 77 to strengthen their unity and work for the                         
 realisation of this objective. It believed that collective self-reliance                          
 through cooperation by the non-aligned nations would focus greater attention on                   
 the question of deve- lopment and need for international cooperation and thus                     
 help towards ultimate realisation of a just and equitable economic order. It                      
 was not only political equality but also economic equality, that would help in                    
 bringing about a "warm living peace" among nations free from exploitation,                        
 mutual fear and suspicion.                                                                        
                                                                             Top                   
 India's Neighbours                                                                                
 CHAPTER I                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 INDIAS NEIGHBOURS                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 India gave top priority to improving its relations with its immediate                             
 neighbours among its foreign policy objective. These relations, developed on                      
 the basis of equality, goodwill and mu- tual trust, helped towards creating a                     
 climate of normalisation and friendship, thus promoting the cause of peace in                     
 the region.                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 The Minister of External Affairs, during his visit to Afgha- nistan from 3 to                     
 Sep 06, 1977, reassured Afghan leaders of India's desire to maintain the                          
 traditionally close ties of friend- ship between India and Afghanistan and to                     
 further enhance them to their mutual benefit. The visit provided an opportu-                      
 nity for establishment of personal rapport with Afghan leaders and for exchange                   
 of views on bilateral, regional and internatio- nal problems. Both countries                      
 reaffirmed their adherence to non-alignment and their belief in the principles                    
 of co-existence as fundamental to conduct of relations. Discussions held during                   
 the visit of President Daoud to India in March 1978 showed the close identity                     
 of views of the two countries on major inter- national problems. There was                        
 satisfaction at technical and economic cooperation between the two countries                      
 and it was agreed to strengthen and widen further areas of bilateral co-                          
 operation.                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 A significant event in the field of cultural cooperation was completion of the                    
 restoration work, by the Archaelogical Sur- vey of India in September 1977, on                    
 the two colossal world famous statues of the Buddha at Bamiyan. The Minister of                   
 External Affairs participated in the ceremony held at Bamiyan to mark the                         
 occasion. An Indian trade delegation visited Kabul in September-October 1977                      
 and succeeded in resolving some operational trade problems following a review                     
 of the trade agreement of September 1975. Relations between India and                             
 Bangladesh took a turn for the better following bold decisions taken by the new                   
 Government, particularly in regard to Farakka and to border incidents. India                      
 lost no time to declare its policy of strict non-interference in the internal                     
 affairs of Bangladesh and of its regard for its                                                   
                                                                                                   
 pg1                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 pg2                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 sovereignty and independence. While not refusing political asylum on                              
 humanitarian grounds to Bangladeshi nationals who had come over to India, after                   
 15 August 1975, India made it clear that these political refugees would not be                    
 allowed to use the Indian soil for carrying out propaganda or other activities                    
 directed against their Government. As a result, a number of Bangladeshi                           
 political refugees returned to their country and Bangladesh stopped making                        
 allegations against India regarding border incidents.                                             
                                                                                                   
 After the understanding reached in the Ministerial level talks in April 1977 on                   
 the Farakka question, three rounds of official level talks were held between                      
 the delegations of India and Bangladesh from 7 to 11 May in New Delhi, from 28                    
 July to 6 August in Dacca and from 20 to 29 September in New Delhi. At the end                    
 of the third round of these talks an agree- ment was reached on the Sharing of                    
 the Ganga Waters at Farakka and on Augmenting its Flows and signed in Dacca on                    
 5 November 1977. This agreement, valid for an initial period of five years,                       
 provided for an arrangement of sharing of the Ganga waters at Farakka between                     
 the two countries and pro- cedures for finding a speedy solution to the                           
 long-term problem of augmenting the flow of the Ganga. The signing of this                        
 Agreement resolved an issue which had defied solution for more than a quarter                     
 of a century. The Agreement should pave the way for wider cooperation between                     
 the two countries for har- nessing their water resources to the benefit of                        
 their peoples. The Joint Committee, set up under the provisions of the Agree-                     
 ment to supervise the implementation of the arrangement for sharing, held two                     
 meetings in December 1977 and agreed upon the procedures for observing the                        
 flows to be released at Farakka. The arrangement for sharing came into effect                     
 from 1 January 1978.                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 The Indo-Bangladesh Joint Rivers Commission held its first meeting, after the                     
 signing of the Agreement and after its status was elevated to the Ministerial                     
 level, from 21 to 24 Janu- ary 1978. The most important item on the agenda of                     
 the Joint Rivers Commission was the mandate given to it, under Article IX of                      
 the Agreement, to prepare a study of the best means of augmenting the flow of                     
 the Ganga. It was agreed in the meet- ing that the two Governments would submit                   
 their proposals by mid-March 1978, that a study group would be set up for each                    
 proposal and that a work schedule for each study group would be prepared and                      
 agreed upon so that the study could be com- pleted and the recommendations of                     
 the Joint Rivers Commission                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 pg3                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 formulated within the time-limit of three years stipulated in the Agreement. In                   
 addition, the Joint Rivers Commission took first step towards reviving its                        
 other functions under its Statute and work on which had started till it came to                   
 a standstill after June 1975.                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 The Directors General of the Border Forces of the two countries met twice,                        
 first in April 1977 and more recently from 25 to 27 January 1978, and made                        
 considerable headway towards the realisation of the common objective of the two                   
 countries of maintaining a border of peace and stability.                                         
                                                                                                   
 Personal contacts between the Prime Minister of India and President Ziaur                         
 Rahman of Bangladesh were a major factor in removing misunderstanding between                     
 the two countries and res- toring mutual trust. These contacts began with their                   
 meetings at the time of the Commonwealth Prime Ministers Conference in London                     
 and were continued thereafter. At the invitation of the Government of India,                      
 President Ziaur Rahman paid a State visit to India, on 19-20 December 1977.                       
 During the visit, a wide range of bilateral, regional and inter- national                         
 issues of mutual interest were discussed between the Prime Minister of India                      
 and the President of the Bangladesh and between the delegation of the two                         
 countries. The visit of the President of Bangladesh further contributed to the                    
 building of mutual confidence and the consolidation of friendly relations                         
 between the two countries.                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 In the economic field, supply of commodities under the un- utilised portion of                    
 Government-to-Government credits and grants extended earlier to Bangladesh was                    
 continued and the total amount of utilisation during the first nine months of                     
 the year was approximately Rs. 1.07 crores. As in the previous year, India                        
 offered 100 scholarships to Bangladesh nationals in various disciplines under                     
 its Technical Assistance Programme. India also tried to meet shortages of                         
 essential commodities in Bangla- desh in spite of the fact that there was an                      
 acute shortage of these commodities in India itself.                                              
                                                                                                   
 Exchange of visits at the highest level helped to promote close and friendly                      
 relations between India and Bhutan. The King of Bhutan visited Delhi in April                     
 1977 and the Minister of External Affairs accompanied by the Foreign Secretary                    
 visited Bhutan in November 1977. Discussions held during these visits                             
 contributed to the building up of a spirit of mutual trust and confidence, thus                   
 consolidating the freindship between the two countries.                                           
                                                                                                   
 pg4                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 India continued to be a partner in the economic development efforts, of Bhutan                    
 and provided financial and other assistance in this connection. India undertook                   
 to contribute approximately Rs. 70 crores for the Fourth Five Year Plan of                        
 Bhutan and during 1977-78 provided Rs. 13.50 crores for this purpose. A budget                    
 provision of Rs. 8.50 crores was also made for the year 1977-78 towards the                       
 construction of a hydel project at Chukha. India also undertook to construct a                    
 cement plant at Penden and a provision of Rs. 3.50 crores was made for this                       
 purpose in the current financial year. India was implementing a compre- hensive                   
 area development scheme in the town of Gaylegphug in sourthern Bhutan. It also                    
 agreed to assist Bhutan in joint investigation of water resources of various                      
 rivers.                                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 India gave assistance to Bhusan to build an infrastructure for increasing its                     
 foreign trade and expanding its export. Assist- ance was also given in the form                   
 of experts and specialists in various fields including forestry, industries,                      
 mineral and geologi- cal exploration, telecommunications, road construction and                   
 sur- vey work.                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 Many Bhutanese students were granted scholarships for higher studies at various                   
 institutes in India.                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 The Minister of External Affairs, in pursuance of India's policy to promote                       
 greater goodwill and cooperation with its neighbours, visited Burma in August                     
 1977. In the discussions held during the visit, both countries agreed that, in                    
 the spirit of friendship and good neighbourliness, they should explore avenues                    
 of further cooperation in economic, technical and cul- tural fields. It was                       
 decided to resume negotiations on demar- cating the maritime boundary as the                      
 establishment of 200 mile economic zone by both India and Burma had resulted in                   
 the over-lapping of the zone in the Andaman sea and the gulf of Martaban. The                     
 assurance given by the Burmese that they would expedite the grant of Burmese                      
 citizenship to persons of Indian origin indicated the spirit of understanding                     
 and cooperation existing in the friendly relations between India and Burma.                       
                                                                                                   
 The visit of the Maldives Minister of Education to India in May 1977 reflected                    
 the friendly contacts being maintained between India and the Maldives. The,                       
 Government of Maldives and the Indian Airlines signed an agreement for the                        
 establish- ment of Maldives International Airways to provide air service on                       
 Mate-Colombo sector.                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 pg5                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 India's efforts to establish a mutually cooperative and mean- ingful                              
 relationship with Nepal was a part of its conserted effort to-establish close-                    
 ties with its immediate neighbours. The visit of the King of Nepal to India in                    
 April 1977 followed by the visit of India's Minister of External Affairs to                       
 Nepal in July 1977 and of the Prime Minister of India in December 1977, helped                    
 towards building such a relationship in a spirit of mutual trust and                              
 confidence. India assured Nepal that it did not seek to interfere in its                          
 domestic affairs and was generally interested in developing mutually                              
 cooperative ties. Regarding new arrangements for Indo-Nepalese trade, the Prime                   
 Minister expressed India's willingness to have two separate treaties on trade                     
 and transit and this was welcomed by Nepal. It was, however, also agreed that                     
 both countries would cooperate in taking measures to check unauthorised trade                     
 across their open border as such trade could cause harm to the economy of                         
 either country. Further discussions on these matters were held during the visit                   
 of a Nepalese delegation to India in January 1978 and of an Indian delegation                     
 to Nepal in February-March 1978. A broad understanding reached resulted in the                    
 initialling of separate treaties on trade and transit and an agreement to check                   
 unauthorised trade. This reflected the growing trust, under- standing and                         
 mutual cooperation in Indo-Nepalese relations.                                                    
                                                                                                   
 The Prime Minister during his visit also discussed the enor- mous potential of                    
 rivers in the two countries which could be harnessed for their mutual benefit.                    
 An agreement was reached on specific measures to set in motion the process of                     
 expeditious study and execution of four projects on the rivers Karnali,                           
 Mahakali, Rapti and Trisuli.                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 India continued to extend financial and technical assistance for development                      
 programmes in Nepal. An amount of Rs. 9.09 crores was provided during the                         
 current year for meeting expenditure on schemes in hand. The major project for                    
 which assistance was to be given was the 250-Km long Central Sector of the                        
 Mahendra Rai Marg expected to be completed by 1980- 81 at an estimated cost of                    
 Rs. 40 crores. India agreed to carry out the Devighat Hydro-Electric Project on                   
 a turkey basis and undertake a detailed ground survey of the Dolalghat-                           
 Dhankuta road. Agreements were also reached during the year for continuance of                    
 the scheme for the development of village, cottage and small scale industries                     
 in Nepal. Letters were also exchanged concerning Indian assistance of Rs. 12                      
 lakhs towards construction of a Sports Complex at Pokhra, and extension of the                    
 agreement relating to supply of Iodised Salt to Nepal. The 638-meter bridge on                    
 river Kamla built with Indian assistance at                                                       
                                                                                                   
 pg6                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 a cost of Rs. 4.03 crores was inaugurated by the Prime Minister of Nepal in                       
 November 1977.                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 India, in pursuance of its policy of developing friendly rela- tions with                         
 neighbouring countries, worked for normalisation of relations with Pakistan                       
 while adhering scrupulously to the princi- ple of non-interference in its                         
 internal affairs. The developments in Pakistan, though watched with interest,                     
 were considered as an internal affair of Pakistan and India reiterated its                        
 policy of non-interference in the domestic affairs of other countries.                            
                                                                                                   
 The visit of the Minister of External Affairs to Pakistan in February 1978                        
 marked the culmination of this policy. This was the first visit by an Indian                      
 Minister of External Affairs to Pakistan in 12 years. The Minister, during the                    
 visit, assured Pakistan that India remained committed to the Simla Agreement                      
 and did not seek or claim a leadership much less hegemonistic role in the                         
 region. Further, India was willing to accelerate the pace of normalisation but                    
 the pace would only be as fast as the country concerned jointly determined it.                    
 Pakistan expressed appreciation of India's policy of non-interference in the                      
 internal affairs of other countries and of its attitude towards its smaller                       
 neighbours. Discussions held during the visit included ex- change of ideas on                     
 bilateral matters such as trade, visa procedures and cultural exchanges and                       
 multilateral matters including cooperation in preparation for the United                          
 Nations General Assembly special session on disarmament. Kashmir wag also                         
 discussed and both sides put forward their respective points of view. Pakistan                    
 expressed readiness to resume talks on Salal Project from where they were left                    
 off in October 1976. As a result of discussions it was decided that trade talks                   
 due in January would be held early. Discussions on the Salal Project would be                     
 resumed and journalists would be allowed to be posted in the capital of either                    
 country.                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 The situation on the border throughout the year remained normal, both before                      
 and after the army took over in Pakistan in July 1977. Travel by road, rail and                   
 air between the two countries was not affected. An agreement was signed on 31                     
 August 1977 in New Delhi regarding visa facilities for air- lines personnel and                   
 another agreement on telecommunications in Islamabad on 31 October 1977. As a                     
 consequence of the second agreement, a satellite link went into operation on 1                    
 De- cember 1977. In order to facilitate further the movement of goods by rail,                    
 delegations from both sides held talks in Islamabad from 26 to 29 December 1977                   
 to review the rail agreement of 1976.                                                             
                                                                                                   
 pg7                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 Trade between India and Pakistan increased during the year. A large variety of                    
 goods including timber, cement and steel were exported from India to Pakistan.                    
 A delegation from the Indian Oil Corporation visited Islamabad in October and                     
 signed contracts for the import of furnace oil and naphtha worth S 14 million,                    
 from Pakistan.                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 A new feature during the year was the beginnings in cultu- ral exchanges                          
 between the two countries. Delegations from each country participated in the                      
 celebrations commemorating the birth centenary of poet and philosopher Allama                     
 Mohammad Iqbal in India and Pakistan. Some Pakistani singers visited India and                    
 received enthusiastic response from the Indian public. The decision to hold                       
 hockey matches between the teams of the two countries in February 1978, was                       
 widely welcomed.                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 India believes that further contacts between the peoples of the two countries                     
 can lead to the building of trust and under- standing. To this end, India looks                   
 forward to both countries agreeing to the progressive liberalisation of travel                    
 arrangements for their nationals.                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 Conscious of the humanitarian aspect involved, India offer- ed to release                         
 unilaterally 433 Pakistani detenus in India and Pakistan offered to release 268                   
 Indians held in Pakistan. There were two exchanges during the year involving                      
 291 persons. The cases of those remaining are being verified by either side.                      
                                                                                                   
 Friendly ties between India and Sri Lanka were marked by close cooperation in                     
 cultural and economic fields. A cultural agreement was signed between the two                     
 countries and India ex- tended to Sri Lanka a credit of Rs. 70 million for the                    
 purchase of intermediate goods and essential articles of mass consump- tion.                      
 There was concern in India at the anti-Tamil disturbanc- es in some parts of                      
 Sri Lanka in August 1977 which involved some Indian nationals and some persons                    
 of Indian origin who were to be repatriated to India. The effective steps taken                   
 by Sri Lanka to restore normalcy and bring about confidence with- in the Tamil                    
 community were noted with satisfaction. India donated a sum of Rs. 8 lakhs to                     
 Sri Lanka as contribution towards relief and rehabilitation to those affected                     
 by the distur- bances.                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 The Minister of Home Affairs visited Sri Lanka from 3 to 6 February 1978 to                       
 represent Government of India at the installation ceremony of Mr. J. R.                           
 Jayewardene as the first executive President of Sri Lanka under the country's                     
 amended Constitution. Sep 06, 1977                                                                
                                                                             Top                   
 South-East Asia                                                                                   
 Jan 01, 1977                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 CHAPTER II                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 SOUTH-EAST ASIA                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 A Conference of the Heads of Missions in South and South East Asia, held in New                   
 Delhi in August 1977, underlined the importance India attached to developing                      
 friendly and cooperative relations with all countries of South-East Asia. The                     
 sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the countries of the                       
 South- East Asia and stability in the region is of vital importance to India.                     
 India noted a general desire in the region to settle its problems without                         
 outside influence and pressure and to work towards meeting the aspirations and                    
 rising expectations of the people for a better life by promoting economic                         
 development through national and regional cooperation. India welcomed the                         
 evolution of the ASEAN into an effective instrument of coopera- tion among its                    
 members. Having friendly relations both with the ASEAN countries and Indo-China                   
 States, India viewed with favour the progressive development of relations                         
 between them. So far as the development of the region was concerned, India                        
 expressed its willingness to share its resources, limited as they were, with                      
 the countries of South-East Asia to contribute towards their development.                         
 Opposed to any foreign military presence in the region India reiterated its                       
 support for the concept of South- East Asia as a zone of peace, freedom and                       
 neutrality. It was hoped that sub-regional cooperation would develop into                         
 regional consciousness and in due course contribute to the crystalisation of an                   
 Asian approach on international questions of common concern.                                      
                                                                                                   
 There was increasing cooperation between India and various countries of the                       
 region in economic and commercial fields. India wanted this cooperation to grow                   
 as it was in the interest of deve- loping nations to have such cooperation for                    
 mutual bent-fit.                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 India and Thailand signed a cultural agreement in April 1977. An understanding                    
 was also reached with Thailand on the delimi- tation of the maritime boundary                     
 in the Andamans Sea.                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 India supported and welcomed the admission of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam                   
 to the United Nations. The visit of the Foreign Minister and Deputy Foreign                       
 Minister of Vietnam and an economic delegation and the visit of an Indian                         
 delegation led                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 pg8                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 pg9                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 by the Minister of State for External Affairs to that country in February 1978,                   
 indicated a mutual desire to consolidate friend- ship and promote cooperation.                    
 This was further highlighted during the visit of the Prime Minister of Vietnam                    
 to India towards the end of February 1978. His discussions with the Prime                         
 Minister of India on regional and international problems reflected the common                     
 belief of both countries that relations with neigh- bouring countries should be                   
 settled through negotiations free from foreign interference in a spirit of                        
 equality and mutual respect. The two Prime Ministers reaffirmed their desire                      
 that India and Vietnam would closely cooperate with each other and with other                     
 non-Aligned countries in dealing with international questions at various                          
 international fora. The visit helped towards strengthen- ing friendship and                       
 promoting mutually beneficial cooperation between India and Vietnam.                              
                                                                                                   
 India and Indonesia exchanged instruments of ratification relating to the                         
 agreement on extension of the continental shelf boundary between the two                          
 countries.                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 Relations with Australia and New Zealand which had conti- nued to be friendly                     
 received fillip following the visit of the Prime Minister to Australia to                         
 attend the Regional Commonwealth Conference. Bilateral discussions with the                       
 Australian Prime Minister helped to promote mutual understanding, thus paving                     
 the way for closer links towards furthering regional cooperation. The outbreak                    
 of Anand Marg activities in Australia against Indian diplomats created concern                    
 but it was satisfying that Australia took prompt measure towards controlling                      
 their activi- ties and providing security for the Indian diplomatic officers in                   
 that country. Jan 01, 1977                                                                        
                                                                             Top                   
 East Asia                                                                                         
 CHAPTER III                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 EAST ASIA                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 Progress was maintained towards normalisation of relation's with China. The                       
 resumption of direct trade after nearly 15 years promoted banking facilities                      
 and movement of cargo ships between the two countries. Representatives of                         
 Indian public sector organisations participated in the bi-annual Canton. Trade                    
 Fair and two-way trade transactions amounting to approximately Rs. 3 crores                       
 were made at the Fair. There were also exchanges in a variety of fields such as                   
 agriculture, mining, forestry, medi- cine, public health and sports. A Chinese                    
 trade delegations visited India in February 1978. These demonstrated the readi-                   
 ness of the two countries to profit from each other's experience in various                       
 fields of developmental activities. An unofficial Chinese goodwill delegation                     
 led by Mr. Wang Pin-nan, President of the Chinese Peoples' Association for                        
 Friendship with Foreign Countris, visited India in March 1978 at the invitation                   
 of the All India Dr. Kotnis Memorial Committe whose delegation had earlier                        
 visited China in 1976. Mr. Wang extended an invitation from the Foreign                           
 Minister of China to the Minister of External Affairs to visit that country.                      
 Shri Vajpayee accepted the invita- tion in principle and the visit could take                     
 place at an appropriate time after careful and adequate preparations.                             
                                                                                                   
 Notwithstanding the fact that the border question with China remains                              
 unresolved, India believes in seeking step-by-step norma- lisation of relations                   
 with China on the basis of the five principles of co-existence. It was India's                    
 hope that through the pursuit of such a policy, an atmosphere would be created                    
 which might help towards solving unresolved problems between the two coun-                        
 tries through bilateral negotiations.                                                             
                                                                                                   
 The visit of the Foreign Minister of Japan Mr. I Hatoyama to India, in July                       
 1977, gave a new significance to relations with that country. It was the first                    
 Japanese high-level visit to India in the last seven years. Discussions                           
 revealed a great understand- ing and appreciation by both countries of each                       
 other's foreign policy. Both sides recognised that evolving Indo-Japanese                         
 friend- ship and cooperation were important for the stability and prog- ress of                   
 the Asian continent as a whole. A decision was taken                                              
                                                                                                   
 pg10                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 pg11                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 to exchange delegations with a view to identify areas of further industrial                       
 collaboration. Japan expressed its readiness to make available experts to                         
 advise in schemes of rural development. The decision to elevate the annual                        
 bilateral consultations between India and Japan to the level of Foreign                           
 Ministers reflected the import- ance attached by both countries to exchange of                    
 views on inter- national problems at the highest level.                                           
                                                                                                   
 India is to receive from Japan during 1977-78 a sum equival- ent to Rs. 66                        
 crores as commodity loan and Rs. 33 crores as project aid.                                        
                                                                                                   
 The first meeting of the Joint Business Council of India and the Republic of                      
 Korea was held in Seoul in June 1977. Both sides expressed satisfaction at its                    
 deliberations and hoped it would result in promoting commercial relations                         
 between India and the Republic of Korea.                                                          
                                                                                                   
 The agreement on cultural cooperation between India and the Democratic People's                   
 Republic of Korea came into effect from Nov 11, 1977, with the exchange of                        
 notes of ratification.                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 Discussions held during the visit of the Foreign Minister of Mongolia to India                    
 in February 1978, reflected friendly ties based on a common approach towards                      
 world problems. A trade and cultural agreement was signed between India and                       
 Mongolia. Nov 11, 1977                                                                            
                                                                             Top                   
 West Asia and North Africa                                                                        
 Jan 01, 1981                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 CHAPTER IV                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 WEST ASIA AND NORTH AFRICA                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 India's policy towards West Asia and North Africa showed a new earnestness and                    
 further strengthening bilateral cooperation in the political, economic,                           
 commercial and cultural fields with the countries of the region. The Minister                     
 of External Affairs lost no time in allaying the misapprehensions among Arab                      
 coun- tries about India's support to the Arab cause. In his public statement of                   
 @19770324 ai, , he"we acknowledge Israel's right to exist as a sovereign state                    
 just as the Soviet Union does. But it will have to vacate the Arab territory it                   
 unilaterally occupi- es. We will not support forcible occupation of land by any                   
 one in the same manner as we ourselves will not tolerate aggres- sion on our                      
 borders". The Prime Minister also expressed a sympathetic attitude to the chief                   
 demand of the Arab nations, namely, the Israel should withdraw from occupied                      
 Arab territory and recognise that the Palestinians must be provided with a                        
 home- land to which they could return. India condemned Israel's attempts to                       
 alter the demographic nature of the occupied terri- tories through new                            
 settlements. With regard to the proposals about West Asian Peace Conference, to                   
 be held in Geneva, it was India's view that P.L.O.'s participation was                            
 necessary for such a conference to be meaningful and effective. India has been                    
 watching developments taking place in West Asia since the visit of President                      
 Anwar Sadat to Israel which has resulted in a tre- mendous change in the West                     
 Asian scene.                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 India's close relations with Iran were marked by high-level contacts, exchange                    
 of views on matters of common interest and economic cooperation. This desire to                   
 maintain a continuing dialogue were reflected in the discussions held by the                      
 Prime Minister and the Minister of External Affairs during their brief halt at                    
 Tehran on 7 June 1977. During the visit of Shahanshah and the Shahabano of Iran                   
 to India in February 1978, discus- sions were held on international issues and                    
 bilateral cooperation. There was close similarity of views on major                               
 international issues such as disarmament, the West Asian problem, the                             
 maintenance of the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace and support for the people                     
 of South Africa in their struggle against recialism, colonialism                                  
                                                                                                   
 pg12                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 pg13                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 and exploitation. Both countries shared the belief that the im- paratives of                      
 history and geography, sharing of common tradition and culture, made it                           
 necessary that the governments of the region should cooperate in order to bring                   
 greater prosperity to their peoples. It was realised that continuous contacts                     
 and exchange of visits at different levels should be maintained as these help                     
 towards strengthening relations. Keeping in view a long history of close                          
 cultural inter-action, it was decided to establish two Chairs, one at Tehran                      
 and the other at Delhi to promote research in the history of Indo-Iranian                         
 relations.                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 To promote bilateral relations with countries of the West Asian region and to                     
 explain the policies of the new Indian Government, two Cabinet Ministers                          
 visited these countries as Special Emissaries of the Prime Minister. The                          
 Minister for Works and Housing, Supply and Rehabilitation, Shri Sikander Bakht,                   
 paid a goowill visit to the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Bahrain, the Arab                        
 Republic of Egypt, and Algeria. Likewise, the Minister for Industries, Shri                       
 George Fernandes, paid a good- will visit to Libya, Kuwait, Jordan, Syria and                     
 Iraq. The Minis- ters took the opportunity to emphasise the fact that there was                   
 no change in the policy of the Government of India towards the Palestinian                        
 question.                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 Countries in the WANA region gained singular importance so far as India's                         
 exports were concerned. India was able to diversify its exports from                              
 traditional items like tea, spices, sugar, etc. to sophisticated industrial                       
 equipment and machinery, engi- neering products and electrical appliances.                        
 Countries like Saudi Arabia, Iraq, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait and Egypt                     
 showed a substantial increase in their intake of Indian products. From a total                    
 of 1779.8 million rupees worth of exports during 1973-74, India's exports to                      
 the WANA region countries went up to 7036.2 million rupees in 1976-77. ai, , he                   
                                                                             Top                   
 Africa South of the Sahara                                                                        
 Jan 01, 1977                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 CHAPTER V                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 AFRICA SOUTH OF THE SAHARA                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 India shared with African countries south of the Sahara their concern at the                      
 developments in Southern Africa which posed a threat to international peace and                   
 security. It was equally appre- hensive of the conflict between Ethiopia and                      
 Somalia in the Horn of Africa. This conflict, it was felt, would encourage                        
 super power rivalry and activity in the region and divert world atten- tion                       
 from the problems of colonialism and recialism in Southern Africa. With                           
 individual African countries which, like India, were developing countries,                        
 efforts continued towards closer tech- nical and economic cooperation for                         
 mutual benefit and for helping them in the task of development.                                   
                                                                                                   
 India was greatly disturbed at the repressive measures taken by South Africa in                   
 pursuit of its policy of apartheid. It strongly condemned the arrests, trials                     
 and deaths in detention of freedom fighters and the banning of anti-apartheid                     
 newspapers and orga- nisations in the country. The policy of Bantustans adopted                   
 by, South Africa, in order to segregate its black population into inde- pendent                   
 African units, was denounced as continuation of its apartheid policy. India                       
 refused to recognise such States. The boycott of South Africa in all fields,                      
 including sports, was main- tained as a protest against the policy of                             
 apartheid. In the United Nations, condemning South Africa's racist policies,                      
 India called for a mandatory embargo on supply of arms and related equip- ment                    
 to that country.                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 Developments in Zimbabwe were the focus of international attention during the                     
 year. A major initiative in this direction was the Anglo-United States                            
 proposals which called for the acceptance of the principle of 'one man one                        
 vote" and a time- bound programme for the independence of Zimbabwe. India                         
 welcomed the positive elements in the Anglo-US proposals. At the same time, it                    
 maintained close touch with the front-line States and the nationalist leaders                     
 of Zimbabwe. It was made clear that the Anglo-US proposals could succeed only                     
 if the Ian Smith regime in Zimbabwe was removed and due place was given-to                        
                                                                                                   
 pg14                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 pg15                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 the African nationalist forces in the transitional arrangements proceeding the                    
 grant of independence. India not only continued to support the liberation                         
 struggle in Zimbabwe and Namibia and South Africa but also increased its                          
 material contribution to those engaged in the struggle or affected by                             
 developments in Southern Africa. In response to an appeal from the United                         
 Nations, contributions of Rs. 10 lakhs and Rs. 5 lakhs, to special funds of                       
 Lesotho and Botswana respectively, were announced. These were to be made in the                   
 shape of Indian goods and services to enable these two countries to overcome                      
 the adverse effects on their economy resulting from the actions of minority                       
 regimes in Southern Africa. India also contributed towards the Emergency                          
 Humanitarian Assistance Programme concerning South African refugee students and                   
 gifted medicines and blankets to Botswana and Zambia for the use of South                         
 African refugees living in these countries. India expressed sympathy for                          
 Mozambique, that had suffered heavily as a result of Rhodesian incursions, and                    
 pledged to offer assistance once the United Nations report on the extent of                       
 damage was available.                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 India wanted the conflict between Somalia and Ethiopia in the Horn of Africa to                   
 be resolved peacefully. It supported the stand taken by the Organisation of                       
 African Unity on the terri- torial integrity of African States within their                       
 existing inherited frontiers. The continuation of the conflict between Somalia                    
 and Ethiopia, it was felt, would weaken the unity of Africa and the solidarity                    
 of the non-alignment movement which was subscribed to by both these countries.                    
                                                                                                   
 Close friendship and cooperation was maintained with the countries of East                        
 Africa. Discussions during the visit of the Vice-President of Tanzania to India                   
 in April 1977 reflected similarity of views on major international problems.                      
 Satisfac- tion was expressed at the progress of friendly relations and bila-                      
 teral cooperation and it was hoped that these would be further strengthened. At                   
 the second meeting of the Indo-Tanzanian Joint Commission, held in                                
 Dar-es-Salaam in July-August 1977. mutual cooperation between India and                           
 Tanzania were agreed to in a number of fields. The Minister of External                           
 Affairs, who attended the meeting of the Commission, also met, on his way. at                     
 Nairobi, Kenya's Minister of Foreign Affairs and discussed with him matters of                    
 bilateral and international interest. The visit of the Prime Minister of                          
 Mauritius to India in November 1977 reflected ties between India and Mauritius                    
 based on strong historical and cultural traditions. Discussion on international                   
                                                                                                   
 pg16                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 issues and matters of bilateral interest showed great understand- ing and                         
 similarity of views regarding them. India and Mauritius agreed to further                         
 expand areas of cooperation in various fields. Discussions held during the                        
 visit of the Minister of External Affairs to Mauritius in March 1978 led to                       
 decisions to strengthen existing cultural, technical and economic relations.                      
 India and Mauritius decided to adopt a common approach on aft issues before the                   
 United Nations and work for making the Indian Ocean a zone of peace. Jan 01,                      
 1977                                                                                              
                                                                             Top                   
 Western Europe                                                                                    
 CHAPTER VI                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 WESTERN EUROPE                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 The change of Government in India, in March 1977, in a peaceful manner through                    
 democratic elections was generally welcomed by all countries of Western Europe                    
 as re-affirmation by India of its faith in democratic values and human rights.                    
 During the year, there were many occasions for exchange of views and joint work                   
 on specific proposals with different countries of Western Europe. India also                      
 began joint collaboration with some western firms in third countries' projects.                   
 Western Europe accounts for almost a quarter of India's foreign trade and the                     
 major part of international development assistance both in the financial and                      
 technological fields.                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 The EEC, India's largest trading partner, unilaterally impos- ed restriction in                   
 July 1977 on textile imports from India and eight other countries. This had                       
 serious adverse effect on the working of the textile industry in India,                           
 particularly the handloom sector. Negotiations were taken up to try and arrive                    
 at a settlement which would include preferential arrangements for India. The                      
 Minister of Commerce Shri Mohan Dharia visited France in September 1977 to                        
 discuss the unilateral restrictions placed by the EEC with the French Prime                       
 Minister and the Commerce Minister. This resulted in the release of some                          
 consignments which had been held up by France. In December 1977, as part of the                   
 EEC's programme for non-associated developing countries, a financial                              
 convention, signed between India and the European Commission. granted, India,                     
 $13.4 million as aid for grain and fertiliser storage projects.                                   
                                                                                                   
 On his way back to India, after the Commonwealth Confe- rence in June 1977, the                   
 Prime Minister stopped at Paris and dis- cussed matters of mutual interest with                   
 the French President Mr. Giscard d'Estaing and the French Prime minister. An                      
 Indo- French space agreement was signed in Paris in June 1977. France extended                    
 economic aid to India, to the extent of 340 million French francs in 1977-78                      
 which helped to meet the foreign ex- change requirements for many projects                        
 including the Khetri Cop- per Project, the Haldia Oil Refinery and the Talcher                    
 and Rama- gundam fertiliser projects.                                                             
                                                                                                   
 pg17                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 pg18                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 India remained the largest single recipient of aid given by the Federal                           
 Republic of Germany to developing countries. This assistance on IDA terms came                    
 to Rs. 135.72 crores during 1977- 78. The visit to India in April 1977 by the                     
 Foreign Minister of Federal Republic of Germany reflected the close contacts                      
 main- tained with that country. The Federal Republic of Germany's Parliamentary                   
 Secretary of State in the Ministry of Science and Technology visited India in                     
 November 1977 and reviewed the progress achieved regarding cooperation in                         
 science and techno- logy, under the 1974 Agreement with that country. The sixth                   
 round of Indo-FRG Bilateral Consultations was held at Bonn in September 1977.                     
                                                                                                   
 The visit of the British Prime Minister Mr. James Callaghan, from 6 to Jan 11,                    
 1978, and the discussions held during the visit reflected a warmth and                            
 understanding in Indo-British rela- tions. The visit served to underline the                      
 common ideals and as- pirations shared by India and the United Kingdom, their                     
 realisa- tion of interdependence of nations and their acceptance of the need to                   
 share responsibility for contributing to the creation of a better world. Five                     
 agreements covering British aid to India of Rs. 228 crores for 1977-78 were                       
 signed in the same month. Out of this 110.8 crores was maintenance aid, the                       
 rest being for major projects, import of capital investment goods, the coal and                   
 power sectors and debt refinancing. The entire amount was in grant form, the                      
 practice governing British aid since 1975. The Indo- British bilateral talks                      
 were held in May 1977 in London when the Indo-British Joint Committee on Trade                    
 and Economic Coopera- tion also met.                                                              
                                                                                                   
 The first ever official visit to India by an Irish Head of State was made in                      
 January 1978 when President Hillery of Ireland visited India. He was                              
 accompanied by the Irish Foreign Minis- ter. The discussions held during the                      
 visit held out prospects for further economic and cultural cooperation between                    
 India and Ireland.                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 India continued to have close economic ties with the Nordic countries. In May                     
 1977 an Indo-Swedish Agreement complete- ly remitted debt repayment of about                      
 Rs. 2.8 crores by India. Swedish aid to India for 1977-78 came to Rs. 48 crores                   
 as a grant and further Rs. 27 crores for purchase of Swedish equip- ment as                       
 well as for technical assistance. The Swedish Minister for Economic Cooperation                   
 Mr. Ola Ullsten visited India in November 1977 and wide-ranging discussions                       
 were held on Indo- Swedish economic and other relations. Norway extended assis-                   
                                                                                                   
 pg19                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 tance equivalent to 70 million Kroners on a grant basis for 1977- 78. This was                    
 mainly in the field of fertilizer, paper, fisheries, forestry and family                          
 welfare. Indo-Norwegian cooperation was particularly successful in the field of                   
 fisheries in which Norway has extensive expertise.                                                
                                                                                                   
 Denmark extended a loan of Rs. 12.5 crores on soft terms to India for the                         
 import of equipment in the fields of petro-chemi- cals, fisheries, fertilisers,                   
 food processing and electronics. it also gave nearly five times this amount for                   
 technical assistance over the period 1976-81. The Danish Minister of State                        
 without portfolio visited India in January 1978 and discussed Indo-Danish                         
 economic cooperation and general international economic issues.                                   
                                                                                                   
 THE SOVIET UNION AND EASTERN EUROPE                                                               
                                                                                                   
 India continued to attach importance to developing relations with the socialist                   
 countries of Eastern Europe. This reflected India's belief that states with                       
 diverse economic and social systems can cooperate successfully to their mutual                    
 advantage when such relations are based on the recognition of principles of                       
 peaceful co- existence.                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 The visit of the Soviet Foreign Minister Mr. Gromyko in April 1977 reflected                      
 friendly contacts and bilateral cooperation with the Soviet Union. During the                     
 visit, three agreements were signed re- lating to economic and technical                          
 cooperation, trade and establish- ment of a telecommunication link. Later in                      
 the year, in October 1977, the Prime Minister, accompanied by the Minister of                     
 Exter- nal Affairs, paid an official visit to the Soviet Union. Indo-Soviet                       
 relations and major international problems were discussed during the visit. The                   
 two sides noted that Indo-Soviet friendship was not subject to transient                          
 considerations and was an important factor for peace and stability in Asia and                    
 the world. It was considered im- portant not only to maintain but further                         
 strengthen this friendship. Satisfaction was expressed at the progress of work                    
 being done under the Indo-Soviet Joint Commission on economic, scientific and                     
 technical cooperation. The raising of the level of the co- chairmanship of the                    
 Indo-Soviet Joint Commission with the Indian side nominating the Minister of                      
 External Affairs, Shri A. B. Vajpayee, and the Soviet side nominating Deputy                      
 Prime Minister Arkhipov to be the two co-chairmen had indicated the import-                       
 ance attached by both countries to the work of this Commission. It was further                    
 agreed that a long-term programme of mutually- beneficial economic co-operation                   
 in various sectors of Indian eco- nomy and bilateral trade exchanges should be                    
 worked out for 1978.                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 pg20                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 Teams of experts of the Indian and Soviet organisations were to be formed to                      
 study and define prospects of collaboration in various fields. Some Soviet                        
 delegates have already visited India to study prospects of cooperation in                         
 production of alumina and in science and technology. A distinctive feature of                     
 Indo-Soviet economic re- lations has been the Soviet Union's willingness to                       
 assist India in key sectors of the economy to enable it to realise,                               
 self-sufficiency. These include steel, heavy machine building, power                              
 generation, drugs and pharmaceuticals.                                                            
                                                                                                   
 An agreement was signed in September 1977 enabling India to return the Soviet                     
 wheat loan of 1973 in kind. Earlier, the Soviet Union had accepted India's                        
 proposal to pay back the loan through export of goods and till March 1977                         
 payments equivalent to Rs. 41 crores had been made. Under the present                             
 agreement, the balance quantity of approximately 1.5 million tonnes of wheat                      
 would be shipped some time between October 1977 to, October 1978.                                 
                                                                                                   
 The Soviet Union offered to supply 1 million tonnes of crude oil in 1977 and                      
 1.5 million tonnes every year from 1977 to 1980. The supply would be made under                   
 the Indo-Soviet Rupee, Payment Arrangement against a basket of commodities.                       
                                                                                                   
 An Indian festival of Art and Culture was held in several Re- publics of the                      
 Soviet Union to mark the 30th anniversary of India's independence. A similar                      
 cultural festival from Soviet Union was independence. A similar cultural                          
 festival from Soviet Union was held in several cities of India to mark the 60th                   
 anniversary of the October Revolution.                                                            
                                                                                                   
 Besides the Soviet Union, India maintained high-level contacts and close                          
 economic ties with a number of other countries of Eas- tern Europe including                      
 Yugoslavia. Cultural contacts were pro- moted through exchange of visits such                     
 as the visit of India's Minis- ter of Education, Social Welfare & Culture, Dr.                    
 P. C. Chunder to the German Democratic Republic and the visit of the Minister                     
 of State for Culture of the German Democratic Republic and the President of the                   
 Indo-GDR Friendship Society to India in Septem- ber 1977.                                         
                                                                                                   
 The visit of Mr. Rudolf Saiger, member of the Council of ministers of the                         
 German Democratic Republic, and Secretary of State for Broadcasting in that                       
 country, in January 1978 resulted in an agreement providing for a regular                         
 exchange of radio and television programmes on various aspects of developments                    
 between India and German Democratic Republic.                                                     
                                                                                                   
 pg21                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 The Indian Minister of Education, Social Welfare and Culture also visited                         
 Poland. An agreement for cooperation in peaceful uses of Atomic Energy was                        
 signed with Poland in September 1977.                                                             
                                                                                                   
 The Secretary of State and Chairman of the State Committee for Information of                     
 Hungary visited India in October-November 1977. He discussed prospects for                        
 Indo-Hungarian cooperation in the field of information. During the visit of the                   
 Foreign Secretary to Hungary in June 1977, stress was laid on the strengthening                   
 of bilateral relations. Hungary expressed appreciation at India's continuing                      
 the basic tenets of its foreign policy.                                                           
                                                                                                   
 The visit of the Deputy Prime Minister of Czechoslovakia to India in December                     
 1977, as Head of a Cultural Delegation, pro- vided an opportunity for exploring                   
 possibilities of expanding co- operation with Czechoslovakia in the fields of                     
 radio, T.V. and films.                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 Annual trade protocols signed with the German Democratic Republic, Romania,                       
 Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia envisaged in- creased bilateral trade with these                      
 countries. A trade and pay- ments agreement signed with Hungary in December                       
 1977 provid- ed for switching over to trade in freely convertible currency                        
 with, that country from 1 January 1978. A similar agreement provid- ing for                       
 switchover of trade in convertible currency from 1 January 1981 was signed with                   
 Poland.                                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 The common commitment of both India and Yugoslavia to the policy of                               
 non-alignment served as a bond of friendship between the two countries. This                      
 was reflected in the discussions held dur- ing the visit of the Minister of                       
 External Affairs to that country in November 1977. These revealed an identity                     
 of views on various subjects including the North-South dialogue, developments                     
 in the Indian Ocean, Africa, disarmament, the Belgrade Conference and the                         
 policy of non-alignment. Both India and Yugoslavia hoped for the success of the                   
 Belgrade Conference reviewing the Helsinki Agreement regarding security and                       
 cooperation in Europe. Be- sides, these, discussions were also held on                            
 bilateral and mutually- beneficial cooperation between the two countries in                       
 various fields. The need to ensure the success of the Special Session of the UN                   
 General Assembly on disarmament to be held in 1978 and the im- portance of the                    
 establishment of a new international economic order with more equitable                           
 relations between the developed and the developing countries again received                       
 emphasis during the visit of the Vice-President of Yugoslavia, Mr. Steven                         
 Doronjski, to India in January-February 1978.                                                     
                                                                                                   
 pg22                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 The Indo-Yugoslav Business Council, constituted last year, held its first Joint                   
 meeting in December 1977 to consider projects for economic cooperation. The                       
 President of the Federal Com- mitteee for Industries and Energies for                             
 Yugoslavia, during his visit in the same month, discussed economic and                            
 industrial cooperation. Jan 11, 1978                                                              
                                                                             Top                   
 The Americas                                                                                      
 CHAPTER VII                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 THE AMERICAS                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 The United States                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 The general elections of March 1977, which symbolised the faith of the people                     
 of India in democratic institutions, were widely acclaimed by the Press as well                   
 as official circles in the United States. The United States Congress passed a                     
 resolution welcom- ing the re-establishment of democracy in India.                                
                                                                                                   
 There was keen desire on both sides to develop closer contacts and this was                       
 reflected in the exchange of letters between President Carter and the Prime                       
 Minister of India and between the United States Secretary of State and the                        
 Minister of External Affairs as well as in the high-level visits exchanged                        
 between the two coun- tries. The Minister of External Affairs as well as the                      
 Minister of State for External Affairs visited Washington when they were in New                   
 York for attending the General Assembly session of the United Nations and held                    
 discussions. President Carter's Special Envoy visited India followed by Deputy                    
 Secretary of State. The culmination of this process was the visit of President                    
 and Mrs. Carter to India from 1 to Jan 03, 1978. The President, who, had                          
 wide-ranging discussions during the visit, also announced that he had                             
 authorised the release of another consignment of en- riched uranium for the                       
 Tarapur Atomic Power Plant. The Delhi Declaration issued at the conclusion of                     
 the visit affirmed the two countries' respect for fundamental freedoms and                        
 adherence to the democratic system while acknowledging the right of each nation                   
 to choose its own political, social and economic policies. The two countries,                     
 further committed themselves to resolve disputes with others amicably, to work                    
 towards arresting the danger of proliferation of nuclear weapons and for their                    
 reduction and even- tual elimination.                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Indo-US bilateral relations continued to grow by way of trade, cultural                           
 exchanges and cooperation in science and techno- logy. The United States                          
 continued to be India's largest trading partner accounting for 10.7 per cent of                   
 India's exports valued at Rs. 549.58 crores. and 21.5 per cent of imports                         
 valued at Rs. 1055.53 crores during 1976-77. The trend for 1977-78 in- dicated                    
 that India might well end the financial year with more or                                         
                                                                                                   
 pg23                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 pg24                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 less balanced trade with the United States. The Unitd States also nitiated                        
 discussions with India for the resumption of bilateral de- velopment                              
 assistance.                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 A Memorandum of Understanding was signed on 3 January 1978 providing for the                      
 Indian Earth Station at Hyderabad to re- ceive directly from the American                         
 Landsat satellite data relating to various natural resources.                                     
                                                                                                   
 The third Indo-US Joint Commission meeting was held in Delhi on 3 January 1978,                   
 under the co-chairmanship of Minister of External Affairs and the U.S.                            
 Secretary of State. It approved the reports on the working of the three                           
 Sub-Commissions on edu- cation and culture, science and technology, economic                      
 and corn- mercial matters. Under the aegis of the Sub-Commission on edu- cation                   
 and culture, four joint seminars were implemented, nine fellows and visitors                      
 from each side, exchanged and a festival of Indian films held in the United                       
 States in September 1977. An in- crease in the number of fellows/visitorships                     
 to 15 per year was agreed from 1978 and a programme was approved for short-term                   
 exchanges of artistes, writers, mass media experts, lawyers and architects                        
 Under the aegis of the, Sub-Commission on science and technology, it was agreed                   
 that cooperative research would be undertaken in certain priority areas like                      
 agriculture and water re- sources, energy and environment and natural                             
 resources, health, metallurgy, electronics, information sciences and                              
 institutional ex- changes. Since June 1977 exchanges of scientists and meetings                   
 have either taken place or are proposed in the fields of jet pro- pulsion,                        
 solar energy, coal conversion, environmental protection, ocean sciences, wild                     
 life and habitat, leprosy and malaria control programmes. research and                            
 development systems and remote sensing.                                                           
                                                                                                   
 CANADA                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 The general elections held in March 1977 were observed with keen interest in                      
 Canada. Canadian official circles, as well as the Canadian Press, welcomed the                    
 election results as reaffirming the democratic traditions in the country.                         
                                                                                                   
 High-level contacts were maintained between the leaders of the two countries.                     
 During the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference in London in June 1977, the                   
 Prime Minister of India and the Prime Minister of Canada, had wide-ranging                        
 discussions                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 pg25                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 covering bilateral and international issues. A Parliamentary de- legation led                     
 by Shri Hegde, the Speaker of the Lok Sabha, parti- cipated in the Commonwealth                   
 Parliamentary Conference held in Ottawa in September 1977. A Canadian                             
 delegation, led by the Minister of Industry and Tourism of the Province of                        
 Ontario, visited India in October 1977.                                                           
                                                                                                   
 Canada continued to render development assistance to India in the field of                        
 agriculture, food and fertilizers.                                                                
                                                                                                   
 South and Central America                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 India's relations with the countries of South and Central America and the                         
 Caribbean, in spite of the vast geographical distance separating India from                       
 them, were marked by greater con- tacts in order to promote understanding and                     
 increased coopera- tion.                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 The Minister of Communications visited Surinam in August 1977 for the formal                      
 handing over ceremony of two telephone exchanges constructed by the Indian                        
 Telephone Industries in Surinam.                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 The Minister of State for External Affairs visited Trinidad and Tobago from 8                     
 to 9 November and Guyana from 10 to 11 November 1977. The visit revealed the                      
 potential for further developing relations with these countries in trade and                      
 commerce, science and technology as well as cultural field.                                       
                                                                                                   
 India participated in the 10th International Pacific Trade Fair in Lima in                        
 November 1977. Thirty Indian companies parti- cipated in the Fair. The exhibits                   
 included printing machinery, engineering items, bicycles and other industrial                     
 products. During the 12-day duration of the Fair, about 3 lakhs of people                         
 visited the Indian pavilion. An Indian trade delegation visited Lima from                         
 August 1 to 11, 1977, and met prominent businessmen and Government officials.                     
 The mission explored possibilities of sell- ing products such as machine tools,                   
 bicycles parts, electronic equipment, wire ropes, etc.                                            
                                                                                                   
 A three-member Cuban delegation led by Dr. Pelegrin Torras, Deputy Foreign                        
 Minister of Cuba, visited India in September 1977 and had discussions on                          
 matters of mutual interest such as non-alignment and bilateral issues covering                    
 commercial, cultural, scientific and technical fields.                                            
                                                                                                   
 pg26                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 The Chilean Ministers of Finance and Planning Mr. Sergio de Castro and Mr.                        
 Robert Kelly visited India in October 1977 when letters of ratification of a                      
 trade agreement signed between India and Chile in 1972 were exchanged.                            
                                                                                                   
 Mrs. Carmen Romano Lopez Portillo, wife of the Mexican President, visited India                   
 as the guest of the Government from 19 to 22 October 1977. The visit of the                       
 Maxican First Lady paved the way for greater cultural exchanges between India                     
 and Mexico. Jan 03, 1978                                                                          
                                                                             Top                   
 United Nations and International Conferences                                                      
 CHAPTER VIII                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES                                                      
                                                                                                   
 India, during the year, took part in number of important inter- national                          
 conferences. These included Commonwealth Confe- rences, meetings of the                           
 non-aligned groups and conferences spon- sored by the United Nations.                             
                                                                                                   
 The Prime Minister Shri Morarji Desai and the Minister of External Affairs Shri                   
 Atal Behari Vajpayee attended the 21st Com- monwealth meeting of the Heads of                     
 Government held in London in June 1977. The Prime Minister, in his speech,                        
 referred to India's attachment to the Commonwealth which, a "United Nations in                    
 miniature", had shown adaptability and dynamism and had mar- ched with the                        
 times. The Conference discussed a wide range of issues including the situation                    
 in South Africa, Cyprus, the Middle East, the Indian Ocean, the Law of the Sea,                   
 Human Rights and economic questions. The developed Commonwealth countries                         
 committed themselves to bring their official development assistance (ODA) up to                   
 the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national product and to improve the quality                   
 of their assistance. The Conference wanted the EEC to take further account of                     
 the trade interests of Commonwealth. Asian countries which had been adversely                     
 affected by the phasing out of the Commonwealth preferences and suggest- ed                       
 that it could make an important contribution to enlarging the markets available                   
 to developing countries. It welcomed the con- tinued expansion of the                             
 Commonwealth fund for technical co- operation. A special statement on apartheid                   
 in sports condemned it as an abomination and stated that the member countries                     
 would use all their efforts to foster human dignity everywhere.                                   
                                                                                                   
 An Australian proposal made at the Conference and supported by India led to the                   
 convening of a Regional Meeting of Common- wealth Heads of Government from                        
 South-East Asia and Pacific at Sydney from 11 to Feb 16, 1978. This meeting was                   
 attend- ed, besides India and Australia, by Bangladesh, Fiji, Malaysia,                           
 Singapore, Sri Lanka, New Zealand, Tonga, Western Samoa, Pa- pua. New Guinea                      
 and Nauru. The Prime Minister and the Minister of External Affairs took part in                   
 this meeting. The meeting dis- cussed major political problem- but the main                       
 emphasis was on re- gional economic questions. The question of terrorism                          
 received                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 pg27                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 pg28                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 attention particularly because of the explosion of a bomb on the eve of the                       
 opening of the Conference. The Conference decided to create study groups to                       
 examine terrorism, trade and internatio- nal drug trafficking. As regards                         
 trade, it was felt that the Commonwealth countries of the region should                           
 increase trade among themselves. Discussions on the energy question's were                        
 initiated by India and it was decided to constitute a Consulta- tion Committee                    
 to discuss problems relating to energy. The meeting helped the regional                           
 Commonwealth members to under- stand one another's problems in an informal                        
 atmosphere of fraternity and equality. It was decided that India would host the                   
 next Conference of Heads of Government of Commonwealth countries in Asia and                      
 the Pacific region in 1980.                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 India took part in a number of meetings of groups, of non- aligned countries.                     
 In pursuance of a decision taken at the New Delhi conference of Foreign                           
 Ministers of the Coordinating Bureau held in April 1977, two meetings of the                      
 coordinating countries in the area of monetary and financial cooperation were                     
 held at Belgrade from 30 June to 2 July 1977 and again from 18 to 21 January                      
 1978. Besides India, other countries that took part were Cuba, Indonesia, Peru,                   
 Sri Lanka and Yugoslavia. The Meetings identified issues requiring expert                         
 investigations and studies in the field of financial and monetary cooperation.                    
                                                                                                   
 India participated in a meeting of a group of experts on fisheries of                             
 non-aligned and other developing countries held in Cuba from 3 to 7 November                      
 1977. The meeting's recomm- endations included the creation of a standing                         
 commission to identify the. areas of possible cooperation among non-aligned and                   
 developing countries in the area of fisheries.                                                    
                                                                                                   
 India also took part in the first ever conference of radio and broadcasting                       
 organisations of the non-aligned countries at Sarajevo Yugoslavia, from 27 to                     
 30 October 1977. India was elected a member of the coordinating committee set                     
 up by the conference to implement its action programme. The programme envisaged                   
 mutual cooperation in developing broadcasting in- frastructure, exchange of                       
 radio and television programmes and training of professional and technical                        
 cadres.                                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 India participated in the United Nations International Con- ference held in                       
 Maputo, Mozambique, from 16 to 21 May 1977 in support of the peoples of                           
 Zimbabwe and Namibia. The con- ference was attended by 92 countries, five                         
 liberation movements                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 pg29                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 and several governmental and non-governmental organisations. It adopted                           
 separate declarations on Zimbabwe and Namibia and also a programme of action.                     
 The declaration on Zimbabwe reaffirmed the primary responsibility of the United                   
 Kingdom as the administering power of Southern Rhodesia regarding the future of                   
 that country. It condemned the illegal racist minority regime and called upon                     
 the international community to endorse the existing mandatory sanctions                           
 including the possibility of widening the scope of these sanctions. The                           
 declaration on Namibia proclaimed support for the leadership of the South West                    
 African Peoples Organisation (SWAPO) as the sole authentic liberation movement.                   
 It called upon all states to de- sist from military collaboration with South                      
 Africa. The pro- gramme of action adopted envisaged various measures in sup-                      
 port of the national liberation movements and against the illegal minority                        
 regimes in Southern Rhodesia and South Africa.                                                    
                                                                                                   
 At the World Conference for Action against Aparthied, held in pursuance of a                      
 United Nations resolution, in Lagos from 22 to 26 August 1977, India reiterated                   
 its total commitment to fight against apartheid. The Conference adopted by                        
 consensus a Declaration which re-affirmed the opposition of the international                     
 community to the policies and practice of apartheid in South Africa and its                       
 determination to work for its eradication. It call- ed for a mandatory arms                       
 embargo and total and comprehensive international boycott of South Africa.                        
 Later, in October 1977, India formally acceded to the International Convention                    
 on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid.                                      
                                                                                                   
 A conference on Desertification was held in Nairobi, Kenya, from 29 August to 9                   
 September 1977 in accordance with a United Nations resolution passed in 1974 to                   
 promote international action to combat desertification. The "Committee of the                     
 whole", of which Dr. Swaminathan, leader of the Indian delegation, was elected                    
 Chairman, drew up an action plan which was ad- opted by the Conference. The                       
 plan made specific recommen- dations at the national, regional and                                
 international level for check- ing desertification.                                               
                                                                                                   
 The Minister of External Affairs Shri A. B. Vajpayee led the Indian delegation                    
 to the 32nd regular session of the UN General Assembly which met from 21                          
 September to 21 December 1977 at New York. In his address, delivered in Hindi                     
 for the first time, he outlined policies and attitudes of India to major inter-                   
 national issues. Welcoming the near universality of member- ship of the United                    
 Nations, he stressed the need to transform the                                                    
                                                                                                   
 pg30                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 General Assembly into a "parliament of man" representing the collective                           
 conscience and will of humanity. He pointed out that in this inter-dependent                      
 world, the greatest task before the world community was the welfare of man                        
 regardless of his race, colour, creed or nationality.                                             
                                                                                                   
 The General Assembly had before it a crowded agenda of 131 items covering                         
 political, economic, social and related issues. The Assembly and its Committees                   
 met 537 times and adopted as many as 262 resolutions. As in the previous years,                   
 the situa- tion in South Africa was one of the most important topics dis-                         
 cussed in the Assembly. India co-sponsored it of the 14 reso- lutions approved                    
 by the General Assembly on the problem of apartheid, In addition to requesting                    
 urgent consideration by the Security Council of mandatory economic sanctions,                     
 these called for specific measures such as oil embargo against South Africa, a                    
 tightening of the mandatory arms embargo and a halt to any supply of nuclear                      
 equipment, fissionable material or technology to the South Africa regime. The                     
 Assembly proclaimed the year beginning from March 1978 as an International                        
 Anti-Apartheid Year and endorsed the programme of work of the Special Com-                        
 mittee against apartheid.                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 The Assembly adopted 8 resolutions on Namibia. All these were co-sponsored by                     
 India. These reiterated inter-alia that "any independence talks regarding                         
 Namibia must be between the re- presentatives of the South West Africa People's                   
 Organisation (SWAPO) and South Africa under the auspices of the United Nations                    
 for the sole purpose of discussing the modalities of the transfer of power to                     
 the people of Namibia".                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 On the question of Southern Rhodesia, the Assembly adopted two resolutions,                       
 both of which were co-sponsored by India. These reaffirmed the right of the                       
 people of Zimbabwe for self-determi- nation, that there should be no                              
 independence before majority rule and that the United Kingdom should do                           
 everything to enable Zimbabwe to attain independence in accordance with the                       
 wishes of the majorty. The Security Council was urged to consider the extension                   
 of the existing sanctions against Rhodesia.                                                       
                                                                                                   
 On the question of Middle East and Palestine, the General Assembly passed                         
 resolutions reaffirming that Israel should with- draw to the positions held by                    
 it before 5 June 1967 and that the people of Palestine should be allowed to                       
 exercise their inalien- able rights. They called for the early convening of the                   
 Geneva Peace Conference with the Palestinian Liberation Organisation                              
                                                                                                   
 pg31                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 being allowed to take part in it. This position had the full sup- port of India                   
 which had always maintained that no just solution of the Palestine problem                        
 could be realised without withdrawal of Israel from territories under its                         
 illegal occupation and restora- tion of the legitimate rights of the                              
 Palestinian people.                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 The General Assembly once again adopted a resolution on the Indian Ocean being                    
 maintained as a Zone of Peace. It call- ed for a meeting of littoral and                          
 hinterland States of the Indian Ocean to be convened in New York at a suitable                    
 date. This could be attended by other States which had participated or had                        
 expressed their willingness to participate in the work of the Ad Hoc Committee                    
 on the Indian Ocean. This was an addition to the earlier resolution on the                        
 subject. India has consistently main- tained that Conference on the Indian                        
 Ocean would be fruitful if major maritime users and the Great Powers take part                    
 in it.                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 India abstained on the Pakistani-sponsored resolution adopted by the General                      
 Assembly on a nuclear weapon free zone in South Asia. Earlier, India had voted                    
 against such a resolution. The Indian delegate, explainting India's stand,                        
 pointed out that while India would like the whole world to be free of nuclear                     
 weapons, sub-regionalisation of this concept would be inconsistent with India's                   
 global approach to this question. In fact, regional nu- clear weapon free zones                   
 would not help to combat the nuclear threat to the world but on the contrary                      
 provide an advantage to nuclear weapon States since nuclear weapons and                           
 delivery sys- tems were inter-continental in nature. India, therefore, was                        
 opposed to this concept and expressed its inability, to cooperate in its                          
 implementation.                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 India took an active part in the work of the Committee on Disarmament. It                         
 reiterated its view that the goal of disarma- ment efforts should be the                          
 realization of general and complete disarmament under effective international                     
 control with the highest priority being accorded to the elimination of nuclear                    
 weapon's and all the other weapons of mass destruction. India has already made                    
 known its resolve to use nuclear energy for peaceful pur- poses only and has                      
 reaffirmed that this should be based on the respect for the principles of                         
 sovereignty, equality and non-dis- crimination. As a party to the Treaty on the                   
 Prohibition of the Emplacement of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass                       
 destruction on the Seabed and the Ocean Floor and in the Sub- soil Thereof,                       
 India took part in the deliberations of its First Re- view Conference held in                     
 Geneva from 20 June to 1 July 1977. In accordance with its basic approach in                      
 the field of disarmament,                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 pg32                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 India signed a Convention on the Prohibition of Military or Any Other Hostile                     
 Use of Environmental Modification Techniques (ENMOD Convention) in December                       
 1977. It also took an active interest in the work of the Preparatory Committee                    
 con- cerned with making arrangements for convening the Special Session of the                     
 General Assembly devoted to disarmament to be held next year.                                     
                                                                                                   
 Regarding the problem of Cyprus, which came up before the General Assembly,                       
 India had always stood for the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity                   
 and non-aligned status of that country. It supported the extension of the                         
 mandate of the Unit- ed Nations peace Keeping Force in Cyprus. This Force has                     
 been playing an important role in the existing situation on Cyprus by munities.                   
                                                                                                   
 Among the other important items discussed by the Assembly included hijacking                      
 and the question of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or                    
 punishment. On the ques- tion of hijacking, a resolution was adopted by                           
 consensus condem- ning aerial hijacking calling upon all States to cooperate                      
 with one another to prevent such acts and also become parties to the three                        
 concerned international conventions. The resolution was co- sponsored by India.                   
 On the second question, the General Assem- bly in 1975 unanimously adopted a                      
 Declaration on the Protection of all persons from being subjected to torture                      
 and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. India propos- ed                   
 that member States should be called upon to declare uni- laterally that they                      
 intended to comply with the above-mentioned Declaration and that they would                       
 implement, through legislation or other effective measures, its various                           
 provisions.                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 The nomination of Mrs. Vijayalakshmi Pandit as India's re- presentative on the                    
 U.N. Commission on Human Rights indicated India's interest in the problem and                     
 the importance India attached to the work of that Commission.                                     
                                                                                                   
 As regards economic issues, the dialogue between the deve- loped and the                          
 developing countries at the final meeting of the Conference of International                      
 Economic Cooperation held in May- June 1977 had left much to be desired. The                      
 31st Session of the UN General Assembly convened in September 1977 to dis- cuss                   
 the results of that Conference had failed to reach agreement on the assessment                    
 of its recommendations and had transmitted the report to the 32nd Session of                      
 the Assembly for consideration.                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 pg33                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 The debate at the 32nd Session was marked by a lack of prog- ress on                              
 substantive questions and there was continuing deadlock between the approach of                   
 the developed and the developing coun- tries.                                                     
                                                                                                   
 India also took an active part in the deliberations on inter- national legal                      
 problems. The-Sixth Commtitee (Legal) of the UN General Assembly, during its                      
 meetings in October-November 1977, discussed the question of international                        
 terrorism, taking of hostages and measures against hijacking, consideration of                    
 addi- tion of articles on new subjects by the International Law Com- mission                      
 responsible for the modification of international law and review of the United                    
 Nations Charter. India stressed the im- portance of making civil aviation safe,                   
 both for the security of communications and for the safety of innocent human                      
 lives. As regards the Charter, it did not favour any major modifications though                   
 it was not opposed to the improvement of its working through amendment of some                    
 of its obsolete provisions. India became one of the 35 members of the Ad Hoc                      
 Committee on International Terrorism set up to study the underlying causes of                     
 terrorism and to recommend practical measures to combat it.                                       
                                                                                                   
 The Sixth Session of the Third United Nations Conference on Law of the Sea was                    
 held in New York from 23 May to 15 July 1977. The Conference consolidated the                     
 consensus developed on a 12-mile territorial sea, a 24-mile contiguous zone and                   
 a 200-mile exclusive economic zone.                                                               
                                                                                                   
 There was also broad agreement on the definition of the outer limit of the                        
 continental shelf and on questions of marine pollution and scientific research.                   
 By a Gazette Notification issued in January 1977, Sections 5 and 7 of the                         
 Maritime Zones Act of 1976. India established a 24-mile contiguous zone and a                     
 200-mile exclusive economic zone.                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 India continued to participate actively in the codification and development of                    
 international trade law through its participation in the various Working Groups                   
 and the annual meetings of the United Nations Commission International Trade                      
 Law (UNCI- TRAL). It also played an active role in the working of the                             
 Sub-Committee of the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. Further                    
 India was of the view that the moon and its natural resources are the common                      
 heritage of mankind and that the commercial exploitation of these resources                       
 might be undertaken only in accordance with the international regime to be                        
 established.                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 pg34                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 Indian experts took part in the, fourth session of the United Nations                             
 Environment Programme (UNEP) of experts on natural resources shared by two or                     
 more States, held in Geneva from 5 to 16 September 1977.                                          
                                                                                                   
 During the session, India successfully contested elections to ECOSOC and the                      
 Industrial Development Board of UNIDO. It was also elected to the Executive                       
 Council of ICAO, the Exe- cutive Council of IMCO, the Executive Council of FAO,                   
 the Committee for Food Aid Policies and Programme of the FAO and the                              
 Inter-Governmental Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO. Currently India is a                       
 member of the United Nations Security Council and was President of the Council                    
 during the month of December 1977.                                                                
                                                                                                   
 The Commission on Contributions of the United Nations General Assembly                            
 recommended new scales of contributions for the year 1978-79. In the case of                      
 United Nations Organisations, the share of India was reduced from 1.2% in 1975                    
 and 1976 and 0.7% in 1977 to 0.68% for the year 1978 and 1979.                                    
                                                                                                   
 Lists of major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars organised by                           
 Inter-Governmental Organisations/Non-Govern- mental Organisations/Miscellaneous                   
 International Conferences at which Government of India was represented in                         
 1977-78 are at APPENDICES I, II and III. International Organisations of which                     
 India became a Member or ceased to be a Member during 1977-78 is at                               
 APPENDIX-IV.                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 During 1977, India concluded 72 treaties and agreements (Appendix V). Special                     
 mention may be made of the agreement between India and Bangladesh on sharing of                   
 the Ganga Waters at Farakka and on augmenting its flows and of India's                            
 accession to the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations and the Optional                         
 Protocols thereto (December 1977). Feb 16, 1978                                                   
                                                                             Top                   
 Technical and Economic Cooperation                                                                
 Jan 01, 1977 CHAPTER IX                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 TECHNICAL AND ECONOMIC COOPERATION                                                                
                                                                                                   
 Conscious of the increasing dimensions of economic diplo- macy and the                            
 inter-dependence of the world as a whole, India worked towards strengthening                      
 its economic relations with the developed as well as the developing countries.                    
 Having a large reservoir of skilled manpower, India was in a position to share                    
 its knowhow with many of the developing countries and put for- ward proposals                     
 for joint collaboration and cooperation in diffe- rent fields. Special                            
 attention was paid to India's neighbours and countries of South East Asia and                     
 West Asia and Africa, most of whom are members of the non-aligned group and                       
 share with India the need for cooperation for mutual benefit and de- velopment.                   
 India believes that economic cooperation to be really effective should be                         
 mutually beneficial in every sense and that technical and economic cooperation                    
 should be non-exclu- sive and should be tailored to suit the needs of the                         
 recipient country. This flexibility of approach which comprehended pro- gramme                    
 assistance and not insistence on what is usually called project aid' has made                     
 India an increasingly popular partner in cooperation among developing                             
 countries.                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 Many proposals for joint collaboration and cooperation in different fields were                   
 identified through Joint Commissions estab- lished with a number of these                         
 countries and implemented through technical and economic cooperation. While                       
 substantial aid was extended through bilateral agreements, the increase in the                    
 budgetary provision of the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation Programme                    
 (ITEC) to Rs. 600 lakhs reflected India's interest to use this programme to                       
 assist these countries in their development programmes. Under this programme,                     
 ser- vices of experts were provided, help rendered through supply of equipment                    
 and provision was made for providing training faci- lities to personnel from                      
 these countries in India's vocational and technical institutions. With the                        
 developed countries, the em- phasis was on greater aid and trade and exchange                     
 of technical knowhow to mutual advantage.                                                         
                                                                                                   
 pg35                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 pg36                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 The conclusion of the separate treaties for transit and trade with Nepal during                   
 March 1978 along with a separate agree- ment to control misuse of trade links                     
 was a major step forward in setting Indo-Nepalese economic relations on a firm.                   
 durable and healthy basis. It is expected that with the simultaneous im-                          
 plementation of these agreements, the economic exchanges bet- ween the two                        
 countries will reach a new high level. Close eco- nomic cooperation was                           
 established with Afghanistan. Iraq and Iran. At the meeting of the                                
 Indo-Afghanistan Joint Commis- mission in December 1977, India agreed to extend                   
 assistance for three industrial estates, a medical institute for ear, nose and                    
 throat diseases in Kabul and to supply three additional micro- hydro units. It                    
 was agreed to carry out study for the establish- ment of 15MW thermal power                       
 plant. In addition. it was de- cided to depute 150 Indian experts to                              
 Afghanistan in various fields and provide training facilities for 350 Afghan                      
 nationals in India.                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 The Indo-Iraqi Joint Commission, which met in June 1977, reviewed the earlier                     
 Indo-Iraqi cooperation in trade, transport, agriculture and irrigation and                        
 industrial collaboration. Further areas of cooperation were identified.                           
                                                                                                   
 The Indo-Iranian Joint Commission, which met in Septem- ber 1977, discussed                       
 ways and means for increasing Indo- Iranian trade and possibilities of                            
 collaboration and joint ven- tures and identified new areas of cooperation.                       
 During his visit to India in February 1978, the Shahenshah of Iran offered to                     
 make available additional crude oil supplies on credit basis, to participate in                   
 or finance approved projects such as Alumina pro- ject for the Bauxite deposits                   
 on the eastern coast, paper and pulp factory for Tripura and the second stage                     
 of the Rajasthan canal, and this offer was accepted by India. India and Iran                      
 agreed that the plans for economic development provided an opportunity for                        
 mutually beneficial cooperation in accordance with their respective                               
 capabilities and capacities in a number of other fields such as rural                             
 electrification, housing, construction of industrial estates, development of                      
 power, railways and ship- building.                                                               
                                                                                                   
 Considerable progress was made in connection with the Pilot Plants projects                       
 being established in Burma with Indian assist- ance. About 50 per cent of the                     
 equipment and machinery in respect of these plants have already been shipped.                     
 Indian ex- perts in the field of refrigeration, civil engineering and air                         
 traffic                                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 pg37                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 control were deputed to Maldives at the request of the Govern- ment of that                       
 country. Steps were taken to depute a teacher and equipment was supplied for                      
 schools in Maldives. Arrangements were also made to impart training to two                        
 Maldivian nationals in nursing in India.                                                          
                                                                                                   
 Economic cooperation with Sri Lanka including the supply of two agricultural                      
 deep drilling rigs, deputation of experts in medicine and provision for                           
 training facilities to Sri Lanka nationals in India in fisheries, mica mining                     
 and for the Indo-Sri Lanka animal husbandry project.                                              
                                                                                                   
 As regards cooperation with countries of South East Asia, the officials of the                    
 Indonesian Electricity Authority visited India for exploring possibilities of                     
 cooperation in the power generation field. Medicines, irrigation pumps and                        
 textiles worth Rs. 30 lakhs were supplied to Laos. Two Indian experts visited                     
 that country to explore possibilities of sharing Indian technical ex- periences                   
 with Laos in the field of animal husbandry and agri- culture. A concrete shape                    
 was given to India's willingness to participate, according to its capabilities,                   
 in the economic recon- struction of Vietnam. A delegation of the Federation of                    
 Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry visited Vietnam in July 1977 to                          
 explore how the industrial capabilities and competence in India could be made                     
 available to support Vietnam's develop- ment plan. This was followed by the                       
 visit of a Vietnamese eco- nomic delegation to India in August-September 1977.                    
 Two agreements were concluded which provided for 100,000. tons of wheat loan to                   
 Vietnam and the setting up of a Rice Research In- stitute and a Buffalo                           
 Breeding Centre, in Vietnam with Indian as- sistance. Discussions during the                      
 visit of the Minister of State in the Ministry of External Affairs to Vietnam                     
 in February 1978 followed by the subsequent visit of the Prime Minister of                        
 Vietnam to India in the same month, resulted in agreements being signed on                        
 cooperation in the field of science and technology, in the field of                               
 agricultural research and on trade and economic cooperation, and Government to                    
 Government credit of Rs. 100 million. India also agreed to give a loan of                         
 30,0000 tons of wheat to Vietnam and a commercial credit of Rs. 300 million.                      
                                                                                                   
 To the West Asian region, India's exports continued to regis- ter Ali upward                      
 trend; there is also a healthy tendency towards diversification. There is a                       
 marked increase in the securing by Indian concerns of contracts for development                   
 projects in the                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 pg38                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 countries of the region and also the provision by West Asian countries of funds                   
 for projects in the region. Kuwait gave a loan of Rs. 45 crores from its                          
 development funds for the Kalanad-- Hydro-electric project and Saudi Arabia a                     
 loan of US $100 mil- lion for the Nagarjuna Sagar and Srisailam project in                        
 Andhra Pradesh. It was hoped that additional amount will be made available for                    
 infrastructures in India Indian parties also secured a number of contracts. In,                   
 Libya, National Building Construction Corporation won a contract worth Rs. 900                    
 million for the con- struction of 1300 houses and M/S Continental Construction                    
 Cor- poration signed a contract worth Rs. 720 million for the Wadi Ghan earth                     
 filled dam. The Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited was awarded a contract worth                     
 US$74 million by the Saudi Elec- tricity Organisation and the Dredging                            
 Corporation of India was awarded contract worth US$10 million for developing                      
 the Yanbu port in Saudi Arabia. In the field of consultancy, the Dastur and                       
 Company were awarded a contract worth Rs. 100 million for iron and steel                          
 complex in Libya and they were appointed as consul- tants for a separate                          
 foundry forge plant. National Industrial Development Corporation was                              
 commissioned to undertake a fea- sibility study for a mini steel plant and for                    
 Libya's Five-Year In- dustrial Development Plan.                                                  
                                                                                                   
 The oil producing countries in the WANA region embarked upon massive                              
 development plans and this provided opportunity for India to send its technical                   
 personnel, trained technicians, skil- led and semi-skilled labour to assist                       
 these countries in their task of development by providing the necessary                           
 manpower. The ser- vices of these personnel possessing qualifications                             
 equivalent to those from western countries but with more relevant experi- ence                    
 in similar conditions and much less expensive to the receiv- ing countries were                   
 highly appreciated.                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 A delegaion from Yemen Arab Republic visited India in December 1977 to discuss                    
 possibilities of industrial collaboration in many fields. These resulted in the                   
 signing of two agreements regarding trade and technical and economic                              
 cooperation including the supply of manpower to that country. During the visit                    
 of the Deputy Prime Minister of Egypt in January 1978. India agreed to extend                     
 scientific, technical and industrial cooperation to that country for some of                      
 its developmental projects.                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 With Africa closer economic ties were developed, particularly with the                            
 countries of East Africa. With Kenya, increased eco- nomic contacts were                          
 established as a result of a delegation spon- sored by the Federation of Indian                   
 Chamber of Commerce and.                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 pg39                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 Industry's visit to, Nairobi in October-November 1977. The Direc- tor of the                      
 Kenya Industrial Survey and Promotion Centre and the Executive Director of the                    
 Kenya Industrial and Commercial Development Corporation also visited India                        
 during the year. A number of industrial projects were identified for promoting                    
 bilate- ral cooperation with Uganda during the visit of the Ugandan Minister of                   
 Industry and Power to India in November 1977. These related to development of                     
 small scale and cottage indus- tries, establishment of machine tool complexes,                    
 textile mills, sugarcane plants, power generation etc. Ethiopia showed interest                   
 in learning from India's experiences in the field of sugar manu- facturing and                    
 two Indian experts were deputed to that country in this connection. In response                   
 to a request from that country, two Indians visited Ethiopia in December 1977                     
 to identify matters of bilateral cooperation and utilise Indian experience in                     
 the develop- ment of small scale industries. Ethiopia recruited a number of                       
 teachers from India under the ITEC programme and India pro- vided training                        
 facilities to a number of Ethiopian nationals in various institutions.                            
                                                                                                   
 India deputed an agricultural expert to Seychelles to advise in the production                    
 of canning and processing of vegetables, fruits and certain commercial crops.                     
 Close economic ties were developed with Mauritius. India offered to set up a                      
 Consultancy Service for small scale industries in that country. Assistance to                     
 the order of Rs. 2.1 million was given to the Industrial Trade Training Centre                    
 at Piton, and a number of experts in various disciplines were deputed to that                     
 country under the ITEC programme. The agreement to set up a Joint Economic                        
 Commission, signed bet- ween India and Mauritius during the visit of the                          
 Minister of Ex- ternal Affairs to that country in March 1978, reflected the                       
 desire of both countries to further their economic cooperation. To help                           
 Mozambique to tide over its economic difficulties, India con- tributed the                        
 rupee equivalent of US$100,000 as a part of the Commonwealth Fund for                             
 Mozambique and gifted cloth worth Rs. 900,000. It also agreed to provide                          
 experts in the field of railways, civil engineering, medicine, accountancy,                       
 teaching etc. and sent a delegation to assess its overall requirements in the                     
 field of railways. India expressed its readiness to assist Zambia in all                          
 possible fields and the Zambian Minister of Commerce, dur- ing his visit to                       
 India in October 1977, requested assistance in the seting up of a rural                           
 industry with agricultural base and the estab- lishment of handicrafts centre.                    
 Two delegations representing Pub- lic Service Commission and the Teaching                         
 Service Commission came to India to recruit Indian personnel.                                     
                                                                                                   
 pg40                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 In West Africa, close economic ties were developed, parti- cularly with                           
 Nigeria. A joint venture, between M/S Scindia Steam Navigation Company Limited                    
 was set up for operating shipping services between India and West Africa                          
 including Nigeria. The Water and Power Consultancy Services was awarded an                        
 initial contract for carrying out hydrological surveys in that country. A team                    
 from the Nigerian Steel Development Authority visited India and concluded                         
 extension of an agreement for training per- sonnel in India. The agreement                        
 signed in December 1977, dur- ing the visit of a Nigerian delegation, for                         
 setting up a Joint Com- mission reflected the desire of the two countries to                      
 develop closer economic cooperation. A number of other delegations visited                        
 India to study the industrial experience of India in order to pro- mote                           
 industrial development in their own country. Many re- quests from Nigeria for                     
 recruitment of experts in various fields were received and speedily processed.                    
 The National Industrial Development Corporation team visited Ghana and Upper                      
 Volta under the ITEC programme in March 1977 and identified pos- sibilities of                    
 setting up several small and medium-scale industries. A trade delegation                          
 sponsored by the Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industry visited                    
 Ghana, Nigeria, Liberia. Senegal and Kenya in October 1977 to explore possibi-                    
 lities of expansion of trade and joint industrial ventures. The Foreign                           
 Minister of Liberia visited India in April 1977 and dis- cussed bilateral                         
 economic and technical cooperation . Pursuant to these discussions, MECON sent                    
 experts teams to explore the possibilities of developing the iron ore industry                    
 in Liberia and setting up a steel plant. India agreed to assist in the prepara-                   
 tion of the feasibility reports. Further impetus was given by the visit of the                    
 Planning Minister of Liberia to India in February 1978.                                           
                                                                                                   
 With many developed countries India explored avenues of friendly cooperation in                   
 specialised fields through collaboration and for ventures in third countries.                     
 The Indo-Soviet Joint Com- mission, which met in March 1978, discussed further                    
 cooperation in the broad framework outlined during the visit of the Prime                         
 Minister to the Soviet Union in October 1977. A protocol war signed providing                     
 for economic, technical and scientific collabora- tion in various fields in                       
 ferrous and non-ferrous metallurgy, par- ticularly for modernisation of                           
 technology and production process- ing at Bokaro and Bhillai and the project                      
 for setting up of an alumina plant. The two sides also agreed for participation                   
 of Indian organisations in Soviet projects in third countries.                                    
                                                                                                   
 pg41                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 The Indo-GDR Joint Commission, which met in September 1977, considered the                        
 setting up of a mica paper and mica-nite plant in Bihar and the manufacturing                     
 of ophthalmic lenses at a factory at Durgapur, besides manufacturing equipment                    
 in a number of other fields. The Indo-Polish Joint Commission, which met in                       
 October 1977, laid emphasis on cooperation in the field of mining, sepecially                     
 coal-mine. The Indo-Italian Joint Committee, which met in December 1977,                          
 identified areas of special interest, such as electronics and establishing                        
 joint ventu- res in third countries. The British Minister for Overseas Deve-                      
 lopment visited India in July 1977. Britain announced increase in its aid                         
 programme to India and discussions were held concern- ing increase in the large                   
 capital projects in the British program- me. The Indo-German Ad-hoc Commission,                   
 which met in De- cember 1977 in Delhi, expressed interest of German industry in                   
 third country ventures with Indian parties as well as in collabo- ration in                       
 India in export-oriented and other industries. The Joint Commission set up                        
 under the commercial cooperation agreement between India and the European                         
 Economic Community met in Brussels in November 1977. India expressed concern at                   
 the protectionist tendencies in the Community but was assured that the                            
 Community had no intention to block access to the Commu- nity market.                             
                                                                                                   
 Economic and technical links between India and Latin American countries, which                    
 are of relatively recent origin, were reviewed at a Conference of Indian Heads                    
 of Mission and eco- nomic officers held under the chairmanship of the Minister                    
 of Commerce in New York in August 1977. Problems discussed included those of                      
 distance, complementarity of development, traditional links between Latin                         
 American countries and the de- veloped world, inadequacy of trade and shipping,                   
 language diffe- rences. The share of India's trade being negligible, it was                       
 rea- lised that there was considerable scope for increase in India's exports to                   
 the South American region where several countries have impressive plans of                        
 development of industries and infras- tructure. Delegations of Public Sector                      
 undertakings such as EEPC and the market survey conducted by the Commonwealth                     
 Fund for Technical Cooperation identified a number of fields in this                              
 connection. The fields identified included railway equip- ment, textile                           
 machinery, cement machinery, machine tools. tele- communication equipment.                        
 compressors, mining and transport                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 pg42                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 equipment, refrigeration and airconditioning, hand tools, bicycle. sugar plants                   
 etc. Exports of traditional items like jute, tea, gems, shellac, textiles,                        
 handicrafts etc. could also be increased in selec- tive areas.                                    
                                                                                                   
 The agreement to set up a Joint Commission with Guyana, the first, of its kind                    
 with a South American country, indicated India's intention to strengthen                          
 economic relations with countries of that hemisphere. Jan 01, 1977                                
                                                                             Top                   
 External Publicity                                                                                
 Jan 01, 1977 CHAPTER X                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 EXTERNAL PUBLICITY                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 The object of the Ministry's information activities is to pro- mote a correct                     
 appreciation of developments in India and the country's foreign policy.                           
                                                                                                   
 There was world-wide interest in the General Elections held in India in March                     
 1977. The orderly manner in which the change of government took place in                          
 accordance with the verdict of the electorate, demonstated the strength of                        
 India's democratic traditions. The Ministry gave extensive publicity to these                     
 developments. In general, the mass-media in foreign countries commented                           
 favourably on the complete restoration of democratic rights and the return to                     
 an open society.                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 A Committee under the Chairmanship of a prominent journalist Shri Chanchal                        
 Sarkar was set up to, review the Ex- ternal Publicity set-up of the Ministry                      
 with a view to making it more effective. The Committee has submitted its                          
 interim report which is being studied. The final report is awaited.                               
                                                                                                   
 The daily briefing given by the Official Spokesman to press correspondents in                     
 Delhi contributed to a better appreciation of. India's foreign policy and stand                   
 on current international ques- tions. Meetings arranged between foreign                           
 correspondents and Ministers/Secretaries not only of the Ministry of External                     
 Affairs but also, of some of the other Ministries enabled corres- pondents to                     
 get an authoritative and correct view of the acti- vities of the government as                    
 a whole.                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 Indian Missions were constantly engaged in projecting India's new image and her                   
 official policies through Television and Radio interviews, speaking engagements                   
 and contacts at appropriate levels with journalists, intellectuals and                            
 political leaders. The Division supplied publicity literature in English, Hindi                   
 and some other languages to the Missions. The regular publicity work of the                       
 Ministry continued under                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 pg43                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 pg44                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 the following heads :-- Press Relations The Press Relations Section acted as                      
 host to about 20 foreign journalists and arranged for their visits to important                   
 industrial and cultural centres within India and their briefing by senior                         
 officials. Assistance was provided to 77 Indian journ- alists to visit foreign                    
 countries and 208 foreign journalists who came to India on their own were                         
 accorded appropriate facilities. The Section provided facilities to 38 foreign                    
 Television teams for making documentary films on various subjects. The Sec-                       
 tion issued 178 press releases.                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 Audio-visual Publicity                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 250 prints of 50 approved documentary films were supplied to different                            
 missions/posts abroad. Two special compilation of films on "Farakka Project"                      
 and "Bhutan" hi-blighting co- operation with Bangladesh and Bhutan were                           
 completed during the year.                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 Over 200 Gramophone records of Indian classical vocal instrumental and popular                    
 music were supplied to different missions. Two sets of Vedanta literature on                      
 disc by Swami Ranganathananda were supplied to selected missions.                                 
                                                                                                   
 ISI Transmissions                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 The twice daily news transmission broadcasts to Indian Missions through the                       
 Overseas Communication Service kept them adequately informed about day-to-day                     
 developments in India in the political as well as economic fields. The trans-                     
 misions carried official statements on foreign and national poli- cies, joint                     
 communiques on important visits of Indian leaders abroad and foreign                              
 dignitaries to India. A new feature of the afternoon transmission is the                          
 inclusion of important news head- lines appearing in the daily press. It is                       
 proposed to increase the number of listening posts (presently 51) by supplying                    
 tele- printer equipments to 8 more missions.                                                      
                                                                                                   
 Exhibition and Cultural Work                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 The Ministry supplied 275 large-size photographs, 393 books, 48 album pages of                    
 postal stamps, 32 panels of reproduc- tion of Tagore paintings, 100 children                      
 paintings and six Indian dolls to Missions in Paris, Amman, Copenhagen,                           
 Santiago, Dacca, Male, Bangkok, Washington, Rome and Accra for arranging                          
 exhibitions. The Ministry actively assisted the Lalit Kala Academy in                             
 organising Graphic Art Exhibition at Algiers, Tunis, Lisbon, Cairo and                            
 Belgrade. Help was extended to the National Book Trust in giving wide publicity                   
 abroad to the                                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 pg45                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 Third World Book Fair held in New Delhi in February 1978. Similar assistance                      
 was given for giving publicity to the Fourth Triennial of World Contemporary                      
 Art held in New Delhi in February 1978.                                                           
                                                                                                   
 Print Publicity                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 The Ministry produced a number of pamphlets, for external publicity. Some of                      
 the notable among these were : "Prime Minister Morarji Desai in USSR",                            
 "Restoration of Bamyan", "Dynamics of an open society" and a collection of                        
 speeches by the Foreign Minister entitled "India's Foreign Policy-new di-                         
 mensions". A pamphlet in Hindi on "India's Foreign Policy" was also brought                       
 out. Some of the missions produced pamph- lets in the languages of the                            
 countries of their accredition. Notable examples were; Speeches of the Prime                      
 Minister in Thai and a biographical sketch of the Prime Minister in Spanish.                      
 Two pamphlets covering the Inaugural Address by Shri Morarji Desai and the                        
 Statement of Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee, the Minister of External Affairs, were                    
 produced on the occasion of the Conference of the Foreign Ministers of Non-                       
 Aligned Countries. The delegates attending the Conference were given a set of                     
 books on Indian Cultural heritage and other informative literature. Besides                       
 these, a number of other pamph- lets, articles on India's socioeconomic                           
 progress, books on Indian history, philosophy, religion, art, culture and                         
 recent developments in the country, newspapers, periodicals and a number of                       
 journals were also supplied to the missions abroad.                                               
                                                                                                   
 A large number of enquiries from foreign scholars and others on various aspects                   
 of Indian history, economics and other subjects were attended to and material                     
 collected from various sources, was provided to. help them.                                       
                                                                                                   
 The fortnightly "Indian & Foreign Review" in English and in French published                      
 informative articles on India's political, eco- nomic and cuttural matters and                    
 the monthly "Foreign Affairs Record" containing statements, speeches, important                   
 press communiques and agreements continue to fulfil a useful role. Copies of                      
 important press communiques, texts of speeches and other publicity material                       
 produced by the Press information Bureau and other sources were supplied to the                   
 Missions. A large number of photographs, including slides, covering various                       
 subjects were also supplied to the Missions.                                                      
                                                                                                   
 The World Press Review containing comments on or of interest to India in                          
 foreign newspapers and periodicals continued to be brought out regularly in                       
 cyclostyled form. Jan 01, 1977                                                                    
                                                                             Top                   
 Cultural Relations                                                                                
 CHAPTER XI                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 CULTURAL RELATIONS                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 Cultural relations of India were strengthened with a number of countries                          
 through the signing of cultural agreements. Such agreements were concluded with                   
 Sri Lanka. Mongolia and Thailand. Cultural agreements signed with Bahrain,                        
 Cuba, Democratic Republic of Korea and Vietnam were ratified during the year.                     
                                                                                                   
 The Indian Council for Cultural Relations acted as the main agency for                            
 promoting India's cultural contacts and streng- thening cultural ties with                        
 other countries. The Council did so through sponsoring exchange of scholars,                      
 writers, artists, send- ing cultural delegations, organising lectures and                         
 orientation pro- grammes, deputing visiting professors to centres of Indian                       
 studies abroad, sponsoring exhibitions within India and in various other                          
 countries, and presenting books and objects of art to various universities and                    
 institutions abroad. Within the country it ren- dered financial assistance to a                   
 number of foreign scholars and looked after their welfare.                                        
                                                                                                   
 Cultural exchange being a major constituent of foreign policy, it was felt that                   
 there was need to review the present arrangements in planning and implementing                    
 such exchanges with other countries. The Minister of External Affairs requested                   
 Shri Ashok Mehta to head a Committee to examine the working of the Indian                         
 Council of Cultural Relations and to recommend how to ration- alise and                           
 improve, its activities. The Report, submitted by the Committee in December                       
 1977, is under consideration.                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 During the year, a large number of distinguished visitors from different                          
 spheres were invited to visit the country, and many eminent Indian painters,                      
 writers, educationists, dancers, musi- cians and journalists were sent abroad.                    
 Of the cultural dele- gations sponsored by the Council, one was sent to give                      
 lectures, demonstrations and concerts in German Democratic Republic,                              
 Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union; another participated in the Festival. of                     
 Asian Arts in Hong Kong and the third gave per- formances in some countries of                    
 Europe. Nearer home, delega- tions were sent to Afghanistan, Nepal and Bhutan                     
 on the occa- sion of the Independence Day celebrations in these countries.                        
                                                                                                   
 pg46                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 pg47                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 The Council continued to bring out a series of publications aimed at projecting                   
 India's culture abroad. These included a quarterly publication in Spanish,                        
 French, Arabic and English relating to literature, culture and arts in India,                     
 and an illustrated- quarterly digest of cultural events in the country. The                       
 Council also published books in a number of foreign languages dealing with                        
 various aspects of Indian culture.                                                                
                                                                                                   
 The Azad Memorial lecture during the year was delivered by Dr. Saburo Okita,                      
 Chairman of the Japan Economic Centre and Special Adviser to the Chairman of                      
 the International Deve- lopment Centre of Japan. The subject was "Implications                    
 of the Japanese experience for the Developing Economies".                                         
                                                                                                   
 The Indian Centre for Africa continued to focus attention on African affairs.                     
 The Centre held a public meeting on 31 August to commemorate Namibia Day. It                      
 was attended by 400 foreign students, particularly from the African countries.                    
 The Minister for External Affairs, who presided over the function, expressed                      
 India's solidarity to the freedom-loving people of Namibia. Zim- babwe and                        
 South Africa.                                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 The Council, in collaboration with the African Missions in New Delhi, held an                     
 African Film Festival from 3 to Dec 08, 1977. The Festival was inaugurated by                     
 the Minister of State in the Ministry of External Affairs. The Council                            
 conducted a number of orientation programmes for students and teachers from the                   
 United States and the Nether- lands. The lectures and demonstrations given in                     
 these programm- es were meant to make them familiar with Indian art,                              
 architecture, dances and economic planning.                                                       
                                                                                                   
 A number of exhibitions were organized within the country, under the cultural                     
 exchange programme or in collaboration with the Lalit Kala Academy and some of                    
 the local Embassies. These included an exhibition of recent photographs from                      
 Australia, of prints and drawings from Thailand, an exhibition of contemporary                    
 Mexican paintings, arts, crafts, books and con- temporary films during the                        
 visit of the wife of the President of Mexico to the country, and an exhibition                    
 of toys from the German Democratic Republic. The Council also sent abroad                         
 paintings of some of the Indian artists for, participation in Festivals. Thus,                    
 paintings of Indian artists were sent for participation in the 8th                                
 lnternational Festival of Paintings held at Cagnes Sur-Mer and in the                             
 international exhibition of art organised by the Museum                                           
                                                                                                   
 pg48                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 of Modem Art at Belgrade. Paintings by Rabindra Nath Tagore were exhibited in                     
 Indian Mission in Rajshahi (Bangladesh) and paintings by Indian artists                           
 exhibited at Sao Paulo Biennale. Books and objects of art were, presented to                      
 Universities and Institutions in many countries of Europe, Asia, America and                      
 Africa.                                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 A number of professors and lecturers were deputed to various centres of Indian                    
 Studies abroad to facilitate the dissemination of knowledge about Indian                          
 history, languages, art and culture. Under this scheme, visiting professors                       
 were sent to Universities in Thailand, Trinidad, Mexico, Senegal, Romania,                        
 Bulgaria. Poland. Afghanistan, Indonesia and Guyana.                                              
                                                                                                   
 The third joint meeting of the Indo-US Sub-Commission on Education and Culture                    
 was held in New Delhi in May 1977. The Sub-Commission reviewed the progress                       
 made during the last year and identified areas of new initiative for future                       
 cooperation. The Commission decided to continue the fellowship programme by                       
 exchanging ten scholars on each side, agreed to new joint seminars and reviewed                   
 the programme for sending of Indian feature films to the United States for the                    
 festival of Indian films to be organised by the American Film Institute and the                   
 Public Broadcasting Service. T.V. Network. The Sub-Commission dis- cussed                         
 suggestions for expanding programme of collaboration in various fields. The                       
 first meeting to formulate plans for the Joint Media Working Group under the                      
 Sub-Commission was also held and the All India Radio, Doordarshan and the Films                   
 Division. were requested to send their suggestions regarding exchanges of                         
 films, documentaries and personnel.                                                               
                                                                                                   
 The Indian Cultural centres in Fiji. and Guyana continued to function well. The                   
 Council assisted the School of Music at Kabul, the School of Indian Culture in                    
 Trinidad and Tobago and the Mahatma Gandhi Institute in Mauritius by lending to                   
 them the services of experts in music/dance.                                                      
                                                                                                   
 Another aspect of the Council's work was to look after the welfare of foreign                     
 students in India. Summer camps were orga- nised for the benefit of such                          
 students and financial assistance was given to the All India Uganda Students'                     
 Association to hold their annual conference in Delhi. Study tours and                             
 sight-seeing tours were organised for the benefit of foreign students from time                   
 to time. Financial assistance was also extended to a number of foreign students                   
 who were in India to enable them to tide over their difficulties.                                 
                                                                                                   
 pg49                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 The scheme of nominating self-financing students from deve- loping countries of                   
 Asia and Africa for admission to medical and engineering colleges in India was                    
 continued during the year. Due to limited number of seats available, all the                      
 applicants for such courses, however, could not be accommodated. In all, 243                      
 students were admitted to engineering colleges and 75 to medical colleges. The                    
 statement indicating the country-wise break-up of seats allotted during the                       
 last three years is given at Appendix VI.                                                         
                                                                             Top                   
 Pprotocol                                                                                         
 CHAPTER XII                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 PPROTOCOL                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 The governments of Central African Empire, Niger and Mali appointed their first                   
 Ambassadors to India. H.E. Mr. Jean- Louis G. Psimhis, Ambassador of Central                      
 African Empire, H.E. Mr. Illa Salifou, Ambassador of Niger and H.E. Mr.                           
 Boubacar Kasse, Ambassador of Mali, presented their credentials on 9 May, 18                      
 July and 15 December respectively. While the Ambassador of the Central African                    
 Empire is resident in Delhi, those of Niger and Mali are resident in Moscow.                      
                                                                                                   
 New Heads of Missions of the following 27 countries arrived in Delhi and                          
 presented their credentials :                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 Ambassadors of Burma, Colombia, Uruguay (stationed at Tokyo), Afghanistan,                        
 Norway, FRG, Peru, Central African Em- pire, Romania, Egypt, USA, Niger                           
 (stationed in Moscow). Nepal, Mexico, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Yugoslavia,                        
 Ethiopia. Mali (stationed in Moscow), and High Commissioners of Britain,                          
 Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, Nigeria. Canada, Sri Lanka, Kenya and Singapore.                     
                                                                                                   
 The Charge d'Affaires of the Embassy of Ecuador left India on Apr 30, 1977,                       
 after closing down the resident mission of Ecuador in New Delhi.                                  
                                                                                                   
 H.E. Mr. S. Fida Hassan, Ambassador of the Islamic Repub- lic of Pakistan in                      
 India, died in New Delhi on 10 December 1977. He had been Ambassador of                           
 Pakistan to India since, 24 July 1976, when diplomatic relations were resumed                     
 between the two countries. Flags were flown at half mast on Government                            
 buildings and ail escort was provided for the body upto the Wagah border.                         
                                                                                                   
 pg50                                                                                              
                                                                             Top                   
 Passport, Emigration & Consular Services                                                          
 CHAPTER XIII                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 PASSPORT, EMIGRATION & CONSULAR SERVICES                                                          
                                                                                                   
 Passport and consular service is an area of activity in which the Ministry of                     
 External Affairs comes directly into contact with the Indian public both at                       
 home and abroad. There, was an explosive growth in the demand for passports                       
 during the year and major policy changes were made to meet this demand.                           
                                                                                                   
 The Minister of External Affairs, in a statement in the Lok Sabha on Aug 08,                      
 1977, outlined the features of the new policy aimed at liberalising the issue                     
 of passports. The basic objectives of this set of policies were to reduce                         
 delays in the issue of paw- ports and minimise the inconvenience and hardship                     
 to appli- cants. The changes related-to the free grant of endorsements. signing                   
 of Verification Certificates by Members of Parliament dissemination of passport                   
 application forms through post offices and simplification of procedures.                          
                                                                                                   
 From 15 August 1977 all ordinary Indian passports became valid for travel to                      
 "all countries except South Africa and the colony of Rhodesia" as against the                     
 previous policy of endorsing passports valid for travel on a restrictive basis.                   
 It is estimated that, by the end of the year, over five lakh passports, issued                    
 prior to the introduction of the new policy, would have been validated on the                     
 basis of the liberal endorsement policy.                                                          
                                                                                                   
 Members of Parliament were empowered to sign Verification Certificates in                         
 support of passport applications. Hitherto, this could be done wily by                            
 Government officials of the rank of Deputy Secretary or above and by                              
 Stipendiary First Class Magistrates or above. The public welcomed this measure                    
 and 1,17,000 passport applications were verified by Members of Parliament, by                     
 the end of December 1977. This represented 20 per cent of the applica- tions                      
 received during this period.                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 The scheme for distribution of passport application forms through post offices                    
 was introduced from 2 January 1978. To start with, the scheme was put into                        
 operation through two Head                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 pg51                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 pg52                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 Post Offices in Delhi and is being gradually extended to Head Post Offices in                     
 other States.                                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 There was a substantial increase in the number of passport applications                           
 received by Regional Passport offices. The increase was due to a greater                          
 awareness of the availability of job opportu- nities outside India and to                         
 liberalised measures regulating the issue of passports.                                           
                                                                                                   
 Over nine lakh new ordinary passports were issued in 1977. This represented an                    
 increase of 58 per cent over the number issu- ed in 1976. The number of                           
 applications received, passports issu- ed and the number pending disposal at                      
 the end of the year in each of the Regional Passport Offices is given in                          
 Appendix VII. This statement also shows the details of diplomatic and official                    
 pass- ports issued or serviced and other miscellaneous services rendered by the                   
 Ministry during the year 1977.                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 This increase of 58 per cent over the previous year was achiev- ed by                             
 increasing the staff in Regional Passport Offices and by im- proving the                          
 efficiency of the system as a whole. 104 clerical posts and 4 officers posts                      
 were created in May 1977 and an additional 113 clerical posts and 4 more                          
 officers posts were created in September 1977. 53 more clerical posts were                        
 added towards the end of the year to cope with the increased workload in some                     
 offices. The total additions to clerical staff during the year was thus 270.                      
 The total sanctioned strength in different grades of the Central Passport &                       
 Emigration Organisation, as at the end of 1977, is given in Appendix VIII.                        
                                                                                                   
 In spite of substantial increase in staff, arrears still persisted because the                    
 Current inflow of applications was more than the capa- city of disposal.                          
 Attention was paid to this aspect of the matter with the assistance of expert                     
 organisations. such as the Depart- ment of Administrative Reforms and the Staff                   
 Inspection Unit of the Finance Ministry. The steps taken led to a significant                     
 increase in productivity per man in all the Offices. Further improvements of                      
 the system will be effected during 1978. The facilities in the Passport Offices                   
 were also improved during 1977. After many years of, effort the Regional                          
 Passport Office in Bombay finally moved into adequate office promises. New                        
 premises were rented for the RPO, Ahmedabad, and more accommodation was made                      
 available in Ernakulam and Delhi. Additional equipment was provided wherever                      
 necessary. Aug 08, 1977                                                                           
 Annual Report for 1977-78                                                                         
 MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1977-78                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 CORRIGENDUM                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 Page  Paragraph  Line                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 v     1  13-14  Read "the visit of the                                                            
               Japanese Foreign Minister,                                                          
               Mr. Hatoyama in July 1977".                                                         
                                                                                                   
 vi   3   1      Read "same time" for                                                              
                 "Same India".                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 4    2   1      Read  "Bhutan", for "Bhusan".                                                     
                                                                                                   
 5   3    8      Read  "turnkey" for "turkey".                                                     
                                                                                                   
 12  1    2      Read   in it for "and".                                                           
                                                                                                   
 12  1  14       Read  "that" for "the".                                                           
                                                                                                   
 12  2   4       Read   "Was" for "were".                                                          
                                                                                                   
 15  1   2       Read  "Preceding" for                                                             
                 "Proceeding".                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 15  3    7      Read   "non-aligned" for                                                          
                 "non-alignment".                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 31   3   4      Read  "explaining" for                                                            
                 "explainting".                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 33  5    4      Add "on" after                                                                    
                 "Commission".                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 37  2    1      Read  "included" for                                                              
                 "including".                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 47  3    6      Read   "with" for "to".                                                           
 pg53>                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 In 1977, the total revenue of the Regional Passport Offices was Rs. 346.79                        
 lakhs as compared to a revenue, of Rs. 213 laths, in 1976. The expenditure in                     
 1977 was Rs. 104.20 lakhs (Rs. 61 lakhs in 1976).                                                 
                                                                                                   
 Increasing attention was paid to the tightening up of emigra- tion control to                     
 ensure that the Emigration Act was not violated. With good job opportunities                      
 for Indian skilled workers in the Gulf and West Asian countries and with Indian                   
 firms securing more contracts in the areas, the year saw an increased                             
 emigration of Indian workers for employment abroad. The Ministry of Labour, who                   
 are the focal point for approving contracts for overseas deployment of Indian                     
 workers, approved recruitment of 34,450 workers till Dec 31, 1977. It was,                        
 however, suspected that a large number of workers also emigrated without                          
 fulfilling the requirements of the recruitment and in violation of the                            
 Emigration Act. This necessitated greater vigil on the part of the Protectors                     
 of Emigrants at Bombay and Delhi, the two main points of exit from the country                    
 towards West Asia. Surprise checks were carried out by them at sea/airports and                   
 those seeking to emigrate in vio- lation of the Emigration Act were not allowed                   
 to proceed until they had completed emigration formalities. This invigilation                     
 had it salutary effect on those assisting persons to emigrate illegally. It is                    
 proposed to strength the emigration staff at major exist points in 1978.                          
                                                                                                   
 The Consular wing of the Consular, Passport & Visa Division, which coordinates                    
 the consular functions of Indian Missions abroad, extended financial assistance                   
 to 54 Indian nationals abroad. In addition to repatriation of 409 destitute                       
 Indian nationals, 105 cases of arrest of Indian nationals abroad were dealt                       
 with; 356 requests for registration of persons as Indian citizens were                            
 processed in consultation with the Ministry of Home Affairs. Death cases of 157                   
 Indians abroad along with 35 cases of states of deceased Indians were looked                      
 into. Apart from looking after interests of Indians abroad, the Division also                     
 assisted foreign Missions in India in tracing missing foreigners in India. and                    
 in the disposal of dead bodies of foreigners and their estates. 119 requests                      
 from foreign Missions in India for verifying docu- ments originating in India                     
 were entertained. 70,350 judicial, com- merical and educational documents were                    
 authenticated.                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 The use of consular stamps for various consular services ren- dered by Indian                     
 Missions was dispensed with, with effect from 1 January 1977, since it was                        
 found that the results obtained from the use of stamps were not commensurate                      
 with the effort. Dec 31, 1977                                                                     
                                                                             Top                   
 Organisation and Administration                                                                   
 CHAPTER XIV                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 ORGANISATION AND ADMINISTRATION                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 Shri Atal Behari Vajpayee and Shri Samarendra Kundu were respectively the                         
 Minister for External Affairs and Minister of State for External Affairs during                   
 the year. Shri A. K. Damoda- ran assumed charge as Additional Secretary on Nov                    
 01, 1977.                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 At Headquarters, the Ministry comprised 21 Divisions (of which 9 were                             
 specialist divisions) with a total strength of 530 officers and 1871                              
 non-gazetted staff. Twenty three officers were on deputation to other                             
 Ministries/Departments and International Organisations.                                           
                                                                                                   
 The number of Missions/Posts during the year was 127 (including 6 special                         
 offices of the Representative of India in Bhutan, Permanent Representative to                     
 the United Nations in New York and Geneva and to the U.N. Environment                             
 Programme, Nairobi, Permanent Mission of India to the International Organi-                       
 sations, Vienna, and Ambassadorial Mission to the E.E.C. and the European Coal                    
 and Steel Community, Brussels.) Besides these, India had also concurrent                          
 accreditation in 48 countries. Thus, with resident and concurrent                                 
 accreditation, India was represented in most of the countries in the world. The                   
 strength of the Staff in the Missions/Posts was 659 Diplomatic Officers and                       
 2520 non-diplomatic staff including local employees.                                              
                                                                                                   
 To provide better opportunities to its employees for advance- ment in their                       
 carreer, 52 posts were introduced in Selection Grade in Grade VI of the IFS(B)                    
 and 4 posts of Record Keepers were created in the case of Group 'D' officials.                    
 A separate Cell was set up to watch and monitor the implementation of Reserva-                    
 tion orders in respect of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes and other                             
 directives relating to their representation in public services. Similar                           
 arangements are being introduced in the case of Central Passport and Emigration                   
 Organisations. Details regarding the number of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled                         
 Tribes in the total strength of the Ministry, vacancies reserved for Scheduled                    
 Castes/Schedu- led Tribes and appointments made in these vacancies are given in                   
 Appendix IX and X.                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 pg54                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 pg55                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 The revenue expenditure of the Ministry during the financial year 1977-78 is                      
 estimated to be of the order of Rs. 1,03,13.16 lakhs (excluding loans to                          
 Bangladesh and Bhutan amounting to Rs. 841.00 lakhs), (Appendix XI). Details of                   
 expenditure under various Heads at Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad                         
 including External Publicity are given in Appendix XII.                                           
                                                                                                   
 Pursuant to the Prime Minister's directives on economy, a number of steps were                    
 taken to curtail expenditure but some increase in outlay became unavoidable                       
 because of inflationary trends affecting foreign allowance, rents and salaries                    
 of local staff. In order to reduce expenditure on spiralling rents of                             
 residential accommodation and office buildings abroad, efforts were intensified                   
 to acquire property abroad. Land was acquired in Lilongwe (Malawi), Colombo                       
 (Sri Lanka) and Djkarta (Indonesia). Decision was taken to purchase the                           
 existing Chancery building in Amman (Jordan), High Commissioner's re- sidence                     
 in Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia), Ambassador's residence in Warsaw (Poland) and                         
 Chancery building in Tehran (Iran). Construction of office building and                           
 residential appartments in Lusaka (Zambia) and Ottawa (Canada) is expected to                     
 commence next year. Preliminary planning has been undertaken for construction                     
 of Chancery building in Ankara (Turkey), Colombo (Sri Lanka), and Kathmandu                       
 (Nepal). The investment and acquisition of property abroad in the above manner                    
 is expected to be around Rs. 5 crores in 1977-78.                                                 
                                                                                                   
 A new Mission was opened in Surinam during the year 1977-78 (Appendix-XIII).                      
                                                                                                   
 The Foreign Service Inspectorate carried out inspection during the year of                        
 Missions in Kathmandu, Rangoon, Cairo, Rabat, Rome, Madrid, Tunis, Lisbon,                        
 Algiers, Belgrade and Tehran.                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 The Welfare Unit of the Ministry continued to look after the general welfare of                   
 all the officials serving at Headquarters and Missions abroad including                           
 admission of their children in Educa- tional Institutions including Medical and                   
 Engineering Colleges. and in promotion of Cultural and Social activities.                         
                                                                                                   
 Financial assistance was provided to some officials during their prolonged                        
 illness and to the bereaved families of the deceased officials from the Staff                     
 Benefit Fund and employment opportunities were also provided to the direct                        
 deserving dependents of the de- ceased officials. Nov 01, 1977                                    
                                                                             Top                   
 Hindi in official work                                                                            
 Jan 01, 1977 CHAPTER XV                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 HINDI IN OFFICIAL WORK                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 In accordance. with the-Government's policy on official langu- age, the use of,                   
 Hindi in this Ministry is progressively increasing. One of the landmarks, in so                   
 far as the question of progressive use of Hindi is concerned, was the speech in                   
 Hindi by the Minister of External Affairs at the 32nd Session of the United                       
 Nations General Assembly in October 1977, thus giving Hindi its rightful place                    
 in the comity of nations. The Official Language Implemen- tation Committee in                     
 the Ministry watches over the implementation of orders and instructions issued                    
 in this regard and all efforts are being made to use Hindi in as many spheres                     
 of activity as possible.                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 This Ministry has two specialised fields of work, i.e., protocol matters and                      
 international relations. In these two fields, Hindi was regularly used during                     
 the year under review. Documents like "Letters of Recall", "Letters of                            
 Credence" and "Commis- sions of Appointment" as well as other protocol                            
 documents, were prepared in Hindi. The Ministry also advised Ambassadors and                      
 Heads of Missions that while presenting credentials, they may as far as                           
 possible, make their introductory speeches in Hindi.                                              
                                                                                                   
 Apart from the above, international treaties and agreements were also prepared                    
 in Hindi for signature. This Ministry ren- ders assistance to other Ministries                    
 and Departments of the Govern- ment in preparing Hindi texts of such legal and                    
 formal docu- ments. The Ministry issued a large number of notifications, office                   
 orders, etc., in Hindi. Letters received in Hindi from the State Governments                      
 and from the members of the public were invariably replied to in that language.                   
 The Ministry also sent, letters to Indian Missions abroad and to Regional                         
 Passport Office in Hindi to the extent possible and some of the Ambassadors                       
 also corres- ponded With the Ministry in Hindi.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 A new tradition was established during the year in that on important occasions                    
 like visits of Heads of State and Heads of                                                        
                                                                                                   
 pg56                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 pg57                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 Government from foreign countries, where the visiting dignitary spoke in his                      
 own language, speeches on the Indian side were made in Hindi, and a number of                     
 joint declarations were also issued in Hindi.                                                     
                                                                                                   
 Efforts are being made to equip all Missions abroad with Hindi typewriters and                    
 Hindi-knowing typists/stenographers so that facilities for increasing use of                      
 Hindi could be extended. 19 Missions were equipped with Hindi typewriters.                        
 During the current financial year, 25 Missions more will receive Hindi type-                      
 writers as a part of the effort to ensure that all the Indian Missions are                        
 equipped with facilities for correspondence in Hindi. Instruc- tions were                         
 issued to Regional Passport Offices located in Hindi-- speaking areas, to                         
 ensure that in all correspondence work, Hindi should invariably be used in                        
 addition to English.                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 In order to create a favourable atmosphere for the propagation of Hindi abroad,                   
 the Ministry took some positive steps. This included posting of Hindi Officers                    
 in the Missions in Mauritius, Trinidad and in the High Commission in Fiji.                        
 Efforts are also being made to create more posts of Hindi Officers abroad.                        
 Hindi translators have already been posted to our Missions in London and                          
 Kathmandu. Under the scheme for the propagation of Hindi abroad, Hindi books                      
 and equipment worth nearly Rs. 3 lakhs were sent during this year to the                          
 libraries of the Missions abroad and to voluntary organisations so that these                     
 libraries could meet the requirements of the local people, particularly the                       
 people of Indian origin. The Ministry also sent some Hindi news- papers and                       
 journals regularly to our Missions. A Hindi news- papers-exchange programme was                   
 also started tinder which Hindi newspapers published in foreign countries are                     
 sent to Hindi news- papers of India and vice versa.                                               
                                                                                                   
 The Ministry, with the help of its Missions abroad, rendered necessary                            
 assistance to those foreign nationals and non-Hindi speaking employees who                        
 learn Hindi through correspondence courses. Efforts were made to renew and                        
 widen contacts with eminent foreign Hindi writers and to popularise Hindi in                      
 foreign countries.                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 Under the aegis of this Ministry, a scheme called 'Children's Hindi Classes'                      
 was commenced by which the school-going children of the employees of the                          
 Government of India and public sector undertakings posted abroad, may be able                     
 to learn Hindi and not be placed at a disadvantage on return to this country.                     
                                                                                                   
 pg58                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 The Indian Council of Cultural Relations financed chairs of Indian studies                        
 abroad for which Professors/Lecturers are deputed for teaching Hindi and other                    
 Indian languages. These included visiting Professors of Hindi language in the                     
 University of Bucha- rest in Romania and a visiting lecturer of Hindi at Sofia                    
 in Bul- garia. For the propagation of Hindi abroad, lecturers in Hindi were                       
 deputed to Trinidad, Surinam and Guyana. The Professor of Dravidian languages                     
 in Dakar (Senegal) also conducted classes in Hindi.                                               
                                                                                                   
 In order to cater to the vast Indian community living abroad, the Indian                          
 Council of Cultural Relations also started a quarterly Hindi publication,                         
 "Gagananchal". In the cultural centres also maintained and assisted by the                        
 Council in foreign countries, ar- rangements for teaching Hindi were made                         
 besides arrang- ing instruction in Indian music, classical dance, etc. The                        
 Council regularly sent Hindi books for presentation to the cultural insti-                        
 tutions and also arranged to Project Hindi films in foreign coun- tries.                          
                                                                             Top                   
 Appendix I Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars                                      
 APPENDIX I Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars etc. organised by                    
 Inter-Governmental Organisations at which Government of, India was represented                    
 in 1977-78.                                                                                       
 S.No.  Title of Conference etc. Foreign Exchange                                                  
        (with venue and date)    component of ex-                                                  
                                 penditure in Rs.                                                  
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1                2                      3                                                         
                                                                                                   
 Asian  African Legal Consultative Committee:                                                      
                                                                                                   
     19th Session, Doha, 16-Jan 28, 1978                                                           
                           Not available                                                           
                                                                                                   
 Asian Development Bank:                                                                           
                                                                                                   
     10th Annual Meeting, Manila, 18-27                                                            
              April 1977        3733.00                                                            
                                                                                                   
 Commonwealth Secretariat :                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 1.  15th Meeting of the Commonwealth Tele com-                                                    
     munications' Council, Auckland, New Zealand                                                   
     17-28 May 1977                   9554.65                                                      
 2.  Commonwealth Telecommunications Conference                                                    
     Sydney, 29 May-10 June 1977                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 3.  Meetings of Commonwealth Fund for Technical                                                   
     Cooperation, Commonwealth Senior Finance                                                      
     Officials and Commonwealth  Finance                                                           
     Ministers, Bridgetown, Barbados, 19-22 Sep-                                                   
     tember 1977                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 4.  Commonwealth Telecommunications  Council's                                                    
     Specialist Group for Net-Work operation, Hong                                                 
     Kong, 21-27 September 1977                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 5.  16th Meeting of the Commonwealth Telecommu-                                                   
                                     1933.46                                                       
     nications Council, Singapore, 28th November-6                                                 
     December 1977.                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 *6. Indian Ocean Commonwealth Cable Meeting. Nil                                                  
     Bombay- 13-16 December 1977                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1.  Economic and Social Commission for Asia and                                                   
                                  the Pacific:                                                     
                                                                                                   
 1.  Expert Groups Meeting on Socio-Economic                                                       
                        Expenditure met by                                                         
     Measures affecting Fertility Behaviour                                                        
          Programmes    host organisations.                                                        
     Bangkok, 5-10 April 1977                                                                      
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 pg59                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 pg60                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 2. Regional Conference on human Settlement,                                                       
     Bang- kok, 9-14 May 1977                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 3.  Regional Meeting, Bangkok, 5-16 June 1977                                                     
                               5227.00                                                             
                                                                                                   
 4.  Seminar on Rural Development Organised by                                                     
           Expenditure met by                                                                      
     U.N. Asian Centre for Development Administra-                                                 
        ESCAP                                                                                      
     tion, Kuala Lumpur, 20-28 June 1977.                                                          
                                                                                                   
 *5. Joint Panel Meeting on Satellite Instructional                                                
     Television Experiment, Ahmedabad, 31 October-                                                 
     5 November 1977.                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 6.  Committee on Development Planning, Bangkok,                                                   
     1-7 December 1977.                                                                            
                                                                                                   
     Food and Agriculture Organisation :                                                           
                                                                                                   
 1.  3rd Session of the Preparatory Commission                                                     
       of the   4432.00                                                                            
     IFAD, Rome, 4-8 April 1977.                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 2.  2nd Session of the Committee on World Food                                                    
             10,263.00                                                                             
     Security, Rome, 13-19 April 1977.                                                             
                                                                                                   
 3.  4th Session of the Committee on Agriculture,                                                  
         4,489.50                                                                                  
     Rome, 20-28 April 1977                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 4.  Meeting on assessment of appreciation of                                                      
       Scienti-  Expenses met by                                                                   
     fic knowledge to Arid Land Problems,                                                          
     Rome, 2-6     FAO May 1977                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 5.  Meeting of the Contact Group of Food                                                          
       & Agri-       3671.60                                                                       
     culture of CIFC, Paris, 10-15 May 1977.                                                       
                                                                                                   
 6.  Meeting of the Committee on Food Aid                                                          
     Policies of   8,513.00                                                                        
     World Food Programme, Rome, 16-27 May                                                         
     1977.                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 7.  2nd Liaison Officers Meeting, Sri                                                             
    Lanka, 25-27     All expenses met by                                                           
     May 1977                      FAO                                                             
                                                                                                   
 8.  71st Session of the Council, Rome,                                                            
     6-17 June       16460.00 1977                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 9.  Joint Workshop on peoples anticipation                                                        
  in develop-  All expenses met by                                                                 
     ment, Bangkok, 10-16 June 1977     FAO                                                        
                                                                                                   
 10. 2nd Expert Consultation on Accessibility                                                      
       Tropi-  Expenses  met by                                                                    
     cal Forest Resources, Sweden, 4-7                                                             
      July 1977         FAO                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 11. 4th Session of the Preparatory Commission                                                     
     of the    4500.00                                                                             
     IFAD, Rome, 11-15 July 1977                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 12. 4th Session of the Commission on Fertilizer,                                                  
     Rome, 28-30 September 1977                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 13. 21st Session of the Desert Locust Control                                                     
   Com-    mittee, Rome, 3-7 October 1977                                                          
                                                                                                   
 14. 3rd Asian Conference of Agricultural Credit                                                   
       Co-    Nil                                                                                  
     operatives and the Ist General Assembly of the                                                
     Asian Regional Agricultural Credit Association,                                               
     New Delhi, 10-14 October 1977                                                                 
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1                 2              3                                                                
                                                                                                   
 15. 4th Session of the Committee on Food Aid                                                      
    Policies   9565.00                                                                             
     & Programmes of World Food Programme, Rome,                                                   
     24 October-4 November 1977                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 16. 55th Session of the Executive Committee of                                                    
      IPFC,    Expenses met by                                                                     
     Manila, 31 October-2 November 1977                                                            
     FAO                                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 17. 72nd Session of the Council, Rome, 8-10                                                       
     November 1977                                                                                 
 18. 19th Session of the Conference, Rome, 12                                                      
     Novem-     184066.00                                                                          
     ber-1 December 1977                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 19. Expert Consultation on Grain Legume                                                           
      Processing,     Nil                                                                          
     Mysore, 14-18 November 1977                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 20. Ist Session of the General Council of                                                         
     the IFD,   Rome, 10-18 December 1977                                                          
                                                                                                   
 21. Ist Session of the Governing Council                                                          
    of the IFAD,  Rome, 13-16 December 1977                                                        
                            50,000 -00                                                             
                                                                                                   
     International Atomic Energy Agency:                                                           
                                                                                                   
 1.  International Conference on Nuclear                                                           
     Power and     its Fuel Cycle, Salzsburg,                                                      
     Austria, 2-13 May 1977   62,368.00                                                            
                                                                                                   
 2.  21st General Conference, Vienna,                                                              
    26-30 Septem-      27,742.00                                                                   
     ber 1977                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
    International Civil Aviation Organisation :                                                    
                                                                                                   
 1.  2nd Session of the Study Group on Traffic                                                     
      Peaks     1825.23 (approx)                                                                   
     at International Airports, Montreal, 22-26                                                    
     August 1977                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 2.  22nd Session of the General Assembly,                                                         
     Montreal,     44,300.00 (estimated)                                                           
                                                                                                   
     13 September-5 October 1977                                                                   
                                                                                                   
     International Labour Organisation :                                                           
                                                                                                   
 1.  10th Session of the Metal Trades                                                              
     Committee,         2,071.80                                                                   
     Geneva, 20-28 April 1977                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 2.  Seminar on the 'Application of appropriate                                                    
     tech-    11,400.00                                                                            
     nology in road construction', Manila,                                                         
     16-24 May     Expenses met by                                                                 
     1977                         ILO                                                              
                                                                                                   
 3.  63rd Session of the Conference, Geneva, 1-22                                                  
            1,69,007.61  June 1977                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 *4. National Seminar on Social Security &                                                         
       National       Nil                                                                          
     Development, New Delhi, 19-30 September 1977                                                  
                                                                                                   
 5.  Workshop for Directors of Training in Labour                                                  
         Nil                                                                                       
     Administration, Kuala Lumpur, 19-24 September                                                 
     1977                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 6.  General Assembly of the International Social                                                  
        4,056.00                                                                                   
     Security Association, Madrid, Spain 3-14 October                                              
     1977                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
                              pg62>                                                                
                                                                                                   
 1                      2                  3                                                       
                                                                                                   
 7.  Asian Regional Seminar for Cooperatives for                                                   
        the     Nil                                                                                
     Disabled, Warsaw, Poland, 4-19 October 1977                                                   
                                                                                                   
 8.  Regional Workshop on Education and Motivation                                                 
        Nil                                                                                        
     of Rural Workers for Family Welfare Planning,                                                 
     Bangkok, 1-5 November 1977                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 9.  204th Session of the Governing Body and its                                                   
         7,160.05                                                                                  
     various Committee Meetings, Geneva, 7-18                                                      
     November 1977                                                                                 
 10. Tripartite Meeting on the conditions of work                                                  
        and    Nil                                                                                 
     employment of Professional Workers, Geneva,                                                   
     22-30 November 1977                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 11. 17th Session of Asian Advisory Committee and                                                  
         Not available                                                                             
     the Asian Consultations on Working Conditions                                                 
     Environment and choice of Technology, Manila,                                                 
     29 November-10 December 1977                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 12. Tripatite Technical meeting for Civil Aviation,                                               
       Nil                                                                                         
     Geneva, 7-15 December 1977                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 13. Sub-Regional Seminar on Status and Role of                                                    
         Expenses met by                                                                           
     Women in the organised sector, Dacca, 12-16                                                   
         ILO                                                                                       
     December 1977                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 14. 205th Session of the Governing Body, Geneva, 28                                               
     February-3 March 1978                                                                         
     International Lead and Zinc Study Group.                                                      
     21st Session and the meeting of the Committees                                                
     of   25,000 (approx.)                                                                         
     the Group, Geneva, 8-17 September 1977                                                        
                                                                                                   
 Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative                                                          
    Organisation:                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 1.  38th Session of the Council, London, 23-27 May                                                
     1977                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 2.  5th Session of the Joint IMCO/ILO Committee on                                                
     Training, London, 13-17 June 1977                                                             
                                                                                                   
 3.  7th Session of the Marine Environment Protec-                                                 
     tion Committee, London. 10-24 June 1977                                                       
                                                                                                   
 4.  11th Session, of the Sub-Committee on Life Saving                                             
     Appliances, London, 27 June-1 July 1977                                                       
                                                                                                   
 5.  10th Session of the Sub-Committee on Standards                                                
     of Training and Watchkeeping, London, 19-23                                                   
     September 1977                                                                                
                                                                                                   
                              pg63>                                                                
                                                                                                   
 1                      2                   3                                                      
                                                                                                   
 6.  Joint Maritime Safety Committee/Marine Environ-                                               
     ment Protection Committee Meeting on Tanker                                                   
     Safety and Pollution Prevention, London, 10-21                                                
     October 1977                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 7.  9th Extraordinary Session of the Council, London,                                             
     4-5 November 1977                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 8.  10th Session of the Assembly, London. 7-18                                                    
     November 1977                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 9.  18th Session of the Sub-Committee on Radio-                                                   
         2035.00                                                                                   
     Communication, London, 28 November-2                                                          
     December 1977                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 10. 8th Session of Marine Environment Protection                                                  
     Committee, London, 5-9 December 1977                                                          
                                                                                                   
 11. International Conference on Tanker Safety and                                                 
     Pollution Prevention, London, 6-17 February                                                   
     1978                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 International Monetary Fund/International Bank                                                    
                                                                                                   
     for Reconstruction and Development:                                                           
                                                                                                   
 1.  Meeting of the Group of Twenty-four, Interim &                                                
     & Development Committees and annual meetings,                                                 
     Washington, 23-30 September 1977                                                              
                                                                                                   
 2.  Seminar of 18 member Nations, Washington, 4-12                                                
     Expenses met by                                                                               
     October 1977                 IMF                                                              
                                                                                                   
 International Telecommunication Satellite System:                                                 
                                                                                                   
 1.  5th Meeting of the Singnatories, Sydney, 19-22                                                
      2,727.00                                                                                     
     April 1977                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 2.  Meeting of Operations Representatives for Indian                                              
     2,540.93                                                                                      
     Ocean Region, Honolulu, Hawii, 26-30 April                                                    
     1977                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 3.  Seminar on New Earth Station Technology,                                                      
            1,057.00                                                                               
     Athens, 23-26 October 1977                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 International Communication Union :                                                               
                                                                                                   
     32nd Session of the Administrative Council,                                                   
     Geneva, 23 May-10 June 1977                                                                   
                                                                                                   
     United Nations Children's Fund :                                                              
                                                                                                   
     Annual Session of the Executive Board, Manila,                                                
       14,308.06                                                                                   
     17 May-3 June 1977                                                                            
                                                                                                   
                              pg64>                                                                
                                                                                                   
 1                      2                  3                                                       
                                                                                                   
 United Nations Conference  on Trade ond Develop-                                                  
     ment :                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 1.  8th Session of the Committee on Shipping,                                                     
      Geneva, 12-22 April 1977                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 2.  2nd Meeting of the Committee on Economic Co-                                                  
     operation among Developing Countries, Geneva,                                                 
     2-6 May 1977                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 3.  17th Session of the Trade & Development Board,                                                
     Geneva, 23 August-2 September 1977                                                            
                                                                                                   
 4.  3rd Session of 3rd Ad hoc Group of Experts on                                                 
     Restrictive Business Practices, Geneva, 17-25                                                 
     October 1977                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 5.  2nd Part of the U.N. Negotiating Conference on                                                
     a Common Fund under the Integrated Programme                                                  
     for Commodities, Geneva, 7 November-2                                                         
     December 1977                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 6.  4th Session of the Inter-Governmental Prepara-                                                
     tory Group on a Convention on International                                                   
     Multi-Modal   Transport,   Geneva,    14-25                                                   
     November 1977                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 United Nations Development Programme :                                                            
                                                                                                   
 1.  Meeting of the International Panel of Experts                                                 
     for   Nil                                                                                     
     preparatory work for a World Conference on                                                    
     Technical Cooperation among Developing                                                        
     Countries Kuwait, 31 May-5 June 1977                                                          
                                                                                                   
 2.  24th Session of the Governing Council, Geneva,                                                
       18786.00                                                                                    
     7 June-1 July 1977                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 3.  Meeting of the Asian  Re-insurances Corporation,                                              
     Expenses met  by                                                                              
     Bangkok, 31 October-2 November 1977       UNDP                                                
                                                                                                   
 United Nations Economic and Social Council:                                                       
                                                                                                   
 1.  2nd Meeting of the Inter-Governmental  Working                                                
     Group on a Code of Conduct for Transnational                                                  
     Corporations, New York, 18-22 April 1977                                                      
                                                                                                   
 2.  3rd Session of the UN Commission on Transna-                                                  
        39. 131.10                                                                                 
     tional Corporations, New York, 25 April-6 May                                                 
     1977                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
                              pg65>                                                                
                                                                                                   
 1                     2               3                                                           
                                                                                                   
 3.  5th Session of the Committee on National Re-                                                  
        Not available                                                                              
     sources, Geneva, 10-21 May 1977                                                               
                                                                                                   
 4.  3rd Meeting of the Inter-Governmental Working                                                 
     Group on a Code of Conduct for Transnational                                                  
     Corporations, New York, 6-17 February 1978                                                    
                                                                                                   
 5.  34th Session of Human Rights Commission,                                                      
     Geneva, 6 February-10 March 1978                                                              
                                                                                                   
 6.  4th Meeting of the Inter-Governmental Working                                                 
     Group on a Code of Conduct for Transnational                                                  
     Corporations, New York, 20-31 March 1978                                                      
                                                                                                   
 United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural                                               
     Organisation:                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 1.  102nd Session of the Executive Board, Paris, 25                                               
      3,000.00                                                                                     
     April-13 May 1977                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 2.  Sub-Regional Meeting of National Commission in                                                
       2377.03                                                                                     
     Asia, Manila, 1-7 August 1977                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 3.  103rd Session of the Executive Board, Paris,                                                  
      12     3000.00                                                                               
     September-7 October 1977                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 4.  Project Meeting No. 107, Izmir and Athens,                                                    
          1693.00                                                                                  
     21 September-6 October 1977                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 *5. Regional Seminar on Informatics in South and                                                  
        27920.00                                                                                   
     Central Asia, New Delhi, 7-9 November 1977                                                    
                                                                                                   
 *6. International Symposium on Archaean Geoche-                                                   
          Nil                                                                                      
     mistry, Hyderabad, 15-19 November 1977                                                        
                                                                                                   
 7.  Ad Hoc Meeting of Experts on Science and Tech-                                                
       Expenses met by                                                                             
     nology aspects of UNESCO's, Paris, 21 November                                                
      UN     1977                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 8.  Project Meeting No. 2 on Precambrian Mobile                                                   
      23,042.00                                                                                    
     Zones, Cairo, 10-22 December 1977                                                             
                                                                                                   
 9.  Meeting on Ophiolites, Dubrovnik, Yugoslavia,                                                 
        360.00                                                                                     
     10-17 December 1977                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 10. Project Meeting No. 129 on Laterites and Lateri-                                              
     1900.00                                                                                       
     tization, Ouagadougou, Upper Volta, 17-27                                                     
     December 1977                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 11. 2nd Thailand Workshop on Mangrove Environ-                                                    
          Expendituremet                                                                           
        ment, Thailand                                                                             
        UNESCO                                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 6-1173EA/77                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
                              pg66>                                                                
                                                                                                   
 1                      2                 3                                                        
                                                                                                   
 United Nations General Assembly:                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 1.  UN Conference on Succession of States in                                                      
      respect         44,724.00                                                                    
     of Treaties, Vienna, 4 April-8 May 1977                                                       
                   (estimated)                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 2.  6th Session of the UN Conference on the Law                                                   
     of           Nil                                                                              
     the Sea, New York, 21 May-18 July 1977                                                        
                                                                                                   
 3.  10th Session of the United Nations                                                            
      Commission of         35,639.04                                                              
     international Trade Law, Vienna, 23 May-                                                      
                  (estimated)                                                                      
     -17 June 1977                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 4.  UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer                                                    
                2,968.00                                                                           
     Space, Vienna, 20 June-1 July 1977                                                            
                                                                                                   
 5.  Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty                                                
     on        13,788.00                                                                           
     the Prohibition of Emplacement of Nuclear                                                     
     Weapons and other weapons of mass destruction                                                 
     on the sea bed and the ocean floor and in                                                     
    the sub-soil thereof, Geneva, 20 June-1 July 1977                                              
                                                                                                   
 6.  Meeting of the Regional Group for Asia and the                                                
           95.00                                                                                   
     Pacific of UN Advisory Committee on the Appli-                                                
     cation of Science & Technology to Development,                                                
     (UN-ACAST), Bangkok, 21-23 June 1977                                                          
                                                                                                   
 7.  6th Session of the 3rd United Nations Conference                                              
         6,425.00                                                                                  
     on the Law of the Sea, New York, 25 June-15                                                   
     July 1977                                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 8.  Meeting of the Working Group on Policy for                                                    
             564.75                                                                                
     Science & Technology within the UN Systems set                                                
     up by UN-ACAST, Geneva, 13-15 July 1977                                                       
                                                                                                   
 9.  International Conference on the National Treaty                                               
          200.00                                                                                   
     Law and Procedure, Villa Cerbelloni, Italy, 6-10                                              
         (estimated)                                                                               
     August 1977                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 10. 6th Session of International  Civil  Service                                                  
              16,800.00                                                                            
     Commission Meeting, Vienna, 16 August-2 Sep-                                                  
             (approx.)                                                                             
     tember 1977                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 11. 3rd U.N. Conference on Standardisation of Geo-                                                
            9927.61                                                                                
     graphical Names and the 7th Session of Experts on                                             
     Geographical Names, Athens, Greace. 16 August                                                 
     8 September 1977                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 12. World Conference for Action against Apartheid in                                              
          11,025.00                                                                                
     Lagos, 22-26 August 1977 and Accra, 27-29                                                     
          (approx.)  August 1977                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                              pg67>                                                                
                                                                                                   
 1                      2                      3                                                   
                                                                                                   
 13. 9th Session of the United Nations Commission                                                  
       on          9,050.00                                                                        
     International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) Working                                                    
                (estimated)                                                                        
     Group on the International Sale of Goods, Geneva,                                             
     19-30 September 1977                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 14. 32nd Session of the General Assembly, New York,                                               
          815,000.00                                                                               
     20 September-21 December 1977         (approx.)                                               
                                                                                                   
 15. Meeting of the 23rd Annual Session of the UN                                                  
            1794.00                                                                                
     Secretary General's Advisory Committee on the                                                 
     Application of Science & Technology to Develop-                                               
     ment (UN-ACAST), Geneva, 13-19 November                                                       
     -3 Decemcer 1977                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 16. U.N. Meeting of Experts on Sea Bed Mineral                                                    
            Nil                                                                                    
     Resources Assessment, New York, 27 November                                                   
     -3 December 1977                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 17. 6th Session of the Working Group on International                                             
         Not available                                                                             
     Negotiable Instruments, Geneva, 3-13 January                                                  
     1978                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 18. International Civil Service Commission Meeting,                                               
           24,300.00                                                                               
     New York 27 February-17 March 1978   (approx.)                                                
                                                                                                   
 19. UN Conference on the Carriage of Goods by Sea,                                                
           Not available                                                                           
     Hamburg (FRG), 6-31 March 1978                                                                
                                                                                                   
 United Nations Industrial Development Organisation :                                              
                                                                                                   
 1.  Expert Group Meeting on Industrialisation in re-                                              
     lation to Integrated Rural Development, Vienna,                                               
     12-15 December 1977                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 2.  Plenipotentiary Conference on the Establishment of                                            
     UNIDO as a Specialised Agency, New York, 21                                                   
          Nil     February-10 March 1978                                                           
                                                                                                   
 World Health Organisation :                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 1.  30th World Health Assembly, Geneva, 2 May                                                     
     1977 for 3 weeks                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 2.  30th Session of the Regional Committee for South                                              
     East Asia, Bangkok, 2-8 August 1977                                                           
                                                                                                   
 *3. International Symposium on "Recent Progress on                                                
     Immunology of Laprosy and Chronic Microbacter-                                                
     terial Infections, New Delhi, 11-15 November                                                  
     1977                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
                              pg68>                                                                
                                                                                                   
 1                           2                   3                                                 
                                                                                                   
 *4. Regional Seminar on Anti-malaria operations,                                                  
     Bombay and Aurangabad, 28 November-9                                                          
     December 1977                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 5.  61st Session of the Executive Board, Geneva, 11                                               
     January 1978                                                                                  
     World Meteorological Organisation                                                             
                                                                                                   
 1.  4th Session of the Panel on Tropical Cyclones,                                                
           668 -00                                                                                 
     Dacca, 12-18 April 1977                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 2.  4th Session of the Commission for Basic Systems                                               
           Expenses met by,                                                                        
                                                                                                   
     Advisory Working Group, Geneva, 13-15 April                                                   
             WMO     1977                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 3.  13th Session of JOC for GARP and FGGE Re-                                                     
               Expenses met by                                                                     
     search Coordination Conference, Stockholm,                                                    
                WMO     21-22 April 1977                                                           
                                                                                                   
 4.  Technical Conference on Instruments and Method                                                
     of Observation, Hamburg, FRG, 27-30 July 1977                                                 
             8629.00                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 5.  7th Session of the Commission for Instruments &                                               
     Method of Observation, Hamburg, FRG, 1-2                                                      
     August 1977                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 6.  Conference on the Potential Benefit of Agricultural                                           
     Meteorology, Rome, 16-24 October 1977                                                         
                                                                                                   
 7.  2nd Planning Meeting on Tropical Wind Observing                                               
           2633.00                                                                                 
     System (TWOS), Geneva, 17-21 October 1977                                                     
                                                                                                   
 8.  Informal Planning Meeting for the Establishment                                               
           Financed by WMO                                                                         
                                                                                                   
     of Co-ordinated Programme of Storm Data                                                       
     Acquisition in the Bay of Bengal, Bangkok, 2-5                                                
     November 1977                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 World Tourism Organisation                                                                        
                                                                                                   
     SARTC Meeting, Islamabad, 12-26 September                                                     
                908.00     1977                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 *In India.                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 Jan 28, 1978                                                                                      
 Appendix II Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars                                     
 APPENDIX II Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars organised by Non-                   
 Governmental Organisations, at which India was represented with Government                        
 assistance in 1977-78                                                                             
 S.No.    Title of Conference    Foreign Exchange                                                  
         (with venue & date)     component of ex-                                                  
                                 penditure in Rs.                                                  
                                                                                                   
 1                   2                     3                                                       
                                                                                                   
 1 . Special mid-year meeting of the International                                                 
        Exe-        Nil                                                                            
     cutive Committee and Council of Pugwash move-                                                 
     ment, Geneva, 12-Apr 19, 1977                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 2.  11th International Hydrographic: Conference in                                                
              12,465.00                                                                            
     Monte Cario, Monaco, 18-30 April 1977                                                         
                                                                                                   
 3.  10th Conference of the International Association                                              
     of Ports and Harbour's, Houston, Texas (USA)                                                  
     23-30 April 1977                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 4.  14th Session of International Commission on Rice,                                             
            2,000.00                                                                               
     Rome, 27-30 April 1977                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 5.  Pacific Area Travel Association (PATA), Board of                                              
            5601.00                                                                                
     Directors' Meeting, Frankfort, 1-20 May 1977                                                  
                                                                                                   
 6.  Asian Productivity Organisation Symposium on                                                  
                Nil                                                                                
     Computer Application, Tokyo, 23-27 May 1977                                                   
                                                                                                   
 7.  7th Session of the Working Group on International                                             
          1,125.00                                                                                 
     Statistical Programme, Geneva, 23-24 June 1977                                                
                                                                                                   
 8.  Pacific Area Travel Association (PATA), Market-                                               
            Nil                                                                                    
     ing Meeting, Los Angeles (USA), 9-20 July 1977                                                
                                                                                                   
 9.  27th Pugwash Conference on Science & World                                                    
                Nil                                                                                
     Affairs, Munich (FRG), 21-31 August 1977                                                      
                                                                                                   
 10. 26th Session of International Conference on                                                   
     Edu-          38,914.00                                                                       
     cation, Geneva, 30 August-8 September 1977                                                    
                                                                                                   
 11. International Conference on Nutrition                                                         
     Education,          Expenditure met b                                                         
 y                                                                                                 
     Oxford, England, 31 August-7 September 1977                                                   
                UNICEF                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 12. Pacific Area Travel Association (PATA)--'                                                     
     Promote          2,188.00                                                                     
     Conference' Sydney, Melbourne, Perth & Adelaid,                                               
     2-15 September 1977                                                                           
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1                      2                       3                                                  
                                                                                                   
 13.  9th Asian Electronics Conference and 5th                                                     
      General        11022.00                                                                      
      Assembly of Asia Electronics Union, Tehran,                                                  
      21-27 September 1977                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 14.  Executive Committee Meeting of the International                                             
         3667.65                                                                                   
      Cooperative Alliance (ICA), Enschede, The Nether-                                            
      lands, 27-28 September 1977                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 15.  Regional Conference of the International Council                                             
         21,400                                                                                    
      on Social Welfare for Asia and Western Pacific,                                              
          (provisional)                                                                            
      Tehran, 3-8 October 1977                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 16.  ASTA Annual Convention, Madrid, Spain and                                                    
                3,930.00                                                                           
      Geneva, 29 October-5 November 1977                                                           
                                                                                                   
 17.  Pacific Area Travel Association, Board of Direc-                                             
         Nil                                                                                       
      tors' Meeting, San Francisco, 12 November-7                                                  
      December                                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 *18. 41st Session of International Statistical                                                    
      Institute,    Nil                                                                            
      New Delhi, 5-15 December 1977                                                                
                                                                                                   
 *19. Pacific Area Travel Association (PATA) Conference,                                           
      New Delhi, 22-28 January 1978                                                                
                                                                                                   
 *In India.                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 Apr 19, 1977                                                                                      
 Appendix III Miscellaneous International Conferences                                              
 APPENDIX III Miscellaneous International Conferences etc. in 1977-78 at which                     
 Govern- ment of India was represented or at which India was represented with                      
 Government of India's assistance                                                                  
 S.No.  Title of conference     Foreign exchange                                                   
        (with venue & date)     component of ex-                                                   
                                penditure in Rs.                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1                          2                3                                                     
                                                                                                   
 1.  Conference on Transfer of Nuclear Technology                                                  
            1016.00                                                                                
     Persepolis/Shiraz 10-Apr 14, 1977                                                             
                                                                                                   
 2.  Special Air Transport Conference, Montreal,                                                   
             7311.43 (approx.)                                                                     
     13-26 April 1977                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 3.  4th Regional Consultation Meeting of the Asian                                                
         Nil                                                                                       
     Programme of Educational Innovation and Deve-                                                 
     lopment (APEID), Bangkok, 19-25 April 1977                                                    
                                                                                                   
 4.  Meeting of the Technical and Economic, Market-                                                
     ing and Financial Panel of Preparatory Committee                                              
     of International Maritime Satellite Organisation                                              
     (INMARSAT) Paris, 9-14 May 1977                                                               
                                                                                                   
 5.  International Maritime Satellite System First                                                 
     Technical Panel Meeting, Paris, 9-13 May 1977                                                 
          3,127.00                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 6.  International Symposium on Space Science &                                                    
            7,626.00                                                                               
     Technology, Tokyo, 16-20 May 1977                                                             
                                                                                                   
 7.  Symposium on Space Tribology, Netherlands,                                                    
             4,692.00                                                                              
     27-30 May 1977                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 8.  10th Asian Pacific Forestry Commission, Nepal,                                                
          1635.00                                                                                  
     6-10 June, 1977                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 9.  Preparatory Meeting of the Experts for the 4th                                                
          Nil                                                                                      
     Regional Conference of Ministers of Education                                                 
     responsible for Economic Planning in Asia and                                                 
     Oceania, Bangkok, 25-28 July 1977                                                             
                                                                                                   
 10. 15th Session of the Asian and Pacific Coconut                                                 
          All expenses met by                                                                      
                                                                                                   
     Community, Bangkok, 26-30 July 1977      APCC                                                 
                                                                                                   
 11. 6th Quinquenial Conference of the International                                               
        440.00                                                                                     
     Council of Educators of the Visually handicapped                                              
     Paris 1-10 August 1977.                                                                       
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1                      2                   3                                                      
                                                                                                   
 12. International Conference on "Utilisation of                                                   
            7229.15                                                                                
     Mineral Resources in the Developing Countries"                                                
     Lusaka, Zambia, 3-5 August 1977                                                               
                                                                                                   
 *13.International Conference on Production Engi-                                                  
            Nit                                                                                    
     neering New Delhi, 27-30 August 1977                                                          
                                                                                                   
 14. 8th International Congress on Social Insects.                                                 
     Nageningen, Netherlands, 2-22 September 1977                                                  
                                                                                                   
 15. Sub-Commission of the South & East Asia of the                                                
         1190.00                                                                                   
     Commission for Geological Map of World,                                                       
     Seoul, Korea, 5-9 September 1977                                                              
                                                                                                   
 16. Final meetings of the study groups of the                                                     
     Interna-     Not available                                                                    
     tional Radio Consultative Committee (CCIR)                                                    
     Group A, Geneva, 25 September-21 October                                                      
     1977                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 17. 1977 Photovolataic Solar Energy Conference con-                                               
        4000.00 (approx.)                                                                          
     ducted by Commission of European Communities,                                                 
     Luxembourg 27-30 September 1977                                                               
                                                                                                   
 18. International , Conference on Remote Control and                                              
        12,340 -00                                                                                 
     Monitoring in Mining.  Birmingham, UK 10-18                                                   
     October 1977                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 *19. 3rd Asian Conference on Agricultural Credit and                                              
        Nit                                                                                        
     Cooperatives (ACACC) and Ist General Assembly                                                 
     of the Asian and the Pacific Regional Agricultural                                            
     Credit Association (APEACA), New Delhi, 10-14                                                 
     October 1977                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 20. International Maritime Satellite System Second                                                
         1,763.00                                                                                  
     TechnicalPanel meeting, New Castles, U.K. 10-14                                               
     October 1977                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 21. Asian Regional Seminar on Social Policy organised                                             
       Nil                                                                                         
     by the Indian Association of Trained Social                                                   
     Workers with India International tCentre, New                                                 
     Delhi, 11-16 October 1977                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 2.  Colloquium on-employment motivation in public                                                 
         Not available.                                                                            
     enterprises in Asia, organised by the Asian Centre                                            
     for Development Administration, Kuala Lampur,                                                 
     17-22 October 1977.                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 *23. 5th Session of ICFC and the 6th Session of the                                               
         Nil                                                                                       
     ICFC Executive Committee for the implementation                                               
     of the International Indian Ocean Survey and                                                  
     Development Programme, Cochin, 17-26 October                                                  
     1977                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1                      2                      3                                                   
                                                                                                   
 24. Conference of the International Nuclear Fuel                                                  
     Cycle Evaluation, Washington, DC' 19-21 October                                               
     1977                                4,183.00                                                  
                                                                                                   
 25. Asian Regional Seminar on Deafness Tehran,                                                    
      4-9         Nil                                                                              
     November 1977                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 26. 26th Meeting of the Colombo Plan Consultative                                                 
           24750.00                                                                                
     Committee, Kathmandu, 28 November-9 Decem-                                                    
     ber 1977                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 27. Final meetings of the Study Groups of the Inter                                               
         Not available.                                                                            
     national Radio Consultative Committee (CCIR)                                                  
     Group B, Geneva, 9 January-3 February 1978                                                    
                                                                                                   
 28. Asian and Pacific Regional Seminar on Public                                                  
           Not available.                                                                          
     Enterprises Policy on Investment, Policy, Costs                                               
     and Returns, Kuala Lampur, 18-27 January 1978                                                 
                                                                                                   
 *In India.                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 Apr 14, 1977                                                                                      
 Appendix IV International Organisations                                                           
 Jan 01, 1977 APPENDIX IV International Organisations of which INDIA became a                      
 Member or ceased to be a Member during the year 1977-78.                                          
 S.No. Name of International   Name of International                                               
      Organisa-tion of which   Organisation of which                                               
     India became a Member     India ceased to be a                                                
    during the year 1977-78    member during the year                                              
                               1977-78                                                             
                                                                                                   
 1.  International Fund for Agricultural                                                           
     Development (IFAD)                                                                            
 2.  Association of Development Re-                                                                
     search of Training Institutions of                                                            
     Asia and the Pacific.                                                                         
                                                                                                   
                              pg74>                                                                
                                                                                                   
 Jan 01, 1977                                                                                      
 Appendix V Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or renewed by India                          
 APPENDIX V Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or renewed by India with                     
 other Countries in 1977* (*This list is not exhaustive)                                           
 Sl.  Title of Convention/   Date of     Date of    Date on   Remarks                              
 No.  Treaty/Agreement       signature   ratifica-  which                                          
                                         tion/      entered                                        
                                         accession  into                                           
                                                    force                                          
                                                                                                   
 1          2                   3          4          5          6                                 
                                                                                                   
 MULTILATERAL                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 International Convention on                                                                       
 the Suppression and Punish-                                                                       
 ment of the Crime of                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 APARTHEID                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 1.  International Convention         Aug 17, 1977  22-10-1977                                     
     on the Suppression and                                                                        
     Punishment of the Crime of                                                                    
     Apartheid, 1973.                                                                              
                                                                                                   
     Vienna Convention on                                                                          
     Consular Relations                                                                            
     Optional Protocol to the                                                                      
     Vienna Convention on Con-                                                                     
     sular Relations concerning                                                                    
     Acquisition of Nationality                                                                    
     Optional Protocol to the                                                                      
     Vienna Convention on                                                                          
     Consular Relations concern-                                                                   
     ing the Compulsory Settle-                                                                    
     ment of Disputes. 1963.                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 2.  Vienna Convention on Con-            25-10-1977 28-12-1977                                    
     sular Relations; the Op-                                                                      
     tional Protocol concerning                                                                    
     Acquisition of Nationality                                                                    
     and the Optional Protocol                                                                     
     concerning the Compulsory                                                                     
     Settlement of Disputes.                                                                       
     1963.                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 European Economic Community                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 3.  Exchange of letters between     10-5-1977         10-5-1977                                   
     the Government of India                                                                       
     and European Economic                                                                         
     Community regarding food                                                                      
     aid.                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
                              pg75>                                                                
                                                                                                   
                              pg76>                                                                
                                                                                                   
 1               2                      3       4      5          6                                
                                                                                                   
 4.  Exchange of letters between    15-11-1977      15-11-1977                                     
     the Government of India                                                                       
     and the Commission of the                                                                     
     European Communities for                                                                      
     EEC Food Aid-Skimmed                                                                          
     Milk Powder.                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
     International Atomic Energy                                                                   
     Agency                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 5  Exchange of letters between      4-11-1977        4-11-1977                                    
     the Government of India                                                                       
     and the International                                                                         
     Atomic Energy Agency re-                                                                      
     garding the extension of the                                                                  
     Regional Cooperative                                                                          
     Agreement (RCA) for Re-                                                                       
     search, Development and                                                                       
     Training Related to Nuclear                                                                   
     Science and Technology for                                                                    
     a further Period of five                                                                      
     years from June 12. 1977                                                                      
                                                                                                   
     United Nations Development                                                                    
     Programme                                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 6.  Agreement between the          31-3-1977       31-3-1977                                      
     Government of India and                                                                       
     the United Nations Develop-                                                                   
     ment Programme regarding                                                                      
     Vocational Training Pro-                                                                      
     gramme for Women.                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 7  Agreement between the           India           30-5-1977                                      
     Government of India and        18-5-1977                                                      
     the United Nations Deve-       UNDP                                                           
     lopment Programme re-          30-5-1977                                                      
     garding development of                                                                        
     Mushroom cultivation in                                                                       
     Himachal Pradesh.                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 8.  Agreement between the           9-9-1977         9-9-1977                                     
     Government of India and                                                                       
     the United Nations Deve-                                                                      
     lopment Programme re-                                                                         
     garding Project "Stimula-                                                                     
     ting Milk Marketing and                                                                       
     Dairy Development (opera-                                                                     
     tion Flood)-Extended                                                                          
     Phase".                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 9.  Agreement between the          23-9-1977       23-9-1977                                      
     Government of India and                                                                       
     the United Nations Deve-                                                                      
     lopment Programme re-                                                                         
     garding Project dealing with                                                                  
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1             2                      3        4        5         6                                
                                                                                                   
 Advanced Vocational                                                                               
 Training System.                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 BILATERAL                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 Bangladesh                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 10. Agreement between the          5-11-1977         5-11-1977                                    
     Government of the Re-                                                                         
     public of India and the                                                                       
     Government of the Peoples,                                                                    
     Republic of Bangladesh on                                                                     
     Sharing of the Ganga                                                                          
     Waters at Farakka and on                                                                      
     Augmenting its Flows.                                                                         
                                                                                                   
     BELGIUM                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 11. Exchange of letters between   17-5-1977         17-5-1977                                     
     the Government of India                                                                       
     and the Government of                                                                         
     Belgium for Food aid-                                                                         
     1975/76-4000 tonnes of                                                                        
     wheat as gift from Belgium.                                                                   
                                                                                                   
     CANADA                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 12. Exchange of letters for im-   18-1-1977         18-1-1977                                     
     port of Rapeseed Oil from                                                                     
     Canada during 1976-77.                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 13. Amendment No.2 to Agree-      22-8-1977         22-8-1977                                     
     ment dated September 30,                                                                      
     1969 between the Govern-                                                                      
     ment of India and the                                                                         
     Government of Canada                                                                          
     (acting through the Cana-                                                                     
     dian International Deve-                                                                      
     lopment Agency).                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 14. Amendment to Section 2.02     15-9-1977         15-9-1977                                     
     and 4.03 of the Canadian                                                                      
     Development Loan Agree-                                                                       
     ment dated 16-3-1973.                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 15. Exchange of Notes regard-     27-9-1977         27-9-1977                                     
     ing Amendment to Section                                                                      
     403 of the Canadian Deve-                                                                     
     lopment Loan Agreement                                                                        
     dated 24-10-1975.                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 16. Agreement between the          6-10-1977        6-10-1977                                     
     Government of India and                                                                       
     the Government of Canada                                                                      
     for Canadian Development                                                                      
     Loan Agreement of C $                                                                         
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1             2                       3           4          5          6                         
                                                                                                   
     32.0 million for import                                                                       
     of fertilizer and fertilizer                                                                  
     material from Canada.                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 CHILE                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 17. Trade Agreement between        17-4-1972  14-10-1977  14-10-1977                              
     the Government of the Re-                                                                     
     public of India and the                                                                       
     Government of the Republic                                                                    
     of Chile.                                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 DENMARK                                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 18. Agreement between the          30-3-1977              30-3-1977                               
     Government of Indla and                                                                       
     the Government of Den-                                                                        
     mark on a Danish Govern-                                                                      
     ment Loan to India.                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 19. Consular Convention bet-       12-12-1975  India-      6-5-1977                               
     ween the Republic of India                 7-1-1977                                           
     and the German Democra-                    G.D.R.                                             
     tic Republic.                             18-1-1977                                           
                                                                                                   
 GERMANY, FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 20. Loan Agreement between          2-3-1977               2-3-1977                               
     KREDITANSTALT FUR                                                                             
     WIEDERAUFBAU and                                                                              
     India for DM 70,000,000.                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 21. Arbitration Agreement with      2-3-1977               2-3-1977                               
     reference to the Loan                                                                         
     Agreement-(Item No. 20)                                                                       
     Article IX, paragraph (6).                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 22. Loan Agreement between          2-3-1977               2-3-1977                               
     KREDITANSTALT FUR                                                                             
     WIEDERAUFBAU and                                                                              
     India for DM 9,300,000.                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 23. Arbitration Agreement with      2-3-1977               2-3-1977                               
     reference to the Loan                                                                         
     Agreement-(Item No. 22)                                                                       
     Article IX, paragraph (6)                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 24. Project Agreement between      16-3-1977              16-3-1977                               
     KREDITANSTALT FUR                                                                             
     WIEDERAUFBAU and                                                                              
     Neyveli Lignite Corpora-                                                                      
     tion Ltd.                                                                                     
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1                2                       3          4          5          6                       
                                                                                                   
 25. Arbitration Agreement with        16-3-1977            16-3-1977                              
     reference to the provision of                                                                 
     Article VI, paragraph (5).                                                                    
     of the Project Agreement                                                                      
     (Item No. 24)                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 26. Exchange of letters con-          22-8-1977            22-8-1977                              
     cerning supply of fertilizer                                                                  
     to the Indo-German Pro-                                                                       
     jects at Kangra, Mandi                                                                        
     (HP), Nilgiris (Tamilnadu)                                                                    
     and Almora (UP) during                                                                        
     1976.                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 27. Exchange of letters con-          25-8-1977            25-8-1977                              
     cerning follow-up assistance                                                                  
     to the Indo-German Agri-                                                                      
     cultural Development Pro-                                                                     
     ject, Mandi (Himachal Pra-                                                                    
     desh).                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 28. Agreement between the             14-10-1977           14-10-1977                             
     Government of India and                                                                       
     the Government of the                                                                         
     Federal Republic of Ger-                                                                      
     many concerning financial                                                                     
     assistance in 1977.                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 29. Loan Agreement between            25-10-1977           25-10-1977                             
     the Government of India                                                                       
     and KREDITANSTALT                                                                             
     FUR WIEDERAUFBAU                                                                              
     for DM 45,000,000                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 30. Arbitration Agreement with        25-10-1977           25-10-1977                             
     reference to the provision                                                                    
     of paragraph (6) of Article                                                                   
     X of the Loan Agreement                                                                       
     (Item No.29)                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 31. Financing Agreement bet-          25-10-1977           25-10-1977                             
     ween the Government of                                                                        
     India and KREDITANS-                                                                          
     TALT FUR WIEDERAU.                                                                            
     FBAU for DM 17,000,000                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 32. Project Agreement between         25-10-1977           25-10-1977                             
     the Government of Madhya                                                                      
     Pradesh and KREDITAN-                                                                         
     STALT FUR WIEDERAU-                                                                           
     FBAU.                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 33. Arbitration Agreement with        25-10-1977           25-10-1977                             
     reference to the provision                                                                    
     of paragraph (4) of Article                                                                   
     VI of the Project Agree-                                                                      
     ment. (Item No. 32)                                                                           
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1                2                      3           4         5           6                       
                                                                                                   
 34. Project Agreement between       25-10-1977            25-10-1977                              
     Agricultural Refinance and                                                                    
     Development Corporation                                                                       
     (India) and KREDITANS-                                                                        
     TALT FUR WIEDERAU-                                                                            
     FBAU.                                                                                         
 35. Arbitration Agreement with      25-10-1977            25-10-1977                              
     reference to the provision                                                                    
     of paragraph 5 of Article                                                                     
     V of the Project Agreement                                                                    
     (Item No. 34)                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 36. Loan Agreement between          25-10-1977            25-10-1977                              
     the Government of India                                                                       
     and KREDITANSTALT                                                                             
     FUR WIEDERAUFBAU                                                                              
     FOR DM 58,000,000                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 37. Arbitration Agreement with      25-10-1977            25-10-1977                              
     reference to the provision                                                                    
     of Article IX, paragraph                                                                      
     (6), of the Loan Agreement                                                                    
     (Item No. 36)                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 38. Project Agreement between       25-10-1977            25-10-1977                              
     Bharat Heavy Electricals                                                                      
     Ltd. and KREDITANS-                                                                           
     TALT FUR WIEDERAU-                                                                            
     FBAU                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 39. Arbitration Agreement with      25-10-1977            25-10-1977                              
     reference to the provision                                                                    
     of Article VI, paragraph                                                                      
     (5), of the Project Agree-                                                                    
     ment (Item No. 38)                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 FRANCE                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 40. Financial Protocol (1977-        9-3-1977              9-3-1977                               
     78) between the Govern-                                                                       
     ment of India and the                                                                         
     Government of France.                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 41. Financial Protocol relating     25-3-1977             25-3-1977                               
     to the alleviation of the                                                                     
     Indian External Debt bet-                                                                     
     ween the  Government of                                                                       
     India and the Government                                                                      
     of France.                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1                   2                  3            4           5        6                        
                                                                                                   
 HUNGARY                                                                                           
                                                                                                   
 42. Exchange of letters between      India-                                                       
     the Government of               13-5-1977                9-10-1976                            
     India and the Government                                                                      
     of Hungary for the exten-        Hungary-                                                     
     sion of the Agreement for       17-2-1977                                                     
     the development of atomic                                                                     
     energy for a further period                                                                   
     of five years from 9-10-1976                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 INDONESIA                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 43. Agreement between the           14-1-1977    22-6-1977  15-8-1977                             
     Government of the Repub-                                                                      
     lic of India and the Govern-                                                                  
     ment of the Republic of                                                                       
     Indonesia on the Extension                                                                    
     of the 1974 Continental                                                                       
     Shelf Boundary between the                                                                    
     two countries in the                                                                          
     Andaman Sea and the                                                                           
     Indian Ocean.                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 ITALY                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 44. Exchange of letters between      2-4-1977                2-4-1977                             
     the Government of India                                                                       
     and the Government of                                                                         
     Italy for Cooperation in                                                                      
     Matters relating to the                                                                       
     Peaceful Uses of Atomic                                                                       
     Energy.                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 JAPAN                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 45. Loan Agreement between           3-3-1977                3-3-1977                             
     the Government of India                                                                       
     and the Overseas Economic                                                                     
     Cooperation Fund, Japan,                                                                      
     concerning  Commodity                                                                         
     Loan II for ten billion Yen.                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 46. Loan Agreement between           5-4-1977                5-4-1977                             
     the Government of India                                                                       
     and The Overseas Economic                                                                     
     Cooperation Fund of Japan                                                                     
     in respect of Tele-commu-                                                                     
     nication Project for nine                                                                     
     billion Yen.                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 47. Loan Agreement concern-         19-8-1977               19-8-197/                             
     ing Commodity Loan III                                                                        
     between the Government of                                                                     
     India and The Overseas                                                                        
     Economic  Cooperation                                                                         
     Fund, Japan for twenty                                                                        
     billion Yen.                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1                 2                   3              4          5         6                       
                                                                                                   
 MALAYSIA                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 48. Agreement between the         25-10-1976                1-4-1977                              
     Government of India and                                                                       
     the Government of Malay-                                                                      
     sia for the avoidance of                                                                      
     double taxation and the                                                                       
     prevention of fiscal evasion                                                                  
     with respect to taxes on                                                                      
     income and Protocol rela-                                                                     
     ting thereto.                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 NEPAL                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 49. Exchange of letters between   27-12-1977                1-4-1977                              
     the Government of India                                                                       
     and the Government of                                                                         
     Nepal regarding extension                                                                     
     of the Agreement dated                                                                        
     2-3-1973 on supply of iodis-                                                                  
     ed salt to Nepal.                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 50. Exchange of letters between   27-12-1977                5-1-1976                              
     the Government of India                                                                       
     and the Government of                                                                         
     Nepal regarding construc-                                                                     
     tion of a Sports Complex at                                                                   
     Pokhara                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 51. Agreement between the         27-12-1977                1-4-1972                              
     Government of India and                                                                       
     His Majesty's Government                                                                      
     of Nepal for Continuation                                                                     
     of the Development of                                                                         
     Village, Cottage and Small                                                                    
     Scale Industries in Nepal.                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 NETHERLANDS                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 52. Loan Agreement for Hfl        20-5-1977                20-5-1977                              
     120.000.000 between the                                                                       
     Government of India and                                                                       
     the Government of the                                                                         
     Kingdom of the Nether-                                                                        
     lands for goods and/or                                                                        
     services in connection with                                                                   
     the development of India.                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 53. Loan Agreement for Hfl        20-5-1977                20-5-1977                              
     54,000,000 between the                                                                        
     Government of India and                                                                       
     the Government of the                                                                         
     Kingdom of The Nether-                                                                        
     lands for goods and/or                                                                        
     services in connection with                                                                   
     the development of India.                                                                     
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1                   2                      3        4         5          6                        
                                                                                                   
 54. Exchange of letters regard-         8-8-1977            8-8-1977                              
     ing financial assistance to                                                                   
     the Calcutta Metropolitan                                                                     
     Development Authority                                                                         
     and the State Government                                                                      
     of West Bengal.                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 55. Exchange of letters regard-         2-9-1977            2-9-1977                              
     ing financial assistance to                                                                   
     the programme of the Cal-                                                                     
     cutta Metropolitan Deve-                                                                      
     lopment Authority.                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 56. Exchange of letters  between       31-8-1977           31-8-1977                              
     the Government of India                                                                       
     and the Government of                                                                         
     Pakistan providing Consular                                                                   
     facilities to be accor-                                                                       
     ded to  airline personnel                                                                     
     operating   air services bet-                                                                 
     ween the two countries.                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 57. Tele-Communication Agree-           1-10-1977           1-10-1977                             
     ment between the                                                                              
     Government of India and                                                                       
     the Government of Pakis-                                                                      
     tan.                                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 POLAND                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 58. Agreement between the               9-9-1977            9-9-1977                              
     Government of India and                                                                       
     the Government of the                                                                         
     Polish Peoples Republic                                                                       
     on cooperation in the utili-                                                                  
     sation of atomic energy for                                                                   
     peaceful purposes.                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 SRI LANKA                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 59. Supplementary Agreement            22-11-1976  3-2-1977  5-2-1977                             
     between India and Sri Lanka                                                                   
     on the Extension of the                                                                       
     Maritime Boundary bet-                                                                        
     ween the two countries in                                                                     
     the Gulf of Manaar from                                                                       
     Position 13m to the Trijunc-                                                                  
     tion Point between India,                                                                     
     Sri Lanka and Maldives                                                                        
     (Point T).                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 60. Exchange of Notes between          10-5,1977           10-5-1977                              
     the Government of                                                                             
     India and Sri Lanka regard-                                                                   
     ing amendments to the                                                                         
     Credit Agreement of 4                                                                         
     November, 1975.                                                                               
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1                2                    3          4           5         6                          
                                                                                                   
 SWEDEN                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 61. Agreement on Develop-          26-5-1977              26-5-1977                               
     ment Cooperation, 1977                                                                        
     between the Government                                                                        
     of India and the Govern-                                                                      
     ment of Sweden.                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 UNION OF SOVIET SOCIA-                                                                            
     LIST REPUBLICS                                                                                
                                                                                                   
 62. Agreement between the          27-4-1977              27-4-1977                               
     Government of the Repub-                                                                      
     lic of India and the Govern-                                                                  
     ment of the Union of                                                                          
     Soviet Socialist Republics                                                                    
     on economic and technical                                                                     
     cooperation.                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 63. Agreement between the          17-11-1977             17-11-1977                              
     Government of India and                                                                       
     the Government of the                                                                         
     Union of Soviet Socialist                                                                     
     Republics for the Applica-                                                                    
     tion of Safeguards in Con-                                                                    
     nection with the supply of                                                                    
     Heavy Water.                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 UNITED KINGDOM                                                                                    
                                                                                                   
 64. Exchange of Notes regard-      27-1-1977              27-1-1977                               
     ing Capital Investment                                                                        
     Grant, 1977.                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 65. Exchange of Notes for the      27-1-1977              27-1-1977                               
     Mixed Project Grant, 1977                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 66. Exchange of Notes regard-      27-1-1977              27-1-1977                               
     ing Sectoral Grant,                                                                           
     1977.                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 67. Exchange of Notes regard-      27-1-1977              27-1-1977                               
     ing Debt Refinancing Grant                                                                    
     1977.                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 68. Exchange of Notes regard-      27-1-1977              27-1-1977                               
     ing Maintenance Grant,                                                                        
     1977,                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 69. Exchange of Notes for          30-3-1977              30-3-1977                               
     Amending the UK/India                                                                         
     Maintenance Grant, 1975.                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 70.  Exchange of Notes regard-     28-6-1977              28-6-1977                               
     ing Family Planning Grant,                                                                    
     1977.                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1                 2                      3        4             5        6                        
                                                                                                   
 71. Exchange of letters regard-       6-10-1977            6-10-1977                              
     ing Amendment to UK/India                                                                     
     Capital Investment Grant,                                                                     
     1977.                                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                                                                          
                                                                                                   
 72. Agreement between the             3-2-1977             3-2-1977                               
     Government of India and                                                                       
     the Government of the                                                                         
     United States of America                                                                      
     for Sales of Agricultural                                                                     
     Commodities.                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 Aug 17, 1977                                                                                      
 Appendix VI Number of seats allotted to various countries                                         
 Jan 01, 1977                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 APPENDIX VI                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 Number of seats allotted to various countries                                                     
                                                                                                   
                            1975-76        1976-77         1977-78                                 
 Sl.     Country                                                                                   
 No.                     Engg.  Medical  Engg. Medical  Engg.  Medical                             
                                                                                                   
 1         2              3       4       5       6       7        8                               
                                                                                                   
 1.  Afghanistan           3       1       6       1       3        1                              
 2.  Angola                -       -       -       -       -        -                              
 3.  A.R.E.                -       -       -       -       -        -                              
 4.  Baharain              1       -       1       -       4        -                              
 5.  Bangladesh            1       1       3       -       2        -                              
 6.  Bulgaria              1       -       -       -       -        -                              
 7.  Burma                 -       -       -       -       -        -                              
 8.  Ethiopia              -       -       -       -       1        -                              
 9.  Fiji                  3       2       4       2       2        2                              
 10. Guyana                1       2       2       3       -        4                              
 11. Hungary               -       -       1       -       -        -                              
 12. Indonesia             -       -       -       -       -        1                              
 13. Iran                 21       6      40       5      36        5                              
 14. Iraq                  8       1       7       -       6        -                              
 15. Jordan               15       1      26       1      29        1                              
 16. Kenya                 5       4      15       3       6        4                              
 17. Kuwait                5       -       3       -      14        -                              
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 18.  Lebanon              1       -       2      -       -       -                                
 19.  Lesotho              1       -       -      1       -       1                                
 20.  Malawi               1       1       -      1       1       -                                
 21.  Malaysia            36      18      38     15      54      13                                
 22.  Maldive Islands      -       2       -      1       -       -                                
 23.  Mauritius           14      15      21     18      27      15                                
 24.  Nigeria              -       -       1      1       2       1                                
 25.  PDRY                 1       -       1      1       -       -                                
 26.  Poland               1       -       -      -       -       -                                
 27.  Rhodesia             -       -       3      -       4       1                                
 28.  Saudi Arabia         1       -       -      -       -       -                                
 29   Singapore            1       -       1      -       -       -                                
 30.  South Africa         1       4       2      3       2       3                                
 31.  Sri Lanka           23       4      21      7      23       6                                
 32.  Sudan                1       -       2      -       1       -                                
 33.  Syria                3       -       1      -       1       1                                
 34.  Tanzania            11       3      15      3      15       4                                
 35.  Thailand             4       3       5      3       2       2                                
 36.  U.A.E.               -       -       1      1       1       -                                
 37.  Uganda               -       -       5      1       3       2                                
 38.  West Indies          -       1       -      2       -       -                                
 39.  YAR                  -       -       -      -       1       -                                
 40.  Zambia               1       1       2      1       2       3                                
 41.  Developed Countries  -       -       -      -       -       3                                
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 Jan 01, 1977                                                                                      
 Appendix VII Statement of Number of Applications Received and Passport Issued                     
 Jan 01, 1977                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 APPENDIX VII                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 REGIONAL PASSPORT OFFICES                                                                         
 Statement of Number of Applications Received and Passport Issued in 1977                          
                                                                                                   
 Sl.  Passport Office/Passport    Jurisdiction   No. of Passport  No. of passpor                   
 t                                                                                                 
 No.  Issuing Authority                          applications     granted                          
                                                 received during  during 1977                      
                                                 1977                                              
 1       2           3                                              4         5                    
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 1.  Ahmedabad   Gujarat                                          79,267    77,8                   
 80                                                                                                
 2.  Bombay      Maharashtra                                    2,39,679  2,23,8                   
 84                                                                                                
 3.  Calcutta    W. Bengal, Bihar, Orissa, Tripura, Meghalaya,                                     
                 Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Mizoram, Manipur                                     
                 and Sikkim                                       24,290    20,9                   
 98                                                                                                
 4.  Chandigarh  Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Union                                          
                 Territory of Chandigarh                        1,45,688  1,10,1                   
 21                                                                                                
 5.  Delhi       Delhi, Rajasthan, Jammu and Kashmir            1,27,576    97,8                   
 13                                                                                                
 6.  Ernakulam   Kerala                                         3,09,654  2,00,7                   
 17                                                                                                
 7.  Hyderabad   Andhra Pradesh                                   62,068    46,4                   
 84                                                                                                
 8.  Lucknow     U.P., M.P.                                       49,243    35,5                   
 90                                                                                                
 9.  Madras      Tamilnadu, Karnataka, Pondicherry              1,12,905    93,1                   
 14                                                                                                
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 10. Chief Secretary, Govern-   Union Territory of Daman and Diu   11,206    10.                   
 300                                                                                               
     ment of Goa, Daman &                                                                          
     Diu, Panaji                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 11. Chief Secretary, Andaman   Union Territory of Andaman & Nicobar Island  1,5                   
 21  1,174                                                                                         
     & Nicobar Administration,                                                                     
      Port Blair                                                                                   
                                                                11,63,097  9,18.                   
 075                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 Statement of Diplomatic / Official passports issued or serviced                                   
 and other Misc. services rendered in 1977                                                         
 (Figures of 1976 shown in brackets)                                                               
                                                                                                   
 Diplomatic passports   762(942)   Diplomatic & official passports services-2469                   
 (2615)                                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 Official passports    3979(4469)  No. of vises issued to foreign diplomats & ot                   
 her staff of foreign                                                                              
                                   missions in India-3593(3473)                                    
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 Jan 01, 1977                                                                                      
 Appendix VIII Total Sanctioned strength of Central Passport and Emigration                        
 Organisa-                                                                                         
 Jan 01, 1977                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 APPENDIX VIII                                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 Total Sanctioned strength of Central Passport                                                     
 and Emigration Organisa- tions as on 31-12-77                                                     
                                                                                                   
 Regional Passport Officers                  9                                                     
 Assistant Passport Officers                 9                                                     
 Public Relations Officers                  17                                                     
 Superintendents/Protectors of Emigrants    26                                                     
 Assistants                                 56                                                     
 Upper Division Clerks                     180                                                     
 Stenographers                              10                                                     
 Lower Divisions Clerks                    244                                                     
 Non-Clerical Jeep Drivers                   2                                                     
                                                                                                   
                                           553                                                     
                                                                                                   
 Class IV Staff-Record Sorters Daftaries, Gestetner                                                
 Operators, Telephone operators, Watchmen, Sweepers                                                
 , Peons, Messengers, and Farashes          300                                                    
                                                                                                   
              Total                        853                                                     
                                                                                                   
 Jan 01, 1977                                                                                      
 Appendix IX Statement showing the total number of employees                                       
 Jan 01, 1977                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 APPENDIX IX                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 Statement A                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 Statement showing the total number of employees (both permanent and temporary)                    
 in the Ministry under                                                                             
 various groups and the representation of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes                    
 therein (Position as                                                                              
 on  Dec 31, 1977                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 Class      Permanent/ Total     Scheduled  Percentage,  Scheduled  Percentage                     
                                                                                                   
            Temporary  number of  Castes     to total     Tribes     to total                      
                       employees            Employees               employees                      
                                                                                                   
 1. CLASS I   Permanent   256        24         9.4%          9         3.5%                       
              Temporary   250        15         6.0%         10         4.0%                       
                                                                                                   
 2. CLASS II  Permanent   697        21         3.0%          -           -                        
              Temporary   869        81         9.3%         12         1.4%                       
                                                                                                   
 3. CLASS III Permanent &                                                                          
              Temporary   812        66         8.1%         19         2.3%                       
                                                                                                   
 4. CLASS IV                                                                                       
   (excluding  Permanent &                                                                         
   sweepers)   Temporary   429        20         4.7%          6         1.4%                      
                                                                                                   
 5. CLASS IV                                                                                       
   (Sweepers)  Permanent &                                                                         
               Temporary    29        29         100%          -           -                       
                                                                                                   
 Note: The statistics above relate to posts in the Ministry of External Affairs                    
 only.                                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 Dec 31, 1977                                                                                      
 Appendix X Statement showing the number of appointments                                           
 Jan 01, 1977                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 APPENDIX X                                                                                        
                                                                                                   
 Statement-B                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 Statement showing the number of appointments (both by direct recruitment                          
 and by promotion) made to various groups of posts and reserved                                    
 vacancies filed by Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes during 1977.                             
                                                                                                   
               Total      Number of vacancies  No. of reserved      No. of vacan                   
 cies                                                                                              
 Class         number         reserved       candidates appointed   dereserved c                   
 onse-                                                                                             
                of                                                 quent to non-                   
 avail-                                                                                            
             vacancies   Scheduled Scheduled  Scheduled Scheduled  ability of re                   
 served                                                                                            
               filled     Castes    Tribes     Castes    Tribes        candidate                   
 s                                                                                                 
                                                                  Scheduled Sche                   
 duled                                                                                             
                                                                   Castes    Tri                   
 bes                                                                                               
                                                                                                   
 1. Class I      20        3          1          3         -         -                             
 1                                                                                                 
 2. Class II     35        4          2          4         1         -                             
 1                                                                                                 
 3. Class III    95       17         20          13        1         4         1                   
 9                                                                                                 
 4. Class IV (excluding sweepers)     -           -        -         -                             
 -                                                                                                 
 5. Class IV      2        1          1           1        -         -                             
 1                                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 Note: The statistics above relate to appointments made by the Ministry of Exter                   
 nal Affairs only.                                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 Jan 01, 1977                                                                                      
 Appendix XI Revenue expenditure of the Ministry                                                   
 Jan 01, 1977                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 APPENDIX XI                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 Revenue expenditure of the Ministry during the financial year                                     
                       1977-78                                                                     
                                                                                                   
                                                              (Rs. in lakhs)                       
                                                                                                   
                                                                        R.E.                       
                                                                     1977-78                       
                                                                                                   
 Headquarters                                                         569.34                       
                                                                                                   
 Missions/Posts abroad                                               2661.97                       
                                                                                                   
 Supply wings                                                         158.17                       
                                                                                                   
 Other Items                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 Contribution to the U.N. Commonwealth Secretariat and                                             
         other International Institutions                             241.22                       
                                                                                                   
 Central Passport and Emigration Organisation                         168.12                       
                                                                                                   
 Other Miscellaneous Items                                           2231.36                       
                                                                                                   
 Subsides and Aid                                                                                  
                                                                                                   
 Subsidy to Bhutan                                                   2466.00                       
                                                                                                   
 Aid to Nepal                                                         924.39                       
                                                                                                   
 Aid to other developing countries in Asia & Africa                   575.00                       
                                                                                                   
 Aid to Bangladesh                                                    263.10                       
                                                                                                   
 Social Security & Welfare                                             54.49                       
                                                                                                   
                                        Total                       10313.16                       
                                                                                                   
 Jan 01, 1977                                                                                      
 Appendix XII Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad                                
 pg94                                                                                              
                                                                                                   
 APPENDIX XII                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
 Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad during 1977.78                              
                                                                                                   
 The expenditure during 1977-78 on Headquarters of this Ministry is ex- pected                     
 to be of the order of Rs. 5,69.34 lakhs; a sum of Rs. 189.90 lakhs is towards                     
 establishment charges, a sum of Rs. 45.74 lakhs for Dearness Allowance, a sum                     
 of Rs. 230.52 lakhs for publicity, cables, diplomatic bags service etc., a sum                    
 of Rs. 101.78 lakhs for travelling expenses and, a sum of Rs. 1.40 lakhs for                      
 Departmental Canteen.                                                                             
                                                                                                   
 2. The expenditure on Missions/Posts abroad including the Supply Wings at                         
 London & Washington and special Mission in Thimpu is Rs. 2820.14 lakhs, out of                    
 which a sum of Rs. 1259.78 lakhs is spent on Establishment Charges including                      
 Foreign and other compensatory allow - ances, a sum of Rs. 264.97 lakhs on                        
 passages for transfers and local tours, Rs. 165.99 lakhs for Publicity                            
 Contingencies and Rs. 1080.72 for official and residential accommodation, P&T                     
 Charges and other office con- tingencies. The average annual expenditure per                      
 Mission comes to Rs. 21.64 lakhs.                                                                 
                                                                                                   
 3. The expenditure mentioned above (vix. Rs. 3389.48 lakhs= Rs. 569.34                            
 lakhs+2820.14 lakhs) as per details below on Headquarters and Missions/Posts                      
 abroad included expenditure on External Publicity programme activities. The                       
 break-up of this expenditure is as under                                                          
 (a) Headquarters                                            (Rs. in lakhs)                        
                                                                                                   
 (i) Salaries (Officers 24 Staff 80)                             12 85                             
                                                                                                   
 (ii) Travelling Expenses                                         5.36                             
                                                                                                   
 (iii) Publicity Contingencies Charges                          106.64                             
                                                                                                   
                                                                124.85                             
                                                                                                   
 (b) Missions/Posts abroad                                                                         
                                                                                                   
 (i)   Salaries (Officers 54 staff 245)                          44.30                             
                                                                                                   
 (ii)  Foreign Allowance, Compensatory Allowance                 34.26                             
                                                                                                   
 (iii) Passages & Travelling Expenses                             7.31                             
                                                                                                   
 (iv)  Publicity Contingencies                                   62.09                             
                                                                                                   
 (v)  Other Charges, including renting of residential accommo-                                     
      dation and other office contingencies                      18.03                             
                                                                                                   
                                                                165.99                             
                                                                                                   
                  TOTAL : External Publicity                    290.84                             
                                                                                                   
 The expenditure on external Publicity as detailed above comes to 8.5%                             
 of the expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad.                                     
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                        (in lakhs of Rupees)                       
                                                                                                   
                                Establish-   Travelling  Office        Total                       
                                 ment        Expenses    Expenses                                  
                                Charges                                                            
                                                                                                   
 Secretariat                                                                                       
                                                                                                   
 Headquarters                    224.19        96.42        123.88    444.49                       
                                                                                                   
 External Publicity Division      12.85         5.36        106.64    124.85                       
                                                                                                   
              TOTAL              237.04       101.78        230.52    569.34                       
                                                                                                   
 Overseas Establishment                                                                            
                                                                                                   
 (a)  Missions/Posts abroad                                                                        
    (excluding Publicity Wings) 1181.22       257.66        1215.27  2654.15                       
                                                                                                   
 (b) Publicity Wings              78.56         7.31          80.12   165.99                       
                                                                                                   
                  TOTAL         1259.78       264.97        1295.39  2820.14                       
                                                                                                   
            GRAND TOTAL         1496.82       366.75        1525.91  3389.48                       
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 Jan 01, 1977                                                                                      
 Appendix XIII List of Indian Missions/Posts                                                       
 Jan 01, 1977                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   
 APPENDIX XIII                                                                                     
                                                                                                   
 List of Indian Missions/Posts Opened in the year 1977-78                                          
                                                                                                   
 Country                Location                     Remarks                                       
   1                       2                            3                                          
 Surinam                Paramaribo                   Embassy                                       
                                                                                                   
 Jan 01, 1977                                                                                      
                                                                                                   
External website that External website    External website    External website    External website 
opens in a new window that opens in a new that opens in a new that opens in a new that opens in a  
                      window              window              window              new window       

    Address : Patiala House, Annexe - BNew Delhi                              
   -110001                                           Page last updated on: 09 
    Telephone: 23389073, 23382694, 23073685;                  December, 2013  
   Fax: 23386340, 23387700;Feedback :            Site designed and maintained 
   dirlibmea.gov.in                                  by: National Informatics 
    Officer In-charge:-                                         Centre (NIC), 
    (c)Content Owned by MEA Library Ministry of   DeitY, MoCIT, Government of 
   External Affairs, Government of India                               India. 
   Terms & Conditions | Privacy Policy |         Visitors:                    
   Copyright Policy | Hyperlinking Policy |      
   Accessibility Statement | Help                

   java script is required for this page
   MEAs App twitter Facebook Google plus YouTube flickr
   loading
