   java script is required for this page java script is required for this
   page java script is required for this page java script is required for
   this page java script is required for this page java script is required
   for this page

   Sun, February 08, 2015 at 03:44:02 IST Indian Flag
   Ministry of                      Print Content Small Font Medium Font      
    External       MEA Library      Large Font                                
    Affairs,   Ministry of External   * Sitemap                               
   Government  Affairs, Government    * Contact Us                            
    of India         of India         * Feedback                              
                                      * _____________________           [  ]  

     * Home
     * Director's Office
          * Director Lib & Info
          * Library Officers & Staff
     * Journals
          * Current Journals
          * Online Journals
          * CD-ROMs Databases
     * Online Services
          * Business Monitor Online
          * EIU
          * JSTOR
          * Janes Online Services
          * Kessing World News Archive
          * Marketline MDIC
          * Online Service Links
     * Newspapers
          * E-Newspapers
          * Subscribed Print Newspapers
     * Library Bulletins
          * Foreign Affairs Documentation Bulletin
          * Recent Additions
          * Chronicle of Events
     * Alert
          * Book Alert
          * Article Alerts
     * Important Abbrevations

 Annual Reports Prior to 1999                                                                              
   * Home >   Annual Reports Prior to 1999 >   Annual Report 1991-92                       * Home          
 Annual Report 1991-92                                                                     * Director's    
                                                                                             Office        
                                        CONTENTS                                           * Journals      
 Introduction, (i)-(ix)                                                                    * Online        
                                                                                             Services      
 S.NO.  CHAPTERS                                                                    PAGE   * Newspapers    
 No.                                                                                       * Alert         
 1              India's Neighbours,                                     1-9                * Important     
 2              South-East Asia and the Pacific,                        10-15                Abbrevations  
 3              East Asia,                                              16-23              * Back          
 4              West Asia and North Africa,                             24-29                              
 5              Africa (South of the Sahara),                           30-34                              
 6              Europe,                                                 35-44                              
                Erstwhile USSR,                                         35                                 
                Eastern Europe,                                         39                                 
                Western Europe,                                         42                                 
 7              The Americas,                                           45-50                              
                North America,                                          45                                 
                Central and South America and the Caribbean,            48                                 
 8              United Nations and International Conferences,           51-64                              
                Political Issues,                                       52                                 
                Disarmament Issues,                                     54                                 
                Economic Issues,                                        56                                 
                Administrative and Budgetary Matters,                   58                                 
                Social and Humanitarian Issues,                         59                                 
                Apartheid,                                              66                                 
                Decolonisation,                                         59                                 
                Election to UN Bodies and other International           60                                 
                Organizations,                                                                             
                Activities of the Non-Aligned Movement,                 60                                 
                Commonwealth,                                           61                                 
                Conferences,                                            62                                 
                International Law: Development and Activities,          63                                 
 9              Foreign Economic Relations,                             65-67                              
 10             Policy Planning and Research,                           68-70                              
 11             External Publicity,                                     71-75                              
 12             Indians Overseas,                                       76-77                              
 13             Protocol,                                               78                                 
 14             Passport and Consular Services,                         79-82                              
 15             Administration and Organization,                        83-84                              
 16             Foreign Service Training Institute,                     85-87                              
 17             Use of Hindi in Official Work,                          88-89                              
 18             Cultural Relations,                                     90-99                              
                APPENDICES, A-1--A-30                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 1991                                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 Introduction                                                                                              
                                 I N T R O D U C T I O N                                                   
 The world scene witnessed momentous changes during the year under review with                             
 far-reaching implications for India's foreign policy. These changes have reaffirmed the                   
 need, given the state of ferment and metamorphosis in which the world is in today, to                     
 utilise foreign policy as an instrument to further our national interest in a dynamic                     
 manner. The upsurge of democratic sentiment, together with a renewed and focussed                         
 desire for peace, not only globally but at the sub-regional and regional levels, the                      
 demand for greater economic justice and the desire to uphold human dignity, provide                       
 both the background and setting for such changes. These aspirations have naturally led                    
 to replacement of outmoded state structures, and policies with new approaches for                         
 frameworks of political and economic development.                                                         
                                                                                                           
 The disintegration of the erstwhile Soviet State structure and emergence of the                           
 Commonwealth of Independent States, comprising individual, constituent republics,                         
 constitutes, the most profound of such developments. Th e modalities for mutual                           
 interaction among the republics and for their inter- action, in turn, with the                            
 community of nations is still in a state of evolution.                                                    
                                                                                                           
 The perception that the world has become unipolar, needs to be taken note of in the                       
 context of the strategic, political and economic inter- dependence among countries.                       
 Unified Germany and Japan are on the road to becoming still more important centres of                     
 economic power. The rapid process of integration of the European Economic Community is                    
 likely to enhance its importance as yet another major important centre of economic                        
 power.                                                                                                    
                                                                                                           
 The improvement of relations between the United States and the former Soviet Union, the                   
 end of the Cold War and newer diplomatic initiatives have facilitated the resolution of                   
 several outstanding problems. And yet, the lowering and elimination of East-West                          
 tensions, and the renewed quest for solutions to sub-regional and regional conflicts,                     
 have not brought solutions to the basic and fundamental problems of development faced                     
 by the large majority of countries.                                                                       
                                                                                                           
 The successful conclusion of the Paris Conference on Cambodia in which India was proud                    
 to have played an important role renewed hopes for return of peace in that war-torn                       
 country and emergence of a sovereign, independent, non-aligned and democratic Cambodia.                   
                                                                                                           
 (i) India welcomed the convening of the Middle-East Peace Conference and hoped that                       
 this would successfully lead to a just, comprehensive and mutually acceptable                             
 settlement of the Middle-East problem and the Palestinian issue.                                          
                                                                                                           
 India's decision to establish full diplomatic ties with Israel was a natural                              
 concomitant to the evolution of the politcal moves for restoration of peace in the                        
 war-torn region.                                                                                          
                                                                                                           
 The Government carefully examined the evolving international situation and took timely                    
 initiatives to adapt our policies to obtain maximum benefits for the country in the                       
 changing situation. At the macro-level, the foreign policy was directed at achieving                      
 three important objectives: maintaining the territorial integrity of India, ensuring                      
 her geo-political security by creating a durable environment of peace and stability in                    
 the region and to build a framework for the economic well-being of the poeple by                          
 encouraging a healthy external economic environment.                                                      
                                                                                                           
 The Government attached the highest priority to further improvement of our friendly                       
 relations with our neighbours in South Asia and to expansion of our mutually beneficial                   
 cooperation with them. Several high level exchanges were undertaken to acheive these                      
 objectives.                                                                                               
                                                                                                           
 The visit of the Prime Minister of Nepal to India in December 1991 ushered in a                           
 qualitatively new era of relations between the two countries. This has opened very                        
 important areas of cooperation which will fortify the unique closeness of our ties                        
 which have been strengthened by the emergence of multi-party democracy in Nepal.                          
                                                                                                           
 India's traditionally close and cordial relations with Bhutan were further strengthened                   
 by the visit of His Majesty the King of Bhutan to India in September 1991. Through                        
 intensive economic and technical cooperation, India has sought to make its contribution                   
 to the economic development of Bhutan.                                                                    
                                                                                                           
 The visit of Bangladesh Foreign Minister to India in August 1991 resulted in a mutual                     
 understanding on the need for adopting a fresh approach for immediate removal of some                     
 irritants through dialogue and enhanced cooperation. It was significant that the first                    
 ever visit of an Indian Chief of Army Staff to Bangladesh took place in July 1991. The                    
 tempo of bilateral talks on the problems of sharing of the river waters was maintained.                   
 Further momentum was lent to the bilateral relations when the Indian Prime Minister met                   
 Prime Minister Begum Khaleda Zia at Harare during the Commonwealth Heads of Government                    
 Meeting in October 1991. India is keen that its traditionally friendly relations with                     
 Bangladesh are further expanded.                                                                          
 (ii)                                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 The advent of democracy in Bangladesh has become an additional bond between the two                       
 countries.                                                                                                
                                                                                                           
 India continues to sustain her keen interest in a peaceful resolution of the ethnic                       
 issue in Sri Lanka. India has reiterated to Sri Lanka her faith in the need for a                         
 negotiated political settlement within the framework of the unity and territorial                         
 integrity of Sri Lanka for arriving at a lasting and permanent solution to the ethnic                     
 problem. The Indo-Sri Lanka Agreement of 1987 and the 13th amendment to the Sri Lankan                    
 Constitution provide the framework for a solution to Sri Lanka's ethnic crisis. India                     
 is simultaneously committed to the strengthening and consolidation of bilateral                           
 relations with Sri Lanka in keeping with the traditional and historic ties between the                    
 two countries. It was against this background that both India and Sri Lanka signed, in                    
 July 1991, an agreement for establishment of an Indo-Sri Lanka Joint Commission. The                      
 voluntary return of Sri Lankan refugees to their homeland, based on assurances received                   
 from Sri Lanka Government commenced on Jan 20, 1992 and is continuing.                                    
                                                                                                           
 India has consistently maintained closest understanding with Maldives at the highest                      
 level and continues to pursue ongoing multi-dimensional cooperation programmes with                       
 that country encompassing a wide-range of fields of infrastructural development.                          
                                                                                                           
 Pakistan's undiminished support to terrorism in Punjab and Jammu & Kashmir and its                        
 mischievous attempts to internationalise the Kashmir issue with hostile and misleading                    
 propaganda in violation of the Simla Agreement have further exacerbated the already                       
 strained relations between India and Pakistan. Pakistan Foreign Secretary's assurances                    
 to India in August 1991 to engage in constructive dialogue and approach issues with a                     
 new mindset have failed to get reflected on the ground. Despite the continuous tension                    
 in relations, India, aware of the imperative necessity of establishing good neighbourly                   
 relationship, has continued with her efforts to carry the confidence building process                     
 and the bilateral dialogue forward. A positive development in this direction was the                      
 signing of the two agreement in April 1991 relatng to (i) advance notification of                         
 military exercises and manoeuvres and (ii) prevention of air space violations by                          
 military aircraft. In addition, on 1 January 1992, lists of nuclear installations and                     
 facilities in India and Pakistan were exchanged in pursuance of the bilateral Agreement                   
 on Prohibition of Attack against Nuclear Installations and Facilities which had been                      
 signed in December 1988. Although the Prime Ministers of India and Pakistan reiterated                    
 after their meetings in October and December 1991, and February 1992 the need to reduce                   
 tensions and resolve issues bilaterally and peacefully, Pakistan's actions have not yet                   
 matched its stated desire to bring about any improvement in bilateral relations. India                    
 hopes that Pakistan would abandon its negative policies and join her in serious                           
 endeavours to establish tension-free and good neighbourly relations between the two                       
 countires.                                                                                                
 (iii)                                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 India views with regret that political power yet remains untransferred, to the people's                   
 representatives after the general elections in Myanmar in May 1990. India is equally                      
 distressed at the continued house detention of Ms Aung San Suu Kyi. Despite its policy                    
 of non-interference in the affairs of other countries, India cannot ignore the                            
 democratic aspirations of the people of Myanmar and has, therefore, expressed her                         
 strong apprehensions about the lack of progress towards democracy and infringement of                     
 human rights in Myanmar. India hopes that the ruling Government would release Ms Aung                     
 San Suu Kyi and pave the way for the introduction of the democratic processes of                          
 governance.                                                                                               
                                                                                                           
 India continued to extend full support to the political settlement of the Afghan crisis                   
 based on her conviction that any such settlement should recognize the legitimate                          
 interests of all concerned and be arrived at by the Afghans themselves without any                        
 external interference. India, therefore, welcomed the UN Secretary General's Five-Point                   
 Peace Proposals announced in May 1991. While continuing her endeavours to further                         
 cement the traditionally warm relations with Afghanistan, India pursued her efforts to                    
 promote bilateral cooperation in various fields.                                                          
                                                                                                           
 The Sixth Summit of SAARC countries was held at Colombo in December 1991. India                           
 continued to play an active role to expand further mutually beneficial cooperation                        
 among SAARC countries.                                                                                    
                                                                                                           
 Positive steps were taken in several areas of regional cooperation. The most laudable                     
 step forward was the approval by the Sixth SAARC Summit of the recommendation of the                      
 Committee on Economic Cooperation to set up an Inter-Governmental Group to formulate                      
 and seek agreement on an institutional framework under which specific measures for                        
 trade liberalization could be initiated. Another decision of far-reaching importance                      
 was to institute a Fund by pooling regional resources and to constitute a SAARC                           
 Regional Council of Development Financial Institutions to manage the Fund. Under the 13                   
 agreed areas of technical cooperation, 62 SAARC activities were held during 1991; of                      
 these nearly a quarter were held in India. The Sixth SAARC Summit also decided to set                     
 up a South Asian Commission on Poverty Alleviation, which would present a report to the                   
 Seventh SAARC Summit. The year 1992 is to be observed as the "SAARC Year of                               
 Environment". India views SAARC as an important instrument for realising collective                       
 self-reliance and accelerating socio-economic development, and is convinced that the                      
 SAARC cooperation should envelop further the core economic areas so as to percolate                       
 benefits to the common man in an effective and palpable form.                                             
 (iv)                                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 India attached particular significance to strengthening her traditionally close and                       
 warm relations with countries in South-East Asia and the South Pacific. The bilateral                     
 talks with Mr Hun Sen, Prime Minister of Cambodia, during his visit to India in October                   
 1991 and his appreciation of India's role in the Cambodian settlement and his call for                    
 a major Indian presence in the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) reflected                    
 the high regard and esteem enjoyed by India. India has contributed civilian and                           
 military personnel for the UN Advance Mission in Cambodia. India has expressed her                        
 readiness to actively participate in the UNTAC operation to the extent requested by the                   
 United Nations. India participated in the Second Session of the Paris International                       
 Conference on Cambodia held in October 1991. India was one of the countries especially                    
 mentioned at the Paris Conference for facilitating the peace process.                                     
                                                                                                           
 The visit of the President of India to Vietnam in April 1991 lent special emphasis to                     
 enhancing bilateral cooperation with Vietnam. The State visit of t he President of                        
 India to the Philippines in April-May 1991 was the first ever visi t by an Indian Head                    
 of State to that country. It generated considerable goodwill and understanding between                    
 the two countries.                                                                                        
                                                                                                           
 Visit of the Minister for External Affairs to Singapore in August 1991 laidspecial                        
 stress on increasing investment from the region in India in context of the new                            
 liberalised economic environment. The return visit of the Foreign Minister of Singapore                   
 to India in December 1991 gave further momentum to expanding our bilateral cooperation.                   
                                                                                                           
 The sectoral dialogue partner relationship between India and ASEAN is not only a                          
 development of importance but is likely to strengthen India's relationsh ip with ASEAN                    
 countries.                                                                                                
                                                                                                           
 Despite the earlier temporary set-back in bilateral relations with Australia, on                          
 account of the sale of Mirage aircraft by Australia to Pakistan, subsequent                               
 interactions at higher level have improved our relations. Fiji has become a source of                     
 constant concern to India in view of the fact that the illegal Government of Fiji                         
 installed after the coup in 1987 has institutionalised racial discriminatiion. India                      
 has readily extended moral sup port to the democratic forces in Fiji by taking up this                    
 matter at the UN General Assembly from 1987 onwards and by opposing the re-entry of                       
 Fiji into the Commonwealth.                                                                               
                                                                                                           
 The momentum of bilateral exchanges with China initiated with the visit of                                
                                                                                                           
 late Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, in December 1988 was further increased. The                       
 visit of the Chinese Premier Mr Li Peng to India in December 1991 was an important                        
 milestone and it resulted in several positive achievement: the re-establishement of                       
 Consulates General in Shanghai and Bombay, a Consular Convention, a memorandum on the                     
 resumption of border trade, the Trade Protocol for 1992 and a memorandum of cooperation                   
 in the field of space were agreed to. The Joint Working Group on the Boundary Question                    
 held its third session in Beijing in May 1991 and fourth session at New Delhi on 20 and                   
 21 February 1992. The two sides continued their discussions aimed at arriving at a                        
 mutually acceptable settlement of the boundary question and to ensure peace and                           
 tranquillity in the areas along the Line of Actual Control. They agreed th at the                         
 military personnel of the two sides would have regular meetings in June and October                       
 every year and additional meetings whenever need arises at Bumla Pass in the Eastern                      
 Sector and in the Spanggur Gap area in the Western Sector. They also agreed to                            
 establish telephone communication links to facilitate easy conta cts between the border                   
 personnel on each side. India conveyed to China her concern about its arms supplies to                    
 Pakistan.                                                                                                 
 (v)                                                                                                       
                                                                                                           
 A new era was introduced in the history of the Soviet Union with the dissolution of the                   
 USSR founded in 1922. The emergence of the Commonwealth of Independent States heralded                    
 an end of the political and economic structures established in the erstwhile USSR on                      
 socialist ideology. President Gorbachev's relinquishment of office marked the end of a                    
 decisive phase in domestic and international politics initiated by him in April 1985.                     
 India's response to the developments was dictated by her national interests including                     
 geopolitical, strategic and economic imperatives. On 26 December 1991, India announced                    
 her decision to accord formal recognition to the Russian Federation and to all the                        
 other Republics of the former Soviet Union. Russia has assumed the role of a successor                    
 State and has taken over the seat of the erstwhile Soviet Union in the UN Security                        
 Council. India has sought to maintain her traditionally close relations not only with                     
 Russia but with the other Republics as well. The visit of the Minister for External                       
 Affairs in November 1991 and his meetings with President Yeltsin were a step towards                      
 laying the foundation for further enhancement of relations between India and the                          
 Russian Federation. A multi- sectoral team of senior officials led by the Foreign                         
 Secretary visited Russia a nd Ukraine in January 1992 to establish a new framework of                     
 political relations wit h these independent Republics and to review arrangements for                      
 maintaining our long-standing trade and economic links with them. Several delegations                     
 from India have visited the Central Asian Republics. The Presidents of Uzbekistan                         
                                                                                                           
 and Kazakhstan visited India in August 1991 and February 1992 respectively and more                       
 visits by leaders from the Central Asian Republics are expected in the near future.                       
 These visits are aimed at concluding appropriate agreements to promote our political,                     
 economic and cultural tics with these countries with whom we share historic bonds of                      
 friendship. India has also decided to open Embassies in Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Belarus                   
 and upgrade its Consulate General at Tashkent in Uzbekistan to Embassy level.                             
 (vi)                                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 There has been a significant and perceptible improvement in Indo-US relations. Our                        
 shared values of democracy, individual liberty and respect for human rights provide a                     
 strong basis for close cooperation between the two largest democracies of the world.                      
 Political and official contacts in both bila teral and multilateral fora on a                             
 wide-range of issues including peace, security and threats emanating from terrorism and                   
 drug trafficking have contributed towards a greater appreciation of each other's views                    
 and interests.                                                                                            
                                                                                                           
 The United States is our largest trading partner and a major source of technology. It                     
 has been supportive of our efforts to overcome our temporary economic difficulties and                    
 programme of economic reform. A new feature in Indo-US relations was the cooperation                      
 initiated on the defence side. The visit of our Chief of Army Staff to the USA in                         
 August 1991 and the visit of the Commanding-General and the US Commander-in-Chief of                      
 Pacific Command to India are noteworthy. The Prime Minister had a very useful meeting                     
 with President George Bush in New York during the UN Security Council Meeting in                          
 January 1992. There was a strong mutual desire expressed in further expanding our                         
 bilateral and multi-dimensional ties. India's liberalised economic policie s have                         
 opened new possibilities of a long-term mutually beneficial economic partnership with                     
 the United States.                                                                                        
                                                                                                           
 India viewed with concern the political and constitutional crisis in Yugoslavia and                       
 expressed herself in favour of a restructured federal framework. India adopted a                          
 principled and constructive approach in the United Nations Security Council on                            
 Yugoslavia; the Indian stand emanated from her basic belief                                               
                                                                                                           
 that the crisis in Yogoslavia was essentially an internal matter.                                         
                                                                                                           
 India views the Maastricht Summit of December 1991 as a watershed in the history of                       
 Europe in the post-World War II era. The European Community embarked on a new chapter                     
 in its move towards the creation of a political, economic and monetary union. India                       
 maintained an intensified political dialogu e with the European countries through                         
 frequent high-level exchanges. India viewed with satisfaction the positive response in                    
 Western Eruope to the new economic policies and liberalisation measures announced by                      
 India. Prime Minister Shri Narasimha Rao's visits to Germany and France in September                      
 and November 1991 respectively were undertaken with a view to exploring the promising                     
 prospects for strengthening of multifaceted cooperation. The visit o f the President of                   
 Portugal to India in January 1992 was another landmark in relations with Portugal.                        
                                                                                                           
 Increased momentum was established in India's bilateral relations with Japan. The visit                   
 of the Minister for External Affairs, Shri Madhavsinh Solanki to Japan in January 1992                    
 has helped deepen the political and economic dialogue with Japan and helped promote                       
 better mutual understanding between India and Japan, countries that share democratic                      
 values and whose cultural interaction has spanned the centuries. Japan has emerged as                     
 India's largest bilateral donor and has reacted favourably to India's new policy                          
 initiatives in economic liberalisation. It has indicated its desire to take steps to                      
 enable the inflow of Japanese investment to India.                                                        
 (vii)                                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 In recognition of the positive and balanced nature of the relationship that                               
                                                                                                           
 India always enjoyed with the two Koreas, India supported the entry of both the                           
 Republic of Korea and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to the United Nations.                    
 Both the DPRK and the ROK have expressed their appreciation of India's position on this                   
 subject. Bilateral cooperation with t he Republic of Korea in the economic sphere                         
 continued to surge.                                                                                       
                                                                                                           
 India attached special importance to its relations with countries of West Asia and                        
 North Africa. India maintained her consistent and unequivocal support to the Arab cause                   
 particularly to the Palestinian struggle for their just and inalienable rights. This                      
 was reiterated during the visit of the PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat to India in January                     
 1992. India has welcomed the reactivation of                                                              
                                                                                                           
 the West Asian peace process and the ongoing dialogue between Arab States and Israel to                   
 find a just and equitable settlement to the Arab-Israeli dispute. India supported the                     
 revocation of the 1975 UN resolution equating Zionism with Racism, based on her                           
 perception that it would remove an obstacle in the path to peace in West Asia and                         
 facilitate a larger UN role in the peace process. Upon establishment of diplomatic                        
 relations with Israel, India looks forward to establishing a comprehensive and                            
 multi-faceted relationship with that country.                                                             
                                                                                                           
 India's close tics with the Gulf region have now acquired a strong economic                               
                                                                                                           
 and social dimension. The liberation of Kuwait was an act of affirmation of                               
 international legality. The Minister for External Affairs visited Kuwait on 15 and 16                     
 February 1992 and an agreement for establishing a Ministerial-level Joint Commision was                   
 signed during the visit. India also made all possible efforts to facilitate the return                    
 of Indian nationals earlier employed in Kuwait. The rapid developments in sub-Saharan                     
 Africa crystallised in further accentuation of the trends towards political pluralism,                    
 economic liberalisation and the resolution of internal conflicts. India viewed with                       
 satisfaction the growing acceptance of multiparty democracy in Africa although its                        
 progress in different countries was uneven. India intensified her efforts to expand                       
 bilate ral cooperation with African countries. The reform process in South Africa                         
 gathered further momentum with the prospects of a constitutional settlement getting                       
 brighter. The political reforms in South Africa acted as a catalyst to                                    
                                                                                                           
 India's decision to lift all "people-to-people sanctions". India welcomed the signing                     
 of the Lisbon Peace Accords which finally brought peace to Angola after 16 years of                       
 cruel civil strife.                                                                                       
 (viii)                                                                                                    
                                                                                                           
 In an effort to strengthen our rlations with Latin America and the Caribbean, we                          
 applied for permanent Observer status at the Organisation of American States.                             
 Immediately after this was accepted, we attended the OAS General Assembly meeting in                      
 Chile in June 1991. Our association with the OAS is expected to provide an additional                     
 forum for interaction with the countries i n the region, 15 of which are members of NAM                   
 and six share membership with us in the G-15.                                                             
                                                                                                           
 India continued to play a constructive role in the deliberations of the UN Security                       
 Council on a number of major political issues. On the political issue of continuing                       
 sanctions against Iraq, India urged that the humanitarian aspect of the situation                         
 should also be taken into consideration while all efforts are mad e for creating                          
 conditions for lasting peace.                                                                             
                                                                                                           
 The Summit Meeting of the Security Council on 31 January 1992 served to highlight the                     
 new and effective role that the UN has assumed in the wake of momentous changes in the                    
 international situation. India asked for an expansion                                                     
                                                                                                           
 in the membership of the Security Council to make the UN not only more representative                     
 but also to ensure its moral sanction and political effectivenes s.                                       
                                                                                                           
 The Prime Minister set forth at the Council meeting India's position on certain vital                     
 issues such as need for a new international consensus on a global non-proliferation                       
 regime, harmonisation of the defence of national integrity wi th respect for human                        
 rights and a just and fair world economic order.                                                          
                                                                                                           
 At the 46th United Nations General Assembly, India effectively participated in all                        
 deliberations, emphasising urgent need to address development issues. In the meetings                     
 of the General Assembly and its main Committees and the Group of 77, India pointed out                    
 that the developing countries had become increasingly vulnerable with inadequate                          
 financial and resource flows, high debt burdens, worsening terms of trade, problems in                    
 access to technologies, and continued protectionism. It had, therefore, become                            
 imperative for the developing countries to display solidarity and articulate th eir                       
 common interests through constructive and meaningful proposals for negotiations with                      
 the industrialised North. India also voiced her concern at t he growing tendency to                       
 shift the focus away from development issues and to attach non-economic                                   
 conditionalities to development assistance.                                                               
                                                                                                           
 At the second G-15 Summit at Caracas in November 1991, the Prime Minister was the lead                    
 speaker on the subject of a new international consensus on                                                
                                                                                                           
 development. He emphasised the need to restore the centrality and criticality of                          
 development issues on the multilateral agenda.                                                            
 (ix)                                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 The Non-Aligned Movement crossed another landmark in 1991 when it completed 30 years of                   
 sustained activities since its inception. At the 10th Ministerial Conference of                           
 Non-aligned countries held in Accra in September 1991, a reassessment of the role,                        
 objectives and activities of NAM brought outa reaffirmation of the role and continuing                    
 relevance of the Movement in the changed international situation as a political forum                     
 of the developing world. A major achievement was the Movement's endorsement of the                        
 Indian proposal on the democratisation of the UN and expansion of the Security Council.                   
 Further emphasis was given to the need for greater North-South cooperation, issues                        
 relating to disarmament, environment and development and giving greater priority to                       
 economic issues.                                                                                          
                                                                                                           
 India believes that global environmental issues cannot be isolated from the general                       
 issue of development. India made a constructive contribution to the preparatory                           
 meetings of the 1992 UN Conference on Environment and Development to ensure that the                      
 twin issues of environment and development are                                                            
                                                                                                           
 addressed in a balanced way and in their totality in the 1992 Conference.                                 
                                                                                                           
 India continued to play a significant role in the three main multilateral disarmament                     
 fora. India's approach to this issue has been guided by the basic philosophy that given                   
 the global reach of nuclear weapons, we need to follow a global approach in regard to                     
 nuclear disarmament issues. Partial or piecemeal measures such as Limited Nuclear                         
 Weapons Free Zone, therefore, are of little utility and could even detract us from our                    
 ultimate goal.                                                                                            
                                                                                                           
 In his statement at the UN Security Council, the Prime Minister emphasised the need for                   
 a new global nonproliferation regime which must be universal, comprehensive and                           
 non-discriminatory and linked to the goal of complete nuclear disarmament. He also                        
 proposed that the target date for the Action Plan put forward by the late Prime                           
 Minister Shri Rajiv Gandhi for complete elimination of nuclear weapons by the year 2010                   
 could now be advanced to the end of the present century.                                                  
                                                                                                           
 The Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting was held in Harare in October 1991. The                      
 Prime Minister, Shri Narasimha Rao put across the perspective of the developing world                     
 on the issues and challenges facing the world today. India made a significant                             
 contribution by securing a balanced declaration which reflected the concerns of India                     
 and other developing countrie s on issues such as imposition of non-economic                              
 conditionalities to development assistance.                                                               
 (x)                                                                                                       
                                                                                                           
 During the year under review, our endeavour has been to provide an increased economic                     
 content to our diplomatic efforts, while at the same time vigorously pursuing our basic                   
 foreign policy goals in the political field. The comprehensive changes in India's                         
 economic, industrial and trade policies made imperative re-orientation of priorities in                   
 our activities in the area of foreig n policy as well. The Ministry of External Affairs                   
 through our Missions abroad launched a programme to inform the potential investors, the                   
 NRIs and other target audiences in the OECD, ASEAN, Gulf and other countries of these                     
 policy changes and new climate and opportunities for investment and trade with India.                     
 Missions in target countries were geared to work towards increasing investment flows                      
 and export growth; visits of private trade and industry delegations to these countries                    
 for direct talks with their counterparts were actively organized and promoted.                            
 (xi)                                                                                                      
 1991                                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 India's Neighbours                                                                                        
                                                                                     Top                   
                                                                                                           
 INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS INDIA, in pursuance of her policy of according consistent importance                   
  to relations with the neighbouring countries of South Asia, continued her efforts to                     
    forge friendship, cooperation and mutual understanding. High-level contacts were                       
                 consistently maintained to accomplish these objectives.                                   
                                                                                                           
    The year under review witnessed substantial progress in consolidating Indo-Nepal                       
    relations and establishing a durable framework for expanding all- round bilateral                      
  cooperation. After the general elections under the new politic al system in May 1991,                    
  the Government of Prime Minister G P Koirala assumed office in Nepal. A new stage was                    
 thus set for both countries to focus on maximising mutually beneficial cooperation in a                   
   variety of fields. The goal wa s to usher in a new era in Indo-Nepal cooperation to                     
  which both Governments had committed themselves in the Indo-Nepal Joint Communique of                    
                                      Jun 10, 1990.                                                        
                                                                                                           
 The visit of Prime Minister Koirala to India from 5 to 10 December 1991 was preceded by                   
 four months of active and extensive consultations between the two sides. For the first                    
    time, an Indo-Nepal High-Level Task Force had been set up--chaired by the Cabinet                      
 Secretary or equivalent on both sides and including the Foreign Secretary, the Finance                    
   Secretary and the Commerce Secretary-- which prepared a comprehensive programme for                     
  bilateral cooperation. This was a unique effort, for this was the first time such an                     
  approach had been adopted between Nepal and India. The emphasis on expanding economic                    
 and industrial cooperation was highlighted by the fact that Prime Minister Koirala was                    
     accompanied by a delegation of Nepalese industrialists and businessmen besides                        
   Ministers and senior officials. The Indo-Nepal Joint Commission met just before his                     
  visit to finalize a comprehensive set of recommendations to the two Prime Ministers.                     
                                                                                                           
  The subsequent discussions at the Prime Ministerial level resulted in a wide ranging                     
  set of decisions of crucial significance for intensifying Indo-Nepal cooperation for                     
  mutual benefit. As many as five important treaties and agreements were signed. These                     
   included a new trade treaty, a new transit treaty, an agreement for cooperation in                      
    controlling unauthorised trade, a Memorandum of Understanding for cooperation in                       
    agriculture meant to promote rural development and rural employment in Nepal and                       
   another Memorandum of Understanding for the establishment of the B P Koirala India                      
                                    Nepal Foundation,                                                      
                                                                                                           
 in the memory of the great Nepalese statesman and patriot who had also been closely                       
 involved with the Indian independence movement. A number of decisions were also taken                     
 regarding various aspects of cooperation in water resources development. This is the                      
 area with the maximum potential for revolutionising the Nepalese economy while also                       
 benefitting India greatly, The trade and transit treaties provide substantial new                         
 tariff concessions and procedural simplifications which, if fully exploited by Nepalese                   
 trade and industry, should substantially boost Nepalese exports to the large Indian                       
 marke t next door. An especially favourable access regime has been provided for the                       
 products of approved Indo-Nepal joint ventures. Thus, a solid framework has been set up                   
 for Nepal and India to work together for the benefit of both peoples, and the overall                     
 prospects of such Indo-Nepal cooperation are bright.                                                      
                                                                                                           
 The traditionally close and friendly relations between India and Bhutan were further                      
 strengthened. In May 1991, His Majesty Jigme Singye Wangchuck- led a delegation to                        
 India to attend the funeral of the former Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi. He again                     
 visited India in September 1991 and held extensive                                                        
                                                                                                           
 discussions with the President, Prime Minister and others. The discussions on bilateral                   
 and multilateral issues of mutual interest were marked by a close identity of views and                   
 great warmth and cordiality.                                                                              
                                                                                                           
 The growing economic and technical cooperation between the two countries was maintained                   
 and intensified further. The highlights were the inauguration i n March 1991 of the 50                    
 KW Bhutan Broadcasting Station built entirely with Indian assistance and the handing                      
 over to Bhutan in June 1991 of the 336 MW Chukha Hydel Project which provide half of                      
 Bhutan's national revenue. The confluence bridge, another Indian aided project, was                       
 inaugurated in June. India continued                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 to cooperate with Bhutan in various other fields such as telecommunications, health                       
 services, industrial estates, hydel projects, livestock breeding, solar energy, etc.                      
                                                                                                           
 In view of Bhutan's forthcoming 7th Five Year Plan (1992-97), extensive discussions                       
 were held with the Royal Government of Bhutan to finalize Indian aid to Bhutan for this                   
 Plan. This was in pursuance of India's traditionally intensive involvement with the                       
 economic development process in Bhutan, especially through substantial infrastructural                    
 development. In this context, the                                                                         
                                                                                                           
 Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission, Shri Pranab Mukherjee, visited Bhutan in                      
 December 1991, and the Special Secretary (Planning Commission) had led a delegation to                    
 Bhutan earlier in October 1991 for detailed technical discussions. The Indian aid                         
 package, to be finalized soon, will help Bhutan s et up greater revenue earning                           
 projects, especially in hydropower and industry, besides taking up some in the social                     
 sector and meeting continuing commitments.                                                                
                                                                                                           
 During the visit of the King of Bhutan to India in September 1991, a new Air Services                     
 Agreement was signed between the two countries. India continued to offer Bhutanese                        
 students opportunity for secondary as well as higher education and training in various                    
 fields. Nearly 100 Bhutanese students are availing of scholarships tinder the                             
 Government of India schemes and the Colombo Plan. The number of Indian lecturers on                       
 deputation to Slerubtse College under Colombo Plan was increased from 9 to 13. India                      
 continued to supply Bhutan with essential commodities at controlled prices under a                        
 special quota system.                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 The advent of democracy in Bangladesh gave a new impetus to Indo-Bangaladesh relations.                   
 Bangladesh's Foreign Minister paid an official vis it to India in August 1991 at the                      
 invitation of the Minister for External Affairs. Wide-ranging discussions were held on                    
 bilateral issues and both sides agreed to further strengthen their relations by                           
 removing immediately some of the outstanding irritants through dialogue and by adopting                   
 a fresh approach for enhancing economic cooperation. A Credit Agreement and an                            
 Avoidance of Double Taxation Agreement were also signed.                                                  
                                                                                                           
 The Indian Chief of Army Staff visited Bangladesh at the invitation of the Bangladesh's                   
 COAS in July 1991-the first ever visit by an Indian COAS. Secretary-level talks on the                    
 sharing of river waters were also held in Dhaka in April 1991, New Delhi in October                       
 1991 and Dhaka in February 1992. The meeting of the Prime Minister with Prime Minister                    
 of Bangaldesh, Begum Khaleda Zia, at Harare during the Commonwealth Heads of Government                   
 Meeting in October 1991 lent further momentum to India's relations with Bangladesh.                       
                                                                                                           
 During the earlier part of the year, Bangladesh remained preoccupied with bringing                        
 about constitutional and political changes in order to revert to the Parliamentary                        
 system of Government. Policies to restructure the economy with a view to introducing                      
 requisite liberalisation were continued. On 16 December 1991, the nation celebrated two                   
 decades of independence. Bangladesh media took a special notice of the significance of                    
 this occasion and highlighted India's role in the liberation war and assistance given                     
 to the country at the dawn of freedom.                                                                    
                                                                                                           
 More than a year and half after the general elections in Myanmar in May 1990, power                       
 remains yet to be transferred to the elected representatives of the people. The 1991                      
 Nobel Peace Prize winner Ms Aung San Suu Kyi continues to suffer under house arrest.                      
 The National League for Democracy (NLD) leadership has been pressurised into expelling                    
 her from the party's membership. Other leaders and supporters of democracy are either                     
 in prison or in exile, or continue facing political repression.                                           
                                                                                                           
 India would like to maintain a working relationship with the Government of this                           
 important neighbouring country with whom she shares historical and cultura l ties of                      
 long-standing. However, despite India's policy of non-interference in the internal                        
 affairs of other countries, she cannot ignore the democratic aspiratio ns of the people                   
 of Myanmar who continue to suffer. Over the past few months, India-both on her own                        
 through public statements and in concert with other like-minded countries through a                       
 resolution adopted in the third committee of th e UN-expressed concern about the                          
 absence of democracy and widespread infringement of human rights in Myanmar. India also                   
 called upon that Government to release Ms Aung San Suu Kyi unconditionally and to pave                    
 way for setting up a multi-party democratic system of governance. India's concerns were                   
 reiterated through the speech delivered by the President on the occasion o f the                          
 acceptance of credentials presented by the new Myanmar Ambassador on 3 Fabruary 1992,                     
 in which he also praised the non-violent, Gandhian leadership of Ms Suu Kyi. India                        
 sincerely hopes that State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC) would take                           
 necessary steps, enabling the country to take up its rightful place among the community                   
 of nations.                                                                                               
                                                                                                           
 India's sincere interest and concern in a peaceful resolution of the ethnic issue in                      
 Sri Lanka which meets the broad aspirations of the Tamils continue. A t the same time,                    
 India is equally committed to develop bilateral relations with Sri Lanka in their                         
 widest sense, particularly in commercial, economic, industri al, scientific, technical                    
 and cultural fields. It was against this background that both India and Sri Lanka                         
 signed an agreement in July 1991 during the visit of Sri Lanka Foreign Minister, Mr                       
 Harold Herat to establish Indo-Sri Lanka Joint Commission. Its Sub-Commissions on                         
 Trade, Investment and Finance, and on cultural, educational and social matters met in                     
 Colombo in October 1991 and discussed measures to strengthen cooperation in various                       
 spheres. A Cultural Exchange Programme was signed between the two countries for the                       
 years 1992 to 1994. The First Session of the Indo-Sri Lanka Joint Commission was held                     
 in Delhi on 6 and 7 January 1992. The Joint Commission gave directions for future                         
 bilateral cooperaiton and further agreed to set up a Sub-Commission on Science and                        
 Technology.                                                                                               
                                                                                                           
 The process of voluntary return of Sri Lankan refugees back to their homeland, based on                   
 the assurances received from the Sri Lanka Government regarding their safety and                          
 appropriate arrangements for their rehabilitation, commenced on 20 January 1992 and is                    
 continuing according to schedule. India has reiterated to Sri Lanka her conviction that                   
 only a negotiated political settlement within the unity and integrity of Sri Lanka                        
 would bring a lasting solution to the ethnic problem. It is her view that the political                   
 fram ework created by the 13th Amendment to the Sri Lanka Constitution following the                      
 1987 Indo-Sri Lanka Agreement remains a constructive point of reference for any future                    
 negotiations which must include all Tamil Groups, especially those who have eschewed                      
 violence and joined the democratic mainstream.                                                            
                                                                                                           
 The existing close and friendly relations between India and Maldives were further                         
 consolidated and reinforced by regular consultations and meetings which resulted in a                     
 close understanding at the highest level. This cooperation has provided the opportunity                   
 to assess the ongoing multi- dimensional cooperation programmes which encompasses                         
 infrastructure development, health and welfare, civil aviation, communication and                         
 manpower resources development.                                                                           
 President Maumoon Abdul Gayoom visited India on 15 and 16 June 1991 to pay condolences                    
 on the sad demise of former Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi. He again visited India                     
 from 18 to 20 August 1991 for consultation on SAARC and bilateral relations. The                          
 Minister for External Affairs visited Male on 3 and 4 July 1991 for the SAARC                             
 Ministerial Council meeting. Kum. Girija Vyas, Deputy Minister for Information and                        
 Broadcasting, visited Maldives from 6 to 9 September 1991 to handover the fully aided                     
 Television Reception Centre installed and commissioned by Doordarshan. Shri A                             
 Arunachalam, Minister of State for Urban Development, visited Maldives from 28 to 31                      
 October 1991 to inspect and review progress on the prestigious 200-bed Indira Gandhi                      
 Memorial Hospital, an Indian-aided project, due for completion in September 1992.                         
                                                                                                           
 The second Indo-Maldives Joint Commission for Economic and Technical Cooperation met at                   
 New Delhi on 2 and 3 March 1992. Minister for External Affairs, Shri Madhavsinh                           
 Solanki, and the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr Fathulla Jameel, led the respective                      
 delegations.                                                                                              
                                                                                                           
 India's relations with Pakistan continued to be under stress and strain on account of                     
 its undiminished support to terrorism in Punjab and Jammu & Kashmir, directed against                     
 India, and its attempts to internationalise the Kashm ir issue in violation of the                        
 Simla Agreement. Pakistan has also continued with its hostile anti-India propaganda,                      
 misrepresenting the situation in Jammu & Kashmir, and seeking to spread distorted and                     
 exaggerated accounts of alleged atrocities by security forces.                                            
                                                                                                           
 Pakistan's Foreign Secretary visited India from 18 to 21 August 1991 as Special Envoy                     
 of the Pakistan Prime Minister and conveyed the desire of his Government to engage in a                   
 serious and constructive dialogue with India and to approach issues with a new mindset.                   
 He asserted that Pakistan's new approach would be reflected on the ground. However, all                   
 evidence point towards the contrary and shows that Pakistan's support to terrorism and                    
 subversion continues unabated.                                                                            
                                                                                                           
 Convinced of the imperative necessity of establishing a tension-free and good                             
 neighbourly relationship with Pakistan, India has persisted with efforts to reduce                        
 tensions with Pakistan and carry the bilateral dialogue forward. In accordance with                       
 this approach, India proposed a Confidence Building Package in May 1990 and in its                        
 pursuance five rounds of Foreign Secretary level talks have been held between the two                     
 countries. Some forward move could also be made. In April 1991, during the fourth round                   
 of discussions, two agreements were signed on (i) Advance Notification of Military                        
 Exercises and Manoeuvres and (ii) Prevention of Air Space violations by Military                          
 Aircraft. The Directors General Military Operations of the two countries have been in                     
 regular weekly telephonic contact since 1 January 1991. Military delegations have paid                    
 reciprocal visits in March and September 1991. Both sides have agreed to consider a                       
 joint declaration and a bilateral agreement banning the production, development,                          
 deployment and use of chemical weapons. The lists of nuclear installations and                            
 facilities, to be covered under the Agreement on Prohibition of Attack against Nuclear                    
 Installations and Facilities, were exchanged on 1 January 1992.                                           
                                                                                                           
 Discussions have also been held on several pending issues such as demarcation of the                      
 boundary in the Sir Creek area, controlling drug trafficking and smuggling and the                        
 Tulbal, Navigation Project. Both sides have agreed in principle to resume discussions                     
 on the Siachen issue at the appropriate time an d to reconvene meetings of the                            
 Sub-Commissions of the India-Pakistan Joint Commission on mutually convenient dates.                      
                                                                                                           
 The Minister for External Affairs met the Pakistan Minister of State for Foreign                          
 Affairs in New York on 30 September 1991 and called for the cessation of Pakistan's                       
 support to subversion and terrorism in Punjab and Jammu & Kashmir.                                        
                                                                                                           
 The Prime Ministers of the two countries met in Harare on 17 October 1991 and in                          
 Colombo oil 21 December 1991 and reiterated the need to reduce tensions and resolve                       
 issues bilaterally and peacefully. The Prime Minister reminded the Pakistan Prime                         
 Minister that despite assurances, Pakistan continued with its support to terrorism, and                   
 that these actions of Pakistan do not match with Pakistan's stated desire to improve                      
 bilateral relations with India. The two Prime Minister had another useful meeting at                      
 Davos (Switzerland) on 2 February 1992. However, immediately thereafter, the Government                   
 and the National Assembly of Pakistan regrettably chose to associate themeselves with                     
 statements and actions that vitiated the atmosphere in bilateral relations. India hopes                   
 that Pakistan would abandon its negative approach and join in the endeavour to                            
 establish friendly and cooperative relations in the interest o f the peoples of the two                   
 countries and of peace and stability in the region. India maintained her endeavours to                    
 strengthen the traditionally close relations with Afghanistan. There were regular                         
 high-level exchanges. The Vice President of Afghanistan visited India in September                        
 1991. Agreements were concluded to promote bilateral cooperation in the economic,                         
 cultural and other fields. India also continued to extend economic assistance to                          
 Afghanista n which, inter alia, included relief assistance for refugee rehabilitation,                    
 deput ation of experts and scholarships for Afghan nationals. The Government of India                     
 agreed to supply 50,000 tonnes of wheat to Afghanistan on a grant basis.                                  
                                                                                                           
 India continued to extend full support to the political settlement of the Afghan                          
 crisis. India believes that a political settlement taking into account the legitimate                     
 interests of all concerned should be arrived at by the Afghans themselves without any                     
 form of external interference. In this context, India welcomed the UNSG's five-point                      
 peace proposals announced in May 1991. During the year under review, South Asian                          
 Association of Regional Cooperation (SAARC) made notable progress in different areas of                   
 regional cooperation. The Sixth SAARC Summit was held at Colombo on 21 December. The                      
 Colombo Declaration, which was issued from the Summit, contained several decisions of                     
 far-reaching significance.                                                                                
                                                                                                           
 Several steps in regional economic cooperation were initiated. In June 1991 , a                           
 Regional Study on Trade, Manufactures and Services, first proposed to be undertaken in                    
 1987, was finalized at an Expert level meeting in New Delhi. Its recommendations were                     
 endorsed "in principle" at the Ninth Session of the Council of Ministers held in July                     
 1991, in Maldives, and it was decided to set up a high-level Committee on Economic                        
 Cooperation (CEC) to examine the recommendations and identify measures for immediate                      
 implementation from out of the Study. The CEC, composed of Secretary-level officials                      
 from member- states, met in Kathmandu on 15 and 16 September 1991. Its most important                     
 recommendation, to set up an Inter-Governmental Group (IGG) to formulate and seek                         
 agreement on an institutional framework under which specific measures for trade                           
 liberalisation could be furthered, was approved by the Sixth SAARC Summit. The First                      
 Meeting of the IGG is to be held shortly in India. At this Meeting, a Sri Lankan                          
 proposal to establish a SAARC Preferential Trade Arrangement (SAPTA) by 1997 will also                    
 be comprehensively examined.                                                                              
                                                                                                           
 Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI) hosted, on 3 and 4 October 1991, a meeting                    
 of national development institutions to decide the modalities o f a Fund to finance the                   
 Identification and Development of Regional Projects, an Indian proposal accepted in the                   
 Male Declaration. It was agreed to institute a Fund of US $ 5 million to begin with, by                   
 pooling regional resources, and to constitute a SAARC Regional Council of Development                     
 Financial Institutions (RCDFI) to manage the Fund. The first meeting of the RCDFI is                      
 due to take place in India in Februray 1992, also under IDBI auspices.                                    
                                                                                                           
 Pursuant to an earlier decision, SAARC member-states had prepared National Studies on                     
 `Causes and Consequences of Natural Disasters and Protection and preservation of                          
 Environment', which were synthesized into a Regional Study in 1991. The Sixth SAARC                       
 Summit agreed to set up a SAARC Committee on Environment to examine the recommendations                   
 of this Study comprehensively and to identify measures for its implementation.                            
                                                                                                           
 Another Study under preparation is on the Greenhouse Effect or Global Warming, with                       
 particular reference to its impact on the region. National Studi es are to be                             
 synthesized into a Regional Study in time for UNCED Meeting at Rio in June 1992. The                      
 Colombo Declaration considered it useful to hold a Ministerial meeting to harmonise                       
 views of SAARC member-states for effective projection at the UNCED Meeting. India will                    
 host a Ministerial-level Meeting for this purpose in April 1992. The year 1992 is to be                   
 observed as the SAARC year of Environment. As in the past, both National and Regional                     
 Programmes in this field are proposed for implementation in India.                                        
                                                                                                           
 In order to promote people-to-people contact, a Visa Exemption Sticker (also called                       
 SAARC Travel Document) will become operational from 1 March 1992. This will enable                        
 visa-free travel within the region to Members of Nation al Parliaments, Supreme Court                     
 Judges, Heads of National Academic Institutions, their spouses and dependent children.                    
                                                                                                           
 A laudable decision of the Sixth SAARC Summit was to set up a South Asian Commission on                   
 Poverty Alleviation consisting of eminent persons from this region who would draw upon                    
 the region's experiences gained in Poverty Alleviation Programmes and present its                         
 Report to the Seventh SAARC Summit.                                                                       
                                                                                                           
 Under the 13 agreed areas of technical cooperation of which the Integrated Programme of                   
 Action is composed, 62 SAARC activities such as workshops, training programmes,                           
 seminars, symposia and conferences were held during 1991, out of which nearly a quarter                   
 were held in India. In Tourism, a newly identified area of technical cooperation, India                   
 will be hosting a Meeting of Experts to devise strategies for marketing SAARC abroad in                   
 order to promote tourist arrivals from developed countries.                                               
                                                                                                           
 As decided by the Fifth SAARC Summit, 1991 was observed as `SAARC Year of Shelter' in                     
 order to focus attention on and redress the grievances of t he homeless in the SAARC                      
 region. A SAARC Workshop on `Appropriate Building Materials and Technologies' was held                    
 in Madras earlier this year, and a documentary film on `Slum Upgradation' was telecast                    
 on the National Network on 8 December, the anniversary of the signing of the SAARC                        
 Charter. The Sixth SAARC Summit has directed the establishment of "Shelternet", a                         
 shelter information network, to pursue some of the activities initiated in the SAARC                      
 Year of Shelter.                                                                                          
                                                                                                           
 India is firmly committed to regional cooperation under SAARC. The Government of India                    
 view SAARC as an instrument of realising collective self- reliance and accelerating                       
 socioeconomic development. India believes that SAARC cooperation should be extended as                    
 expeditiously as possible to the core economic areas of trade, manufactures and                           
 services, so that the benefits of the Association reach the common man in an effective                    
 and palpable form.                                                                                        
 1991                                                                                                      
 South-East Asia And The Pacific                                                                           
                                                                                     Top                   
 SOUTH-EAST ASIA AND THE PACIFICINDIA'S traditionally close and friendly relations with                    
  countries in South-E ast Asia and the South Pacific were maintained and broadened by                     
   numerous high-level contacts with countries in this region. Relations with Cambodia                     
 continued to be close and friendly. Mr Hun Sen, Prime Minister of the State of Cambodia                   
  (SOC), visited India from 3 to Oct 95, 1991. During the visit, he met Prime Minister,                    
  Minister for External Affairs and other Ministers, and held discussions on bilateral                     
      issues as well a s on prospects for a Cambodian settlement. He expressed deep                        
      appreciation of India's role and called for a major Indian presence in the UN                        
    Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC). India assured Cambodia that she would                      
  continue to play a keen role along with other countries to ensure the emergence of a                     
     sovereign, independent, non-aligned and democratic Cambodia. India stressed her                       
  readiness to actively participate in the UNTAC operations and to share her experience                    
  in peace keeping and in the conduct of elections, to the extent she is called upon to                    
                              do so by the United Nations.                                                 
                                                                                                           
 India continued to extend bilateral assistance to Cambodia. A gift of 5,0 00 MT of                        
 rice, which was offered during Prime Minister Hun Sen's October 1990 visit, was handed                    
 over in June 1991. An agreement in respect of the Rs 1.5 crore commercial credit                          
 extended by India in October 1990 was signed in July 1991. The credit is to be                            
 utilised, at the Cambodian request, for aluminium coils. Action is under way to supply                    
 these items and the medicines, requested by Cambodia under the Rs 1.5 crore grant also                    
 extended in October 1990. In response to an appeal, relief supplies worth Rs 5 lakhs                      
 are being despatched fo r flood victims in Cambodia. Arrangements are also being made                     
 to hold artificial limb fitment camps in Cambodia.                                                        
                                                                                                           
 India continued to play an active role in the efforts to achieve a Cambodian                              
 settlement, through frequent official interaction to promote her views on major issues                    
 including the need for an early ceasefire, cessation of arms supplies to all the                          
 factions and demobilization. As part of the efforts, Secretary (East) visi ted Bangkok                    
 in May and Beijing and Pyongyang in July 1991 and held consultations which paved the                      
 way for a meeting between Prime Minister Hun Sen and Prince Sihanouk. On 22 July 1991,                    
 Secretary (East) personally conveyed Prime Minister's felicitations to Prince Sihanouk                    
 on his election as Chairman of the Cambodian Supreme National Council (SNC). In August                    
 1991, India decided to accredit a representative to the SNC, a decision which Prince                      
 Sihanouk greatly welcomed. In August 1991, immediately prior to the meeting of SNC at                     
 Pattaya, India made a suggestion for phased demobilization. This was subsequently                         
 accepted by the SNC and the Five Permanent Members of the UN Security Council (P-5).                      
                                                                                                           
 A delegation led by Minister for External Affairs participated in the seco nd session                     
 of the Paris International Conference on Cambodia (PICC) from 21 to 23 October 1991.                      
 Prime Minister sent congratulatory messages to President Mitterrand and President                         
 Soeharto conveying India's appreciation of the role played by France and Indonesia as                     
 Co-Chairmen of the Conference and offered all possible Assistance in the implementation                   
 of the Agreement and in the reconstruction of Cambodia.                                                   
                                                                                                           
 India's constructive contribution has been widely acknowledged and appreciated by all                     
 parties. India was among the countries specially mentioned at the PICC for facilitating                   
 the peace process in Cambodia. At the request of the UN, India has contributed civilian                   
 and military personnel for the United Nation s Advance Mission in Cambodia (UNAMIC),                      
 and has conveyed her willingness to participate in UNTAC. An Indian election expert was                   
 a member of the UN Election Survey team which visited Cambodia in October 1991 to study                   
 the preparations required for the holding of UN supervised elections, which are likely                    
 to be held in 1993.                                                                                       
                                                                                                           
 The Minister of State for External Affairs visited Cambodia from 12 to 15 December 1991                   
 and had meetings with Prince Sihanouk, Prime Minister Hun Sen and other Members of the                    
 SNC. He reaffirmed India's continued support for peace and reconstruction in Cambodia                     
 as per the Paris Accords. India's representative to the SNC presented his credentials                     
 to Prince Sihanouk in December 1991. In his communications to the President and the                       
 Prime Minister, Prince Sihanouk has paid handsome tributes to the active role played by                   
 India i n the negotiations leading to the signing of the Paris Accord. He has expressed                   
 the hope that India would continue to play a leading role in the reconstruction of                        
 Cambodia.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                           
 India's traditional relations with Vietnam were further strengthened by exchange of                       
 high-level visits with special emphasis laid on enhancing bilat eral economic,                            
 scientific and technical cooperation. The President of India paid a highly successful                     
 visit to Vietnam from 24 to 28 April 1991. He had discussion s with the Vietnamese                        
 leadership on bilateral and regional issues. A delegation led by the Vice President of                    
 the State Council of Vietnam attended the funeral of former Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv                    
 Gandhi, in May 1991.                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 Following the President's visit, India agreed to assist Vietnam in establishing an                        
 industrial estate at an estimated cost of Rs 1 crore. It was decided that talks on                        
 Civil Aviation and Banking would be held with the objective of establishing air links                     
 and opening a branch of the State Bank of India in Vietnam. The Civil Aviation talks                      
 were held in November 1991 and an Air Services Agreement providing for the                                
 establishment of air links between the two countries was initialled.                                      
                                                                                                           
 India's friendly relations and economic cooperation with Laos were maintained. Laotian                    
 trainees continued to visit India for training in diverse fields under Indian Technical                   
 and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) and other programmes. Deputation of Indian experts to                     
 Laos also continued. The President accompanied by an official delegation, paid a State                    
 visit to the Philippines from 28 April to 1 May 1991, which was the first ever visit by                   
 an Indian Head of State to that country. During the visit, bilateral, regional an d                       
 international issues of mutual interest were discussed. An Agreement for Cooperation in                   
 Utilization of Atomic Energy for peaceful purposes and a Memorandum of Understanding on                   
 cooperation in the field of Agricultural Science and Technology were signed during the                    
 visit. The Philippines also extended support to India's principled position on the                        
 institutionalisation of racism in Fiji. An official announcement was later made by the                    
 Philippines sid e including Fiji in their restricted list because of Fiji's policy of                     
 racial discrimination. One of the highlights of the President's visit was his address                     
 in the University of Philippines on the subject "Developing Countries in the Changing                     
 World" and conferment on him of the Degree of Doctorate of Laws (Honoris Causa) by the                    
 University. The President also extended an invitation t o the President of the                            
 Philippines to visit India. The visit has resulted in gre ater degree of goodwill and                     
 understanding between the leaders of the two countries. India is also providing an                        
 assistance of about Rs 42 lakhs to the Philippines f or setting up a Handtool and                         
 Design Centre at Angels City under the ITEC Programme.                                                    
                                                                                                           
 India has extended a token relief assistance of Rs 5 lakhs worth of essenti al                            
 medicines for the quake victims due to the massive volcanic eruptions of Mt. Pinatubo                     
 in June 1991. The President also sent a message of sympathy to the Philippines                            
 President on this natural calamity.                                                                       
                                                                                                           
 Relations with Singapore became more friendly and close through several exchanges of                      
 ministerial level visits. Singapore Minister for Health, Mr Yeo Cheow Tong, attended                      
 the funeral of former Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi. The Minister for External                        
 Affairs visited Singapore on 12 August 1991. He called on Singapore's Prime Minister,                     
 Mr Goh Chok Tong and Foreign Minister, Mr Wong Kan Seng and had discussions with them                     
 on matters of mutual concern, including an invitation to Singapore to consider                            
 investing in India in view of her liberalised economic environment. Subsequently, a                       
 Seminar on "Investing in India: New Business Opportunities", was held in Singapore on                     
 18 October, which was jointly organized by the Singapore Trade Development Board in                       
 association with High Commission of India and the Ministry of External Affairs. The                       
 official delegation at the Seminar was led by the Finance Minister and included the                       
 Minister of State for Commerce and senior representatives from the concerned Government                   
 departments, trade and industry and financial institutions. The Seminar was highly                        
 successful in its objective of dissemination of information about India' s new trade,                     
 economic and investment policies to the investors in Singapore and its neighbouring                       
 countries.                                                                                                
                                                                                                           
 Singapore Foreign Minister, Mr Wong Kan Seng, later visited India on 5 and 6 December                     
 1991. He called on the Prime Minister, Minister for External Affairs, Finance Minister                    
 and the Speaker of the Lok Sabha and had very useful exchange of views with them for                      
 promoting bilateral cooperation in economic and other areas, including Singapore's                        
 investment in India. The visit of Singapore Foreign Minister which took place after                       
 about 20 years has generated further momentum in the friendly and cooperative relations                   
 between India and Singapore.                                                                              
                                                                                                           
 Relations with Malaysia continued to be friendly. Malaysian Minister for Human Resource                   
 attended the funeral of former Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi. The Prime Minister                      
 had bilateral meeting with the Malaysian Prime Minister, Dr Mahathir during the CHOGM                     
 Summit at Harare in October 1991 when both leaders exchanged ideas for further                            
 promotion of cooperation in economic and other fields as an example of South-South                        
 Cooperation.                                                                                              
                                                                                                           
 Indonesian Coordinating Minister for Security, Mr Sudomo, attended the funeral of                         
 former Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi. Other visits from Indonesia included the                        
 visit of a delegation led by Secretary General in Indonesian Ministry of Defence and                      
 Security, Gen. I B M Sudjana, in May 1991 and the transit visit of Director General in                    
 the Indonesian Foreign Office , Mr Wiryono, in October 1991.                                              
                                                                                                           
 The Fifth Meeting of the Indo-Thai Joint Trade Committee was held in New Delhi in                         
 November 1991. Earlier, Mr Kasem Kasemsri, Minister in the Thai Prime Minister's Office                   
 visited India to attend the funeral of former Prime Minister Shri Rajiv Gandhi.                           
                                                                                                           
 Brunei's High Commissioner in Kuala Lumpur, Mr Pengiran Haji Abdul Momin, visited India                   
 to attend the funeral of former Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi. A resident Assistant                   
 High Commissioner of Brunei will commence operations in Delhi from 1992.                                  
                                                                                                           
 India's proposal to have sectoral dialogue with ASEAN in the areas of trade, technical                    
 and manpower development,. technology and tourism was accepted by ASEAN in January                        
 1992. This significant development would open up avenues of improving India's relations                   
 with ASEAN in economic and other. fields.                                                                 
                                                                                                           
 Bilateral relations with Australia progressed towards normalcy after the temporary set                    
 back in 1990-91 on account of the sale of Mirage aircraft by Australia to Pakistan.                       
 Various bilateral meetings postponed last year were revived. The Joint Working Group on                   
 Coal met in Australia in May 1991. The 5th Joint Business Council Meeting took place at                   
 New Delhi on 3 and 4 Septemebr 1991. High-level economic consultations were held in                       
 Delhi on 13 and 14 November 1991, followed by the second round of senior official-level                   
 talks on 18 and 19 November 1991. The Council for Scientific and Industrial Research                      
 signed a Memorandum of Understanding with its Australian counterpart, Department of                       
 Industry, Technology and Commerce in April 1991. An Avoidance of Double Taxation                          
 Agreement was signed on 25 July 1991.                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 Australian Foreign Minister, Senator Gareth Evans, and Mrs Hazel Hawke, wife of the                       
 then Australian Prime Minister, represented Australia at the funeral of Shri Rajiv                        
 Gandhi in May 1991. Senator Evans again visited India in September 1991 for the meeting                   
 of the Commonwealth Committee of Foreign Ministers on South Africa. The Prime Minister                    
 met the then Australian Prime Minister, Mr Bob Hawke, at the Commonwealth Summit in                       
 Harare.                                                                                                   
                                                                                                           
 Cordial relations with New Zealand were maintained. The Prime Minister met New Zealand                    
 Prime Minister, Mr Bolger, at the Commonwealth Summit in Harare. New Zealand Deputy                       
 Prime Minister, Mr Don Mckinnon, visited India in May 1991 to attend the funeral of                       
 former Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi. He also met several Indian leaders.                             
                                                                                                           
 Fiji remained a matter of intense concern to India. The Minister for External Affairs                     
 in his statement at the UN Generaly Assembly (1991) underscored the institutionalised                     
 racial discrimination being perpetuated in Fi ji by the illegal Government installed                      
 after the coups in 1987. India continued to extend moral support to democratic forces                     
 in Fiji. Indian Missions in Canberra and Sydney retained contact with senior coalition                    
 leaders from Fiji. The ban on commercial, economic and technical cooperation with Fiji                    
 was maintained. Scholarships were given to deserving Fijian students.                                     
 1991                                                                                                      
 East Asia                                                                                                 
                                                                                     Top                   
 THE visit of the Chinese Premier Mr Li Peng to India from 11 to Dec 16, 1991 was a                        
 significant milestone in India-China relations. This was the first visit by a Chinese                     
 Premier to India in thirty one years. The visit was in return for the one undertaken by                   
 the former Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, to China in December 1988.                                  
                                                                                                           
 The Chinese Premier's visit was an expression of the continuing positive momentum in                      
 India-China relations. The leaders of India and China reaffirmed the desire of both                       
 countries to further strengthen their friendly, good neighbourly and mutually                             
 beneficial relations.                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 During the year under review, India and China maintained high level exchanges. The then                   
 Commerce Minister visited China for the second session of the Joint Group on Economic                     
 Relations & Trade and Science & Technology in February 1991. In March 1991, Mr Li                         
 Ximing, member of the Politburo of the Communist Party of China, paid a visit to India                    
 at the invitation of the Congress (I) Party. The Acting Culture Minister of China also                    
 visited India in March 1991. Vice Premier Wu Xueqian represented the Chinese Government                   
 at the funeral of the former Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi. Peacetime exchanges in                    
 the defence field also continued with a visit by the National Defence University                          
 delegation to India in November 1991 in return for a visit made by the National Defence                   
 College in 1990. The Director of the Foreign Affairs Bureau of the Chinese Ministry of                    
 National Defence and the Director General of Military Intelligence of India also                          
 exchanged visits in 1991.                                                                                 
                                                                                                           
 The Cultural Exchange Programme for 1991-93 was signed in March 1991 and a two year                       
 Programme for Science and Technology was signed in July 1991 for the promotion of                         
 research exchanges in the fields of lasers, remote sensing, new materials,                                
 bio-engineering and agriculture.                                                                          
                                                                                                           
 The Joint Working Group on the boundary question held its third session in Beijing in                     
 May 1991. Both sides also held the second set of meetings between the border security                     
 personnel in the Eastern and Western sectors in July 1991.                                                
                                                                                                           
 On his visit to India in December 1991, Premier Li Peng was accompanied by a high level                   
 delegation including the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Minister for Foreign                         
 Economic Relations and Trade. He held wide-ranging talks with the Prime Minister and                      
 called on the President and the Vice President. He also met the Ministers for External                    
 Affairs, Defence and Finance and leaders of major political parties. Separate talks                       
 were held between the Foreign Minister s and the Commerce Ministers of the two                            
 countries.                                                                                                
                                                                                                           
 The visit had a positive and notable outcome. An Agreement on the Re- establishment of                    
 Consulates General in Shanghai and Bombay, a Consular Convention, a Memorandum on the                     
 Resumption of Border Trade, the Trade Protocol for 1992, and a Memorandum of                              
 Cooperation on the Peaceful Applications of Outer Space Sciences and Technology were                      
 signed during the visit. An India-China Joint Communique was also issued at the                           
 conclusion of Mr Li Peng's visit to India.                                                                
                                                                                                           
 On the crucial boundary question, both India and China reaffirmed the need for an early                   
 and mutually acceptable settlement and to keep the border areas free from tension                         
 pending a final settlement of the issue. China agreed that meetings between the border                    
 security personnel should be held on a regular basis to ensure peace and tranquillity                     
 in the border areas. It was further agr eed that the Joint Working Group will hold its                    
 next session in New Delhi in the fir st half of 1992.                                                     
                                                                                                           
 On the issue of Tibet, the Chinese Premier said that China is willing to have a                           
 dialogue with the Dalai Lama on all issues with the exception of Tibet's independence.                    
 India reiterated her long standing and consistent position that Tibet is an autonomous                    
 region of China and that she will not allow Tibetans to engage in anti-China political                    
 activities in India. This position of the Government does not conflict with the                           
 religious and cultural affinities that In dia has had with Tibet through the centuries.                   
                                                                                                           
 The third session of the Joint Group on Economic Relations & Trade and Science &                          
 Technology was held in New Delhi in December 1991. The two sides signed the Trade                         
 Protocol for 1992. New areas of cooperation in the fields of agriculture, energy,                         
 education and public health have been identified. The Chinese have agreed on the need                     
 for a dynamic increase and diversification of trade relations, and have expressed their                   
 willingness to redress the present adverse balance of trade which affects India. The                      
 Chinese have shown interest in the steel and power sectors in India and it has been                       
 agreed to jointly bid f or project exports in third countries. A Festival of India is                     
 to be held in China and a Festival of China is to be held in India.                                       
                                                                                                           
 India and China signed a Memorandum on the Resumption of Border Trade. Initially the                      
 trade will be carried out at one point across the Uttar Pradesh-Tibet border. There are                   
 provisions for the expansion of border trade to other areas along the frontier. India's                   
 desire to expand the scope of borde r trade to cover other areas along the border was                     
 emphasised to the Chinese side.                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 During the visit of the Chinese Premier, India's standpoint on relations with Pakistan,                   
 her concerns about Pakistan's continued support to militant and terrorist activity in                     
 Punjab and Jammu & Kashmir were frankly conveyed to the Chinese side. The Chinese                         
 Premier said that China is opposed to terrorism since it does not solve problems and                      
 only sharpens contradictions. It was also stated that China would convey India's                          
 concerns to Pakistan when the opportunity arises.                                                         
                                                                                                           
 India's concerns about arms supplies to Pakistan and Myanmar were also conveyed to the                    
 Chinese side. The Chinese side has said that they want to see peace and stability in                      
 South Asia and do not wish to see an escalation of the arms race in the region. It was                    
 also mentioned that China would abide by the Missile Technology Control Regime                            
 guidelines in missile exports to Pakistan. During discussions on the international                        
 situation, both India and China expressed the hope that the changes in the                                
 international situation will lead to the establishment of a New World Order based on                      
 the Five Principles of Peaceful Co-existence and the principles of the UN Charter, and                    
 an equitable and mutually beneficial economic order in which the concerns of the                          
 developing countries will be addressed.                                                                   
                                                                                                           
 The momentum in relations between India and Japan was further intensified during the                      
 year under review. Exchanges and interaction continued at the highest level. Prime                        
 Minister Toshiki Kaifu warmly congratulated Prime Minister P V Narasimha Rao on his                       
 assumption of the office of Prime Minister. Prime Minister, Shri P V Narasimha Rao's                      
 message of felicitation to Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa on his election as Prime                        
 Minister of Japan elicited a warm and cordial response from the latter who expressed                      
 the hope for further strengthening and adding new content to bilateral ties so that the                   
 two countries could contribute jointly to stability and peace in Asia and the whole                       
 world. Former Prime Minister of Japan, Mr Noboru Takeshita, represented the Government                    
 of Japan at the funeral of former Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, in May 1991.                         
                                                                                                           
 The Minister for External Affairs, Shri Madhavsinh Solanki, visited Japan from 18 to 24                   
 January 1992 and had wide-ranging discussions with the top Japanese leadership. The                       
 entire gamut of bilateral relations was examined and areas of further cooperation in                      
 the emerging international order were explored. The year 1992 marks the 40th                              
 anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations and the signing of separate                      
 peace treaty between the two countries. The visit also provided the first opportunity                     
 for a visiting Indian Minister to explain the recent economic changes in India to the                     
 Japanese Government and business community.                                                               
                                                                                                           
 The then Finance Minister accompanied by Finance Secretary visited Japan from 10 to 12                    
 April 1991. He met the then Finance Minister of Japan, Mr Ryutaro Hashimoto, the then                     
 Foreign Minister, Mr Taro Nakayama and Speaker of the House of Representatives, Mr                        
 Yoshio Sakurauchi, who is also the President of the India-Japan Association. The                          
 Petroleum Minister, Shri B Shankaranand also visited Japan in October 1991.                               
                                                                                                           
 In the economic sphere, Japan reacted favourably to Government's new policy initiatives                   
 in economic liberalisation and opening up of the Indian economy and indicated its                         
 intention of studying the situation in further detail so as to enable inflow of                           
 investment from Japan to India. A high-level 101-member Economic Mission led by Dr                        
 Rokuro Ishikawa, President of the Japan and Tokyo Chambers of Commerce and Industry,                      
 visited India from 27 to 31 January 1992. The Economic Mission was able to study the                      
 impact of the recent liberalisation measures and explore further areas of economic                        
 cooperation particularly in the area of direct foreign investment from Japan. The visit                   
 al so coincided with the 23rd Joint Meeting of the India-Japan Business Cooperation                       
 Committee represented by FICCI and the Japan and Tokyo Chambers of Commerce and                           
 Industry.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                           
 Indo-Japan cooperation in the field of development continued to be one of the important                   
 aspects of the bilateral relationship. Japan remained India's largest aid donor. At the                   
 Aid India Consortium in Paris in September 1991, Japan pledged a total of 106.6 billion                   
 Yen for 1991-92 which was marginally higher than 104.8 billion Yen pledged in previous                    
 year. Though the figure indicated a marginal increase over the previous year in Yen                       
 terms, in Rupee terms it indicated a 50% increase. During the year Japanese loan                          
 assistance wa s announced for the following projects:                                                     
 (i) The Gandhar Gas Combined Cycle Project.                                                               
 (ii) National Highway No. 2 Improvement Project (Mathura-Agra Section).                                   
 (iii) Aravalli Hills Afforestation Project.                                                               
 (iv) Urban City Water Supply Project.                                                                     
 (v) The Ajanta-Ellora Conservation and Tourism Development Project. At the official                       
 level, visits were exchanged in the economic, trade, scientific , technological and                       
 defence fields. The Mixed Commission for exchanges in the field of culture and                            
 education held its meeting in Tokyo in December 1991. The commemoration of the 40th                       
 Anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between India and Japan in                       
 1992 figured on the agenda of these discussions. The Third India-Japan Joint Committee                    
 for Cooperation in Science and Technology met in New Delhi on 15 and 16 April 1991. In                    
 addition to reviewing in detail the progress made, it discussed new proposals for                         
 further cooperaion and interaction in science and technology.                                             
                                                                                                           
 The Chief of Army Staff briefly visited Tokyo in September and held useful discussions                    
 with senior defence officials of the Government of Japan. In addition, reciprocal                         
 arrangements for exchange of research scholars/officials i n defence studies were                         
 initiated with an Indian scholar visiting Japan in June 19 91 and a Japanese scholar                      
 visiting India in December 1991.                                                                          
                                                                                                           
 The Third India-Japan Working Group for Railways met in Tokyo in December and reviewed                    
 the progress made in areas of cooperation identified in earlier meetings and also                         
 discussed new areas where cooperation could be extended particularly in specialised                       
 areas and new technology in the Railways. Bilateral consultative talks of the economic                    
 Ministries took place in New Delhi on 19 and 20 November 1991 where the two sides                         
 reviewed implementation of assistance-related projects and discussed future projects                      
 whi ch could be covered under grant-in-aid assistance.                                                    
                                                                                                           
 The interaction at the non-governmental level in the spheres of economy and trade was                     
 also substantive in nature. The India-Japan Joint Study Committee met in Tokyo under                      
 the Co-Chairmenship of Dr V Krishnamurthy, Member, Planning Commission, and Mr Eijiro                     
 Noda, former Japanese Ambassador to India, on 26 and 27 November 1991 and discussed                       
 inter-alia new developments in the international political and economic order, India's                    
 new economic policies from the respective vantage points of the two countries,                            
 establishment of an Industrial Model Town in India, ways to commemorate the 40th                          
 Anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations and the intensification of                       
 exchanges particularly in the field of science and technolog y.                                           
                                                                                                           
 The Committee decided to meet biannually. The Standing Committee of the India-Japan                       
 Joint Business Cooperation Committee (IJBCC) held its 14th Meeting in New Delhi from 23                   
 to 25 July 1991; The Japanese delegation led by Mr Eme Yamashita called on the Finance                    
 Minister, Minister for External Affairs and Ministers of State for Commerce and                           
 Industry. A 9-member delegation from the Punjab, Haryana and Delhi Chambers of Commerce                   
 and Industry visited Tokyo and Osaka and had meetings with Tokyo Chamber of Commerce                      
 and Industry, the Osaka Chamber of Commerce and Industry, officials in Ministry of                        
 International Trade & Industry and Japan External Trade Organization.                                     
                                                                                                           
 In recognition of the positive and balanced nature of the relationship tha t India has                    
 always enjoyed with the two Koreas, both the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and                    
 the Republic of Korea sought India's understanding on the question of their entry to                      
 the United Nations. India was also requested by both the Koreas to initiate the                           
 resolution admitting them in the United Nations as full-fledged members in September                      
 1991. Both the DPRK and the ROK expressed appreciation of India's position on the                         
 subject of their entry to the United Nations.                                                             
                                                                                                           
 India's bilateral relations with the Republic of Korea were marked by friendship and                      
 cooperation and increased interaction particularly in the economic sphere. Former Prime                   
 Minister of the Republic of Korea, Mr Shinyong Lho, visited India as Special Envoy of                     
 President Roh Tae Woo from 30 April to 3 May 1991 carrying a message seeking India's                      
 support for the ROK to join the United Nations. He called on the President and Vice                       
 President of India.                                                                                       
                                                                                                           
 The bilateral trade figures showed an upward trend. Given the complementarity of                          
 India's economy with the ROK, the potential for enhancing trade, cooperating in joint                     
 ventures and attracting ROK investment were also explored in depth. The Trade                             
 Development Authority (TDA) and its Korean equivalent the Korea Trade Promotion                           
 Corporation (KOTRA) organized a conference on "Industrial Cooperation and Investment                      
 Promotion between India and Korea" in New Delhi on 4 and 5 September 1991 in which 33                     
 Korean firms and 500 Indian firms participated.                                                           
                                                                                                           
 The then Minister of Commerce, Law and Justice visited Seoul from 1 to 1 0 April 1991                     
 for the ESCAP Ministerial Meeting and utilised the opportunity for discussions on                         
 bilateral matters of mutual interest with Foreign Minister Lee Sang Ok and Trade and                      
 Industry Minister Lee Bong Suk. In the academic and cultural fields too there was a                       
 discernible trend of gradually increasing interaction. Of significance was the 3rd                        
 India-Korea Conference held at Yonsei University where various facets of bilateral                        
 relation s were examined in depth and the potential for future cooperation explored                       
 particularly in the light of India's new liberalised economic policy.                                     
                                                                                                           
 Bilateral relations with the DPRK progressed well during the year under review. Vice                      
 President Li Jong Ok visited India from 7 to 11 May 1991. He called on the President,                     
 Shri R Venkataraman, Vice President, Dr S D Sharma and also met the then Deputy                           
 Minister for External Affairs. Two documents were signed during the visit, namely, the                    
 Plan of Cooperation in Science and Technology and the Cultural Exchange Programme for                     
 1991-92. During the visit, the adherence of both sides to the principles of the                           
 non-aligned movement of which both are members was reaffirmed.                                            
                                                                                                           
 Secretary (East), Shri L L Mehrotra, paid an official visit to Pyongyang from 19 to 23                    
 July 1991 and called on Vice President Li Jong Ok, Vice Premier and Foreign Minister                      
 Kim Yong Nam. He held in-depth discussions on the current international situation,                        
 bilateral matters and issues of common concern with his counterpart, Vice Minister Cha                    
 Bong Ju. Secretary (East) also met Prime Minister Hun Sen of Cambodia and Prince                          
 Norodom Sihanouk who were in Pyongyang at that time.                                                      
                                                                                                           
 India was represented at the Asian Ministerial meeting of G-77 in Pyongyang held from                     
 10 to 12 September 1991 by Special Secretary (Commerce), Shri S Kanungo, leading the                      
 delegation as Ministerial representative.                                                                 
                                                                                                           
 Contacts at both the official and non-official levels continued in diverse fields. A                      
 Parliamentary group led by Shri M A Masodkar attended the 85th International                              
 Parliamentary Union Conference in Pyongyang in April 1991. As in past years, India took                   
 part in the April Spring Friendship Art Festival in Pyongyang.                                            
                                                                                                           
 The year was marked by a continuation of traditional ties of friendship and cordiality                    
 with the Mongolian People's Republic and steady contacts at both the official and                         
 people-to-people levels were maintained. Prominent visitors to Mongolia included:                         
 (i) A 3-member Parliamentary group led by Shri Bhaktacharan Das visited Mongolia to                       
 attend an international conference on new democracy in Mongolia.                                          
 (ii) Shri L L Mehrotra, Secretary (East), attended the National Day celebrations of                       
 Mongolia in July 1991 and also held extensive consultations on matters of bilateral and                   
 mutual interest with his Mongolian counterpart, Vice Minister Doljintseren. Secretary                     
 (East) also called on President P Ochirbaat, Prime Minister D Bymbasuren, Foreign                         
 Minister Ts. Gymbasuren and Minister of Trade Bayer Baataar. Three agreements were                        
 signed during the visit, namely, (i) Cultural Exchange Programme for 1991-93, (ii) Plan                   
 of Cooperation in the field of Health and Medical Sciences and (iii) Protocol on the                      
 Equivalence of Degrees and Diplomas.                                                                      
 (iii) Secretary, Planning Commission, Shri N Sengupta visited Mongolia to give a series                   
 of lectures on the market economy to Mongolian Government and administration officials.                   
 (iv) The former Chief Justice of India, Justice P N Bhagwati, visited Mongolia in                         
 connection with the drafting of the new constitution. Prominent among the visits from                     
 Mongolia was that of the Minister for Labour, Mr Ts. Tsolomon, in November 1991 who had                   
 meetings with the Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Eduardo Faleiro, and                       
 Minister of State for Industry, Shri P K Thungon, and with other Government officials                     
 in addition to meeting private business entrepreneurs.                                                    
                                                                                                           
 Efforts were directed towards increasing cooperation in the economic and trade fields.                    
 Broad areas of cooperation were identified, with Mongolia showin g particular interest                    
 in the agricultural sector and in the small scale and mediu m sectors of industry.                        
 Special stress was laid on assistance to Mongolia in trai ning and management under the                   
 ITEC Programme.                                                                                           
 1991                                                                                                      
 West Asia And North Africa                                                                                
                                                                                     Top                   
 DURING the year under review, India's relations with countries of West Asia and North                     
 Africa continued to flourish within the parameters of normal friendship and                               
 cooperation. In the beginning of the year, the impact of the Gulf Crisis was felt in                      
 the region, with new friendship made and old alliances readjusted between Arabic                          
 speaking countries, even far removed from the Gulf region, as a result of the new and                     
 emergent realities. In the latter half of the year, the joint US and Soviet initiative                    
 to restart Middle East tal ks bore fruit with the principal antagonists gathering in                      
 Madrid on 30 October, for the first ever face to face talks. The preoccupation of the                     
 countries in West Asia and North Africa with regional politics perforce led to their                      
 distraction from enlarging their traditional friendship with countries like Ind ia.                       
 India also continued to monitor the role of the countries in West Asia and                                
 North Africa in the Organization of Islamic Countries, at which Pakistan continued to                     
 drum up support for its stand on the Kashmir issue. This complex mossaic of                               
 international motives presented to Indian diplomacy a fresh challenge.                                    
                                                                                                           
 Indian solidarity with the people of Palestine was highlighted by the visit of Shri                       
 Eduardo Faleiro, Minister of State for External Affairs, to Tunisia from 11 to Oct 13,                    
 1991, when he called on Mr Yasser Arafat, the President of the State of Palestine, and                    
 Mr Farooq Qadumi, the Palestinian Foreign Minister. The two sides exchanged views on                      
 the then upcoming Middle East Peace Conference and the PLO shared with India their                        
 perspective of the US-Soviet initiative and the options available to them at that                         
 crucial juncture . India reiterated her support for the Palestinian people and their                      
 cause. On 29 November 1991 a function was held in New Delhi to observe the Indian                         
 Solidarity Day with the Palestinian people. Shri Eduardo Faleiro, Minister of State for                   
 External Affairs, in his address reiterated the Indian solidarity wit h the Palestinian                   
 people. Dr Najma Heptulla, Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, recalled the background                    
 of the Palestinian struggle and India's consiste nt support for the Palestinian rights.                   
                                                                                                           
 President Yasser Arafat visited India from 20 to 22 January 1992 on a State visit.                        
 Besides calling on the President, he had discussions with the Prime Minister and also                     
 met with the Vice President, the Minister of State for Extern al Affairs, and the                         
 Ministers for Finance and Human Resource Development. Leaders of some political parties                   
 i.e. CPI, CPM, Janta Dal and BJP, also called on him. During his stay, President Arafat                   
 was also presented the Indira Gandhi International Award by the Indian Council for                        
 World Affairs. He held a Press Conference, at which he clearly articulated the                            
 Palestinian stand that the presence of India at the Middle East peace talks was                           
 desirable and that any sovereign step that India might take by way of establishing                        
 diplomatic relation s with Israel would be totally within India's prerogative. His                        
 visit provided an opportunity for an intense exchange of views and reaffirmation of                       
 confidence and support for each other. This was significant as the politics in the                        
 Middle East are rapidly evolving with the traditional alignments between the Arabs,                       
 overtaken by these events.                                                                                
                                                                                                           
 Two rounds of talks between Arab and Israel have been held, the first one at Madrid                       
 from 29 October to 5 November, and the second one in Washington from 11 to 17 December.                   
 The Palestinians had earlier agreed to be a part of th e Jordanian delegation. The                        
 outcome of the Washington Session has been less satisfactory than the one in Madrid,                      
 which had raised hopes of noticeable progress in the peaceful resolution of                               
 Arab-Israeli differences, dating from th e birth of the State of Israel. The next                         
 Session is expected by a wider number o f countries, even other than Israel's immediate                   
 Arab neighbours, in order to discuss multilateral issues of disarmament, utilisation of                   
 water resources, etc . India has welcomed the Middle East peace talks and voted for the                   
 rescinding of UN General Assembly Resolution 3379 hoping that this would enable the                       
 United Nations to play a role in the talks and lead to the lessening of acrimon y and                     
 tension.                                                                                                  
                                                                                                           
 Mr Hocinedjoudi, Secretary General of the Algerian Foreign Ministry, visited India from                   
 18 to 21 April 1991 to hold official level bilateral talks. The discussions centred on                    
 the role of the Non-Aligned Movement. The two sides agreed to strengthen and promote                      
 bilateral cooperation. Mr Hocinedjoudi also called on the then Minister of State for                      
 External Affairs and discussed a wide range of international issues, including the                        
 post-Gulf crisis situations. Symbolising the traditional friendship between India and                     
 Egypt was the presence of the Egyptian Speaker of Shura, Dr Mustafa Kamal Helmi, as a                     
 representative of the Egyptian President at the funeral of Shri Rajiv Gandhi.                             
                                                                                                           
 The two countries signed in July 1991 a new Air Agreement to provide reciprocal                           
 bi-weekly air services between India and Egypt. Dr Boutros Ghali, the Egyptian Deputy                     
 Prime Minister and Minister of State for External Affairs, visited India in August 1991                   
 for soliciting Indian support for his candidature for election to the post of Secretary                   
 General of the United Nations. On his election subsequently, the Egyptian Foreign                         
 Minister conveyed Egypt's grateful thanks to the Minister for External Affairs for                        
 India's role in Dr Ghali's election.                                                                      
 Minister for External Affairs, Shri Madhavsinh Solanki, visited Egypt from 12 to 16                       
 January 1992 at the invitation of his Egyptian counterpart. This visi t was in line                       
 with periodic bilateral exchanges between India and Egypt at the political level. He                      
 was accompanied, amongst others, by Shri I P Khosla, Secretary in the Ministry of                         
 External Affairs. Six prominent businessmen also visited Egypt at the same time for the                   
 inauguration of the Indo-Egypt Business Forum. Shri Solanki launched an Indian Film                       
 Week. The Minister also inaugurated the Maulana Abul Kalam Cultural Centre in Cairo,                      
 which would provide a window to the Egyptians to the vast riches of Indian culture. The                   
 complete gamut of bilateral relations and important international issues were discussed                   
 in detail during the Indo-Egyptian talks. He called on President Hosni Mubarak and                        
 Speaker of the People's Assembly, Mr Ahmed Fathi Sarour. He also met the Arab League                      
 Secretary General, Dr Esmat Abdel Meguid. Shri Solanki delivered a talk at the Cairo                      
 University on `India's perception on the new international scenario' and the role of                      
 NAM with Egypt and India in it. A subject of common concern discussed by the Minister                     
 for External Affairs with both President Mubarak and his counterpart was the danger to                    
 secular societies from the rising crest of fundamentalism. The two sides also agreed                      
 that the Indo-Egyptian Joint Commission should meet this year in New Delhi.                               
                                                                                                           
 A six member Parliamentary Delegation from Jordan visited India in December 1991. They                    
 called on the Speaker of the Lok Sabha and the Minister for External Affairs. They                        
 emphasised the role of Parliamentarians in building bridges between countries and the                     
 need to maintain these exchanges. Brig. General Mahmooud Mattar, the Chief of the                         
 Lebanese Air Force, was in India in November-December 1991. He called on the Indian Air                   
 Chief and discussed matters of mutual concern. He expressed interest in the purchase of                   
 essential items required by Lebanese Defence Services like the Kiran Mark II aircraft.                    
                                                                                                           
 Mr Rafiq Haddaoui, Minister in the Moroccan Prime Minister's Office, visited India in                     
 August 1991 as a Special Envoy of King Hassan II. The visit was part of Moroccan                          
 demarches with the members of UN Security Council on Western Sahara. Shri Jagdish                         
 Tytler, Minister for Surface Transport, visited Morocco from 22 to 28 September 1991 to                   
 participate in the 19th Permanent International Association of Road Congress.                             
                                                                                                           
 Dr Mohd. Zuhair Masharqah, Vice President of the Syrian Arab Republic, transited                          
 through India on 27 and 29 July 1991 on his way to and back from Kabul. During his                        
 stay, he called on the Vice President of India and discussed bilateral and multilateral                   
 issues. On 8 October 1991, an agreement was signed in Damascus between India and Syria                    
 for cooperation in the field of tourism. Shri Eduardo Faleiro, Minister of State for                      
 External Affairs, visited Tuni sia in October 1991 for the annual political                               
 consultations, the second round of which was held in Delhi in 1989. Shri Faleiro was                      
 received by President Ben Al i to whom he handed over a letter from the Prime Minister.                   
 President Ben Ali conveyed his greetings to Prime Minister and accepted the invitation                    
 to visit India. Shri Faleiro also had wide-ranging discussions with Mr Habib Ben Yahia,                   
 Tunisian Foreign Minister and the Secretary of State. The Tunisian leaders expressed                      
 admiration for India and its contribution to the improvement in international                             
 relations. They also expressed keen interest in the new politica l and economic                           
 initiatives undertaken by India. Relations with their respective neighbours were also                     
 discussed as well as the possibility of inter-regional economic cooperation. Shri                         
 Faleiro brought up the question of Tunisia importin g more from India to offset the                       
 imbalance in the bilateral trade as India is the largest importer of phosphoric acid                      
 from Tunisia as well as of expanding and diversifying economic cooperation to include                     
 joint industrial and technical collaboration in areas already identified by the Joint                     
 Committee. There was general satisfaction at the present state of bilateral relations                     
 and keenness t o strengthen and promote them further.                                                     
                                                                                                           
 Mr Abdus Salaam Al Jalloud, Vice President of the People's Bureau of Socialist People's                   
 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, paid a transit visit to India on 22 January 1992. A working                       
 lunch was hosted by the Prime Minister, at which the two leaders exchanged views on a                     
 number of bilateral and multilateral issues. Mr Jalloud, in particular, conveyed the                      
 Libyan perception of the situation that has developed following the allegations                           
 levelled by the USA, UK and France that two Libyan agents had complicity in the Pan                       
 Am/UTA air crashes. The three Western Powers have demanded the handing over of these                      
 two suspects. Contemporaneously with the visit of Mr Jalloud, UN Security Council                         
 passed Resulution 731, endorsing unanimously the above demand. India voted in favour of                   
 the Resolution. Mr Jalloud reiterated the Libyan resolve to reinvigorate th e bilateral                   
 relations and that there should be regular political level bilateral consultations and                    
 exchange of high level visits. Earlier, Libya had dropped th e reference to Kashmir in                    
 a document on terrorism introduced by it in the UN General Assembly. He also suggested                    
 that the Non-Alignment Movement needed to be revitalised.                                                 
                                                                                                           
 India decided to establish full diplomatic relations with Israel and an announcement to                   
 this effect was made on 29 January 1992 by Foreign Secretary, indicating that Embassies                   
 would be set up by India in Tel Aviv and by Israel in New Delhi as soon as physically                     
 feasible. India's decision reflects the change d international situation and the                          
 ongoing Arab-Israel dialogue on a West Asian settlement and her desire to encourage                       
 these peace talks. India has had a longstanding tradition of close and friendly tics                      
 with the Gulf region. During the last two decades, her ties with the countries of the                     
 region have acquired a strong economic and social dimension. It has been India's                          
 endeavour to encourage this trend towards mutually beneficial partnership.                                
                                                                                                           
 India welcomed the liberation of Kuwait on 28 February 1991 as a reassertion of                           
 international legality. Subsequently, India was also gratified to note the fast pace of                   
 restoration of normal life in that country. India and Ku wait resumed their economic                      
 ties. The Government made all possible efforts to facilitate the return of Indian                         
 nationals earlier employed in Kuwait. As a res ult of these efforts, the number of                        
 Indians in Kuwait by the end of December 1991 was estimated at 70,000. The then                           
 Minister for Commerce visited Kuwait in May 1991 with a number of Indian businessmen to                   
 hold indepth discussions with the Kuwaiti leaders on Indian participation in the                          
 reconstruction of that country.                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 The third session of Indo-Saudi Joint Commission was held from 12 to 14 November 1991.                    
 During the session, the two sides signed a Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement on                         
 Aircraft Profits and agreed to consider a bilateral Comprehensive Double Taxation                         
 Agreement. This session was conspicuous for inclusion in the Saudi delegation of 20                       
 businessmen who interacted extensively with their Indian counterparts. The session also                   
 afforded an opportunity for exchange of views on issues of mutual interest.                               
                                                                                                           
 A delegation of Staff and Command College of the Sultanate of Oman visited India in                       
 July 1991. This was followed by an official visit to India in October 1991 by the                         
 Commander of the Royal Navy of Oman, Rear Admiral Sayyid Shihab bin Taimour Al-Said.                      
                                                                                                           
 The second session of the Indo-Bahraini Joint Economic Committee was held in Manama in                    
 November 1991. The Indian Red Cross Society sent a consignment of relief supplies                         
 comprising food and medicines to Iraq by sea in May 1991. India, a member of the United                   
 Nations Security Council, made sincere efforts to alleviate the sufferings of Iraqi                       
 people through relaxation of sanctions against Iraq followi ng the termination of                         
 hostilities.                                                                                              
                                                                                                           
 There was a steady progress in Indo-Iranian relations. There were several high-level                      
 exchanges. In the latter half of 1991 the Minister for External Aff airs met his                          
 Iranian counterpart thrice, the last occasion being the Fifth Session o f the                             
 Indo-Iranian Joint Commission which was held in Tehran during November 1991.                              
 Substantive results were achieved during this meeting with agreements being signed on                     
 cooperation in the cultural, economic, industrial, technical, scientific, agricultural                    
 and consular fields which augur well for further diversification and expansion of                         
 relations between the two countries.                                                                      
 1991                                                                                                      
 Africa (South Of The Sahara)                                                                              
                                                                                     Top                   
 DURING the year, sub-Saharan Africa witnessed an accentuation of the trends towards                       
 political pluralism, economic liberalisation and the resolution of internal conflicts.                    
 The reform process in South Africa gathered some momentum with the prospects of a                         
 constitutional settlement appearing brighter in a land devastated by decades of                           
 apartheid.                                                                                                
                                                                                                           
 While India welcomed the growing acceptance of multi-party democracy in Africa, its                       
 progress in different countries was uneven. The smooth transfer of power, resulting                       
 from the Presidential and Parliamentary elections held in Zambia in October 1991 was                      
 noteworthy. During this period, other countries like Kenya and Seychelles announced                       
 preparations for the adoption of multi- party systems. Nigeria kept a steady course                       
 towards the return of democratic rule by the end of 1992. However, civil strife                           
 complicated attempts at politic al liberalisation in a number of other countries.                         
                                                                                                           
 The Peace Accord concluded between the MPLA Government and UNITA in May 1991, and the                     
 promise of elections during the second half of 1992, final ly brought peace to Angola                     
 after 16 years of cruel civil conflict. Attempts at achieving some agreement between                      
 the Mozambican Government and the RENAMO rebels have, however, not succeeded so far.                      
 Years of civil war ended in Ethiopia with the collapse of President Mengistu's regime                     
 in May 1991 and the assumption of power by a transitional government under President                      
 Meles Zenawi.                                                                                             
                                                                                                           
 Economically, the Continent in general continues to suffer from a crippling debt                          
 burden, balance of payments difficulties, unfavourable terms of trade and an overall                      
 decline in foreign aid. The majority of African countries have embarked on economic                       
 adjustment or restructuring programmes under agreements with the IMF. There has also                      
 been a trend towards greater regional cooperation, whether through ECOWAS in West                         
 Africa, SADCC in Southern Africa, the Preferential Trade Area covering 19 Eastern,                        
 Central and Southern African countries, or the Indian Ocean Commission covering the                       
 Indian Ocean Island States. The OAU is also actively considering an African Economic                      
 Community to come into being, in phases, over the next three decades. India continued                     
 to intensify efforts to convert the historic goodwill exist ing in African countries                      
 for her into mutually beneficial economic, technical and cultural cooperation. Despite                    
 severe constraints of resources on both sides, India's efforts are bearing fruit.                         
 Nearly 10,000 African students are studying in India on various Government of India                       
 scholarship schemes and on self-financing basis. A large number of Indian scientific                      
 and technical experts are working i n Africa and trade is expanding quite                                 
 satisfactorily. It is being increasingly re alised that India possesses the appropriate                   
 technology for employment generation in resource-deficient countries and that her                         
 "Green Revolution" is worthy of emulation.                                                                
                                                                                                           
 Noting that the statutory pillars of apartheid in South Africa have alrea dy fallen and                   
 some further progress registered towards the emergence of a fully democratic South                        
 Africa at the Convention for a Democratic South Africa, several steps have been                           
 undertaken by India to encourage the process. The recommendations made by the New Delhi                   
 Meeting of the Commonwealth Committee of Foreign Ministers on Southern Africa (CCFMSA)                    
 in September last year for a phased lifting of sanctions against South Africa were                        
 adopted b y the Commonwealth Summit (CHOGM) in Harare in October 1991. In consonance                      
 with the CHOGM decision, India lifted all "people to people" sanctions, including visa                    
 and consular restrictions against South Africa. Economic sanctions would also be lifted                   
 when further progress is made towards some form of interim government on which the                        
 black majority would be represented. Given her historic links, India is intensifying                      
 assistance to the African National Congress by providing vocational, technical and                        
 administrative training to representatives of the black majority.                                         
                                                                                                           
 India has welcomed the holding of the convention for a Democratic South Africa (CODESA)                   
 in Johannesburg on 20 and Dec 21, 1991. CODESA marked the first substantive step                          
 towards the establishment of a non-racial democracy based on universal suffrage in                        
 South Africa. At the Convention, 17 political organizations led by the ANC and the                        
 ruling National Party signed a Declaration of Intent which commits CODESA to the basic                    
 tenets of a non- racial democratic and undivided South Africa based on multi-party                        
 democracy, regular elections, an independent judiciary, the supremacy of the                              
 Constitution and a division of executive, legislative and judicial powers. India has                      
 applau ded these decisions since it has been in the forefront of the struggle against                     
 apar theid for about a century now.                                                                       
                                                                                                           
 President Sam Nujoma of Namibia was awarded the Indira Gandhi Prize for Peace,                            
 Disarmament and Development for 1990. He visited India in February 1992 to receive the                    
 award.                                                                                                    
                                                                                                           
 President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe paid a State visit to India from 14 to 16 November                    
 1991. During the visit, President Mugabe was awarded the Jawaharlal Nehru Award for                       
 International Understanding for 1989. Leaders of the two countries reaffirmed their                       
 desire to intensity bilateral, economic and technical cooperation.                                        
                                                                                                           
 India welcomed the signing of the Lisbon Peace Accords which brought an end to 16 years                   
 of civil strife in Angola. Widespread rioting and looting erupted in Zaire on 23 and 24                   
 September 1991 as a result of a revolt by some sections of the Zairean army. Residences                   
 and property of Indians and other foreign nationals were destroyed and looted. No                         
 Indian was, however, physically harmed. France and Belgium rushed troops to Zaire and                     
 law and order was restored to a large extent by 24 September 1991. With the help of the                   
 French, Congolese and Belgian authorities, the Ministry arranged the evacuation of                        
 Indian nationals and dependents of Indian Embassy staff from Kinshasa.                                    
                                                                                                           
 The Nigerian Minister of External Affairs, Major-General Nwachukwu, led an official                       
 delegation to New Delhi to attend the Commonwealth Conference of Foreign Ministers on                     
 South Africa (CCFMSA) on 13 and 14 September 1991. During his visit, he had bilateral                     
 discussions with the Minister for External Affairs.                                                       
                                                                                                           
 The Ghanian Minister for Energy, Mr Ato Ahwoi, visited India in September-October 1991.                   
 During his visit, he discussed the possibilities of procurement of equipment for                          
 electrification from India and of the establishment of joint ventures in Ghana.                           
                                                                                                           
 The Tanzanian Foreign Minister, Mr Hassan Diria, visited India to attend the CCFMSA                       
 Meeting in September 1991. During his meeting with the Minister for External Affairs,                     
 the ways and means to further bilateral relations includi ng the problem of blocked                       
 funds, were discussed.                                                                                    
                                                                                                           
 The civil war led to the defeat and collapse of the Mengistu regime and the EPRDF                         
 forces took control of Addis Ababa on 28 May 1991. Simultaneously, the EPLF took                          
 control of the Eritrean capital of Asmara. Since then the countr y has been divided                       
 into two de-facto administrations. A multi-party conference o n national reconciliation                   
 was held in Addis Ababa in the first week of July 1991.                                                   
 This conference, inter alia, accepted the right of the Eritrean people to self-                           
 determination.                                                                                            
                                                                                                           
 A Special Envoy of President Meles Zenawi, the Ethiopian Minister for Housing and                         
 Construction, Mr Ato Aragaw Tiruneh, visited India in November 1991. He called on the                     
 Prime Minister and the Minister for External Affairs.                                                     
                                                                                                           
 The Indian leaders assured the Special Envoy of India's desire to maintain assistance                     
 to Ethiopia, especially in the small-scale industry sector, water resources management                    
 and agriculture.                                                                                          
                                                                                                           
 Prime Minister Anerood Jugnauth of Mauritius visited India from 23 to 26 July 1991 to                     
 further forge ties with the new Indian Government. He was accompanied by Foreign                          
 Minister Jean Claude L' Estrac and Home Secretary Bhinod Bacha. Mr Jugnauth called on                     
 the President and also had discussions with the Vice President, Prime Minister and the                    
 Minister for External Affairs.                                                                            
                                                                                                           
 The Minister for External Affairs visited Mauritius in August 1991 for the sixth                          
 session of the Indo-Mauritian Joint Commission. The on-going programmes of economic and                   
 technical cooperation between the two countries were reviewed and it was agreed to                        
 expand bilateral cooperation in the sectors of computer software, remote sensing, water                   
 resources education and health.                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 The Deputy Prime Minister and Health Minister of Mauritius visited India from 15 to 20                    
 December 1991, and had wide-ranging discussions with Minister of Health on bilateral                      
 cooperation in the field of health. He also called on Vice President and Prime                            
 Minister. He also had a meeting with Minister for External Affairs.                                       
                                                                                                           
 A constitutional amendment Bill was passed by Mauritius to proclaim itself a Republic                     
 from 12 March 1992. The Prime Minister, Shri P.V. Narasimha Rao, has been invited as a                    
 chief guest on the occasion.                                                                              
                                                                                                           
 The only legal party in Seychelles decided in December 1991 to adopt a multi-party                        
 democratic system. It was decided that the constitution would be amended to allow the                     
 registration of political parties and the election of a Co nsti- tutional Commission,                     
 which would draft a new constitution. A referendum would be field on the new                              
 constitution and elections held before the end of 1992.                                                   
                                                                                                           
 The Action for Resisting Invasion, Colonialism and Apartheid (AFRICA) Fund was                            
 constituted by the 8th Summit of the Heads of State/Government of Non-Aligned countries                   
 in Harare in September 1986 and its mandate was renewed by the 9th NAM Summit in                          
 Belgrade in 1989. The AFRICA Fund was the political expression of the Movement's                          
 support and solidarity to the frontl ine African states to fight the apartheid policy                     
 of Pretoria regime and to assist liberation movements in South Africa in their                            
 unrelenting struggle against raci st and colonialist oppression.                                          
                                                                                                           
 The Government of India contributed a sum of Rs 50 crores in 1987. In addition, a sum                     
 of Rs 2.6 crores was contributed by individuals and orgaization s in India to the                         
 AFRICA (Public Contributions-India) Fund, set up under the Societies Registration Act.                    
 During the year, a large number of multually identified projects have been implemented                    
 in the Frontline States and assistanc e has been provided to the liberation movements                     
 in South Africa. The projects implemented include supply of transport vehicles,                           
 essential commodities, mobile clinics, medicines, mining equipment, etc. A project on                     
 feasibility study for refractory brick plant in Zimbabwe and setting up of a Vocational                   
 Training Centre in Namibia have also been undertaken. A project to supply various                         
 essential commodities including medicines to ANC is also being financed front the                         
 contributions made by the Indian public.                                                                  
                                                                                                           
 The senior officials of the AFRICA Fund Committee at their eighth meeting held in Kuala                   
 Lumpur in May 1991, had recommended issuing of a Joint Appeal by the Foreign Ministers                    
 of the Committee member countries. The Foreign Ministers of the Committee member                          
 countries, who attended the NAM Ministerial Meeting in Accra in September 1991, met                       
 under the Chairmanship of the Minister for External Affairs of India and issued a Joint                   
 Appeal for additional contributions to the Fund by the International community.                           
                                                                                                           
 The ninth meeting of senior officials of the AFRICA Fund Committee held in Harare,                        
 Zimbabwe from 9 to 13 December 1991 was a crucial one as it took place after a series                     
 of positive developments in South Africa such as the repea l of some important                            
 legislative pillars of apartheid, the formation of the Patrio tic Front, all Parties                      
 Conference, etc. The meeting concluded that the AFRICA Fund could not continue further                    
 without additional funds and considered that it is necessary to change the form and                       
 content of the Fund if the donor community were to make fresh contributions. It was                       
 further felt that the Fund will have to be completely reconstituted and restructured if                   
 it were to assist the people of South Africa in addressing the residual problems of                       
 Apartheid such as resettlement, rehabilitation and human resource development. The next                   
 meeting will give due consideration to these and other new suggestions for making                         
 suitable recommendations on the mandate of the Fund to the 10th NAM Summit to be held                     
 in Jakarta in 1992.                                                                                       
 1991                                                                                                      
 Europe                                                                                                    
                                                                                     Top                   
 Erstwhile USSR                                                                                            
                                                                                                           
 THE year 1991 proved to be historic. The Union of Soviet Socialist Republic founded in                    
 1922 following the October Revolution of 1917 was dissolved. All the 15 Republics of                      
 the former Soviet Union emerged as independent States.                                                    
                                                                                                           
 Eleven of these States came together to establish a Commonwealth of Independent States                    
 pledging themselves to abide by the universally-recognized principles and norms of                        
 international law. The emergence of the independent Republics also heralded the end of                    
 the political and economic structures create d in the erstwhile USSR on socialist                         
 ideology.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                           
 After the formation of the Commonwealth, President Gorbachev, who had all along                           
 advocated the preservation of the Union, relinquished his post, there by marking the                      
 end of a phase in domestic and international politics which was begun by him in April                     
 1985. The Prime Minister, in his message to Mr Gorbachev, noted his epoch-making role,                    
 unparalleled in recent history, in making the world a safer and more peaceful place for                   
 all mankind.                                                                                              
                                                                                                           
 Events in the erstwhile USSR moved at a repid pace. In a nationwide referendum held in                    
 March 1991, a majority of those who voted, favoured the preservation of the Union. In                     
 April, President Gorbachev initiated what has been termed as the Novo-Ogarevo process                     
 in which he sought to persuade the Republics to come together in a Union under a new                      
 Union Treaty. Many of the Republics agreed to sign the new Union Treaty on 20 August.                     
 However, this move was pre-empted by an attempted coup on 19 August.                                      
                                                                                                           
 The August developments marked a turning point in the history of the erstwhile USSR.                      
 The coup fizzled out within 72 hours and Mr Gorbachev, who had been placed in a sort of                   
 preventive custody, returned to Moscow in his capacity as the President of the Soviet                     
 Union. President B N Yeltsin of the Russian Federation, displaying rare courage and                       
 qualities of outstanding leadership, played a crucial role in bringing about the                          
 collapse of the coup. The restoration of constitutional order following the abortive                      
 coup marked the victory of the will of the people and a reassertion of democratic                         
 values.                                                                                                   
                                                                                                           
 The abortive coup accelerated the process of the emergence of independent Republics. In                   
 the aftermath of the coup, new political, legislative, executive and economic                             
 structures were created with varying degrees of success. However, with the declaration                    
 of independence by Ukraine in December, it became clear that these structures which                       
 presumed the existence of a Union would not survive. On 8 December, Russia, Belarus and                   
 Ukraine signed an agreement in Minsk creating a Commonwealth of Independent States                        
 which was later joined by the Republic of Armenia, Moldova, Azerbaijan, Uzbekistan,                       
 Tadjikistan, Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan and Kirghizstan on 21 December at the Alma Ata                      
 Summit.                                                                                                   
                                                                                                           
 The Commonwealth leaders have been engaged in discussing issues of mutual interest,                       
 viz, defence policy, future of strategic weapons, economic reforms, foreign policy,                       
 social policies, etc. They have stressed that they wo uld not like to recreate the                        
 Centre. Instead, they would like to resolve these iss ues in the spirit of mutual                         
 cooperation mid accommodation but preserving at the same time their independence and                      
 sovereignty. The Commonwealth has been formaly declared to be neither a State nor a                       
 Superstate. Its exact shape and indentity is yet to develop.                                              
                                                                                                           
 During the year, developments of far-reaching importance took place in the different                      
 Republics. The actions of their governments and leaders were directe d at reassertion                     
 of their independence and sovereignty. Direct Presidential elections, changes in the                      
 structure of the political parties and movements, religious revivalism in some                            
 Republics and opening to the outside world were the characteristic features of the                        
 developments in the Republics.                                                                            
                                                                                                           
 The economic situation in the different Republics deteriorated. The Republics reacted                     
 by resorting to concluding mutually beneficial agreements with other Republics and                        
 countries. There was also a distinct accent on market - oriented economic reforms,                        
 although the exact method and pace of making this transition continue to be debated.                      
                                                                                                           
 India's response to the developments in the erstwhile Soviet Union was in keeping,                        
 inter alia, with her geopolitical, strategic and economic imperatives. India has in the                   
 past had wideranging and intensive cooperation with different Republics under the                         
 overall umbrella of Indo-Soviet cooperation. The Government thus undertook the task of                    
 disaggregating, Republic-wise, Indo-Soviet ties.                                                          
                                                                                                           
 In September, India recognized the independence of the three Baltic States. In                            
 December, India positively assessed the proposed Commonwealth of Independent States and                   
 accorded diplomatic recognition to all the Republics of the former Soviet Union. It is                    
 intended to establish diplomatic relations with all 15 Republics. Accordingly, it was                     
 decided to concurrently accredit India's Ambassador in Helsinki to Estonia, India's                       
 Ambassador in Stockholm to Latvia and India's Ambassador in Warsaw to Lithuania. A                        
 decision was also taken to open, at this stage, new Embassies in Ukraine, Kazakhstan,                     
 Belarus and upgrade India's Consulate General in Tashkent (Uzbekistan) and to open                        
 Consulates/CGs in Vladivostok and St. Petersburg. For the present, the other countries,                   
 viz, Armenia, Georgia, Moldova, Azerbaijan, Kirghizstan, Turkmenistan and Tadjikistan                     
 would be covered by concurrent accreditation.                                                             
                                                                                                           
 President Karimov of the Republic of Uzbekistan paid an official visit to India from 17                   
 to 19 August. India signed two framework agreements with Uzbekistan on economic and                       
 cultural cooperation. This was followed by visits o f a senior official of the Ministry                   
 of External Affairs and of a commercial delegation to the Republics if Uzbekistan.                        
 Kazakhstan and Kirghizstan to explore the possibilities of direct, inter alia, economic                   
 and cultural ties wit h these Republics. A trade protocol between India and Uzbekistan                    
 was signed in October.                                                                                    
                                                                                                           
 President Nazarbaev of Kazakhstan, on his first State visit abroad since th e                             
 declaration of Kazakh independence, chose to visit India on 21 and 22 February at the                     
 invitation of the Prime Minsiter. During the visit, India and Kazakhsta n signed 5                        
 Agreements, including a Declaration on Basic Principles of Inter- Governmental                            
 Relations, Diplomatic and Consular Protocols, and two framework agreements in the                         
 cultural and economic spheres. In addition, an agreement between the State Bank of                        
 India and the Kazakh Foreign Economic Relations Bank concerning correspondent relations                   
 was also signed. A trade delegation from Kazakhstan is expected to visit India shortly.                   
                                                                                                           
 A goodwill inter-Ministerial delegation led by the Minister of State for Ci vil                           
 Supplies, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution, Shri Kamaluddin Ahmed visited                         
 Azerbaijan from 26 February to 1 March. During the visit, he called on President                          
 Mutalibov and other Ministers. Two Protocols were signed on the establishment of                          
 diplomatic and consular relations. Draft framework agreements on economic and cultural                    
 cooperation were handed over for consideration of the Government of Azerbaijan.                           
                                                                                                           
 India also offered technical assistance to the Central Asian Republics. Already 12                        
 trainees from Kazakhstan, Kirghizstan, Tadjikstan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan are                        
 undergoing training in India in different fields.                                                         
                                                                                                           
 Drafts of framework for economic and cultural agreements were sent for consideration to                   
 the Republics of Kirghizstan, Turkmenistan and Tadjikistan. The Government also                           
 received proposals for political, economic and cultural exchanges from different                          
 Republics. India is very keen to enter into detailed cooperation arrangements based on                    
 mutual benefit with all the Republics of the erstwhile USSR.                                              
                                                                                                           
 Kirghizstan, Tadjikistan, Turkmenistan, Azerbaijan and Uzbekistan were admitted to the                    
 Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO) at its first summit held in Teheran on 16 and                     
 17 February. It may be recalled that in 1985, the ECO replaced the former Regional                        
 Cooperation for Development (RCD) grouping founded by Iran, Turkey and Pakistan some 27                   
 years ago. The ECO is primarily an economic grouping aimed at forging stronger economic                   
 and commercial tics amongst the member-States and also with the outside world. The 5                      
 Caspian Sea littoral States (Iran, Russia, Azerbaijan, Turkmenistan and Kazakhstan)                       
 formed the Caspian Sea Cooperation Organization in Tehran on 19 February to reportedly                    
 "better handle the geopolitical situation in the region" .                                                
                                                                                                           
 It is also understood that cooperation between these States would have an economic                        
 foundation with a focus on shipping, fisheries, environmental protection and oil                          
 exploration.                                                                                              
                                                                                                           
 India is carefully monitoring these fast-moving developments and has undertaken a                         
 number of initiatives to establish various linkages with the above - mentioned                            
 Republics of the former USSR with which we have historical, cultural and commercial                       
 contacts of long-standing.                                                                                
                                                                                                           
 The Minister for External Affairs visited Moscow from 14 to 19 November. He held                          
 extensive, and useful discussions with the Soviet and Russian leaders o n International                   
 and bilateral issues. His meetings with President Yeltsin and oth er senior leaders of                    
 the Russian Federation were extremely useful as they laid the foundation for further                      
 development of relation between India and the Russian Federation, The Russian                             
 leadership conveyed that it attached priority to development of multi-sectoral ties                       
 with India. President Yeltsin also accepted Prime Minister's invitation to visit India.                   
                                                                                                           
 The Prime Minister met President Yeltsin in New York on 31 January. Russian Deputy                        
 Prime Minister Burbulis is expected to come to India in the near future for discussions                   
 on economic and other related issues. President Yeltsin's visit is expected in the                        
 Autumn/Winter of 1992.                                                                                    
                                                                                                           
 The Prime Minister also met President Kravchuk of the Ukraine in Davos on Feb 02, 1992.                   
 The two leaders discussed issues relating to further development of relations in                          
 diverse fields and expressed the intention to devel op close relations with each other.                   
 An early visit to India by the Ukrainian President is expected.                                           
                                                                                                           
 Invitations have been extended to the Presidents of Belarus, Ukraine, Kirghizstan,                        
 Tadjikistan and Turkmenistan to visit India. The Government intend to also invite the                     
 leaders of the other Republics. Foreign Secretary led a high-level multi-sectoral team                    
 of officials to R ussia and Ukraine in January 1992. The visit provided a useful                          
 opportunity for gaini ng a first hand assessment of the developing situation in Russia                    
 and Ukraine and t o initiate the process of drawing up cooperation arrangements in                        
 diverse sectors with a view to ensuring continuity in bilateral relationships and for                     
 laying th e foundation of long term relationships with these countries. A new Treaty on                   
 Friendship and Cooperation with Russia has been finalized. A Treaty on Friendship and                     
 Cooperation with Ukraine is also under consideration. Russia and Ukraine, the two                         
 largest Republics of the erstwhile Soviet Union, together account for an extremely high                   
 proportion of India's interchanges in diverse fie lds of activity with the erstwhile                      
 USSR.                                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 India offered humanitarian assistance to the Russian Federation amounting to Rs 15                        
 crores. The purpose was to offer some succor to those sections of the population which                    
 have been adversely affected by the dislocation of economic activities following the                      
 recent political and economic changes in the erstwhile USSR. The amount is to be used                     
 to supply urgently required items including baby food, rice, standard medicines,                          
 including sulphur drugs and antibiotics.                                                                  
                                                                                                           
 India also contributed an amount equivalent to US$ 250,000 for assistance to those                        
 affected by the Chernobyl disaster. This pledge was made in the context of the United                     
 Nations' efforts towards this end.                                                                        
 A Russian delegation visited India from 14 to 22 February and finalized the first-ever                    
 India-Russia Trade Protocol. The Protocol is valid for 1992. The Russian Coal Mining                      
 Engineer, My Sergei Grishchenko was kidnapped and reportedly killed by ULFA extremists                    
 in Assam. This was a matter of great concern and distress to the Government.                              
                                                                                                           
 Ea stern Europe India's traditionally friendly relations with Hungary received a strong                   
 positive impetus with the visit of President of Hungary, Dr Arpad Goncz, in April 1991.                   
 The visit reflected the desire on the part of both countries to ta ke advantage of the                    
 opportunities opened up by democratisation and economic liberalisation in Hungary to                      
 strengthen and further develop existing tics, inte r alia, of solidarity, culture,                        
 trade and economic cooperation which have been nurtured over the years. Trade, which is                   
 conducted in hard currency, continued to show a favourable trend, while new                               
 possibilities for cooperation with a high potential were explored, laying the basis for                   
 a further consolidation of bilate ral relations. The 10th Joint Business Council                          
 session, held in India from 21 to 2 3 January 1992, was well received by the business                     
 community in Bombay and Delhi. Political contacts are to be furthered by a visit to                       
 India of a Hungari an parliamentary delegation in 1992.                                                   
                                                                                                           
 Relations between India and Poland have been traditionally friendly and cooperative.                      
 The year 1991 witnessed major political developments reflecting a phase of adjustment                     
 and transition as a result of the process of democratisatio n and radical economic                        
 reforms that were initiated by Poland in the last couple o f years. The first fully                       
 free parliamentary elections held on 27 October 1991 resulted in it parliament in which                   
 no single party or coalition could claim a majority. In spite of this political                           
 uncertainty, the desire of both sides to maintain high-level political contacts was                       
 reflected in a meeting of the Foreig n Ministers of Poland and India in New York in                       
 September and preparations for a visit of President Walesa to India some time in 1992.                    
 Trade was affacted by th e switch over from rupee to hard currency. At the same time,                     
 efforts were directed at stimulating the business sector in both countries to explore                     
 new opportunities for trade and economic cooperation with a view to sustaining and                        
 developing the existing basis for economic cooperation. Wide-ranging programme on                         
 scientific cooperation between the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research and                      
 the Polish Academy of Sciences was finalized in New Delhi for the years 1992-94.                          
                                                                                                           
 Bulgaria has been no exception to the shift to democracy in Eastern Europe. The second                    
 democratic elections were held on 13 October 1991 in a peaceful manner, with the Union                    
 of Democratic Forces (UDF) forming the Government headed by Mr Filip Dimitrov.                            
 Subsequently, President Zhelev was re-elected after the second round of voting in                         
 mid-January 1992.                                                                                         
                                                                                                           
 Relations between India and Bulgaria continued to be warm and friendly during the year.                   
 The now Bulgarian Government has reiterated its desire to consolidate the relations                       
 further.                                                                                                  
                                                                                                           
 Romania maintained the momentum of political and economic reforms, introduced in the                      
 wake of December 1989 events and the general elections of May 1990. The highlights of                     
 reforms in 1991 were the adoption of a new Constitution, and of privatisation of                          
 agricultural land and small industries. A programme of privatisation of some of the                       
 state-owned enterprises, in 1992, has been drawn up.                                                      
                                                                                                           
 Indo-Romanian relations received a boost during the year with the official visit of the                   
 Romanian Foreign Minister, Mr Adrian Nastase to India from 30 October to 1 November                       
 1991. This was the first visit of a Romanian Foreign Minister to India in ten years and                   
 also the first since the momentous events of December 1989. It was a successful and                       
 useful visit. The meeting of Indo- Romanian Joint Commission was held in New Delhi from                   
 18 to 20 December 1991 in which both sides discussed new avenues of diversifying and                      
 further strengthening economic cooperation. Substantial progress has taken place in                       
 discussion for signing a programme of cultural exchanges between the two countries.                       
                                                                                                           
 A Romanian diplomat, Mr Liviu Radu, was kidnapped by terrorists in New Delhi on 9                         
 October 1991. This evoked great anxiety and concern for his safety and well-being. As a                   
 result of intensive efforts made by the Government of India, Mr Radu was released on 26                   
 November after 48 days of captivity. The Czech and Slovak Federal Republic adopted both                   
 economic and political reforms. While in the political arena, the scene was dominated                     
 by th e process of drawing up a new Constitution and the debate on redefinition of                        
 federal and repbulican powers, in the economic sector, price decontrols were introduced                   
 and the pace of privatisation of agriculture and industry hastened. Inviting foreign                      
 investment was accorded priority on the economic agenda. The country has drawn up an                      
 ambitious programme of privatising all state enterprise s over the next few years.                        
 These reforms have received a boost with the signing of an Association Agreement with                     
 the European Community in December 1991. Relations between India and the Czech and                        
 Slovak Federal Republic remained close and friendly. Both countries negotiated a Plan                     
 of Cooperation in the fie ld of health, which is expected to be initiated soon. Trade                     
 Plan for 1992, betwee n the two countries, under the Trade and Payment Agreement was                      
 negotiated in November 1991. A Czech and Slovak defence delegation led by the Chief of                    
 General Staff visited India in December 1991, and the meeting of the Joint Commission                     
 is likely to be held in March 1992. Bilateral exchanges, covering artists,                                
 academicians, museums, archaeology and other fields took place under the cultural                         
 exchange programme. An exhibition of Indian handicrafts was organized in Prague. In the                   
 field for science and technology, there was a regu lar exchange of scientists between                     
 the two-countries under the agreement between the CSIR and the Czechoslovak Academy of                    
 Sciences.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                           
 Yugoslavia faced a severe political and constitutional crisis during the y ear. Two of                    
 its republics, Slovenia and Croatia, declared independence on 26 June 1991. Efforts by                    
 the European Community countries, under a mandate from the                                                
                                                                                                           
 Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, and through the mechanism of a                          
 Conference on Yugoslavia, to arrive at a political settlement have been under way. The                    
 United Nations Security Council, of which India is currently a member, has also adopted                   
 five Resolutions 713, 721, 724, 727 and 740 relating, inter alia, to imposing an arms                     
 embargo against Yugoslavia, the possible deployment of UN peace-keeping forces and                        
 sending UN military personnel to monitor the ceasefire there. The independence of the                     
 republics of Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina and Macedonia has been recognized by                   
 a varying number of countries.                                                                            
                                                                                                           
 The situation in Yugoslavia, with whom India has traditionally friendly relations,                        
 bilaterally as well as in the non-aligned movement, remains a cause for distress and                      
 concern to India. India had expressed herself in favour of a restructured federal                         
 framework. The restructuring should be done in a peaceful and democratic manner to be                     
 worked out primarily between the different republics and peoples of Yugoslavia. India                     
 adopted a principled and constructive approach in the UN Security Council. India voted                    
 for all the resolutions on Yugoslavia. India's position was that this essentially being                   
 an internal crisis of Yugoslavia, a discussion on this subjec t in the Security Council                   
 could be undertaken only after a formal request from Yugoslavia. This condition was met                   
 as Yugoslavia formally requested the President of the Security Council to discuss the                     
 Yugoslav situation, Yugoslavia, too, supported the provisions of the Security Council                     
 resolutions. However, India did not favour the moves by some countries attempting to                      
 impose an oil embargo against Yugoslavia as this move would have severely and adversely                   
 affected the Yugoslav people who are already undergoing the suffering of a civil war.                     
                                                                                                           
 India signed an agreement for cooperation in the field of tourism, and a sports                           
 protocol with Yugoslavia in April 1991. The Minister of International Cooperation of                      
 the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina visited India, at the invitation of the ICCR in                        
 August 1991.                                                                                              
 Western Europe                                                                                            
                                                                                     Top                   
 The Maastricht Summit meeting on 9 and 10 December 1991 was a watershed in the history                    
 of Europe in the post-World War II era. The European Community has embarked on a new                      
 chapter in its history with its decision to move towards the creation of a political,                     
 economic and monetary union. A single currency (ECU) will be introduced and a European                    
 Central Bank established latest by 1999. The EC has expressed its intention to steadily                   
 move towards a common foreign and security policy. At the same time the EC and EFTA                       
 countries have agreed to create by 1993 a European Economic Area comprising a large                       
 market of 380 million people.                                                                             
                                                                                                           
 With these developments, the EC, which is already India's largest trading and economic                    
 partner, offers additional opportunities for even closer cooperation with India. During                   
 the year under review, India upgraded its relations with the EC and maintained active                     
 contact with the individual members of the Community. An intensive political dialogue                     
 with the European countries was maintained through frequent high-level visits and                         
 exchanges. European Governments, business and industry reacted positively to the new                      
 economic policy and liberalisation measures initiated by the new Government. Many                         
 business and industrial delegations were exchanged between India and the European                         
 countries to explore and exploit the new opportunities for trade and investment.                          
 Germany remains India's largest trading and economic partner in Europe. The President                     
 of Germany, Dr Richard von Weizsaecker, paid a visit to India in February-March 1991.                     
 The successful visit of the Prime Minister to Germany in September 1991 underlined the                    
 importance of the growing Indo-German bilateral relations and gave a fresh impetus to                     
 Indo-German cooperation. Durin g the visit, the Festival of India in Germany was                          
 inaugurated by the Prime Minister and Chancellor Kohl. It was decided to set up an                        
 Indo-German Consultative Group to advise both the Governments regarding upgrading the                     
 bilateral relations in various fields in a long-term perspective. Minister for External                   
 Affairs paid a visit to Germany in September 1991. The Indo-German Joint Commission                       
 meeting and the visit of the German Minister of Economics in November 1991 accompanised                   
 by a high-level business delegation have opened new perspectives for strengthening                        
 bilateral economic ties.                                                                                  
                                                                                                           
 Indo-UK relations were marked by growing understanding and cooperation in diverse                         
 fields. It is a matter of considerable satisfaction that UK has bee n closely                             
 cooperating with India in countering terrorism and has taken stern acti on against                        
 terrorists based in UK. The Minister of State for External Affairs vis ited UK in                         
 November 1991. Matters relating to the conclusion of the Extradition Treaty and                           
 Agreement for the tracing, restraint and confiscation of the proceed s and instruments                    
 of crime and terrorist funds with UK were discussed in depth during the visit of the                      
 British Home Secretary in January 1992. The Foreign Secretary of UK visited India also                    
 in January 1992 and had extensive and fruitf ul discussions with Indian leaders on a                      
 wide range of issues. The Prince and Princess of Wales visited India in February 1992.                    
 India and UK agreed to institutionalise political dialogue at different levels.                           
                                                                                                           
 Prime Minister's transit visit to France in November 1991 and his meeting with                            
 President Mitterand brought about better understanding and opened promising                               
 prospectives for strengthening multi-faceted cooperation with France. Indo-French                         
 Foreign Secretary level consultations were held in May 1991 in New Delhi. The Minister                    
 of State for External Affairs visited France in October 199 1. Indo-French trade and                      
 economic coperation was reviewed in the Joint Commission meeting held in Paris in                         
 November 1991.                                                                                            
                                                                                                           
 Relations with Portugal improved during this period. During the visit of the Minister                     
 of State for External Affairs, Shri Eduardo Faleiro, to Portugal in Ju ly 1991 an                         
 agreement was signed on the return of the gold ornaments which got shifted to Portugal                    
 after the liberation of Goa in 1961. The gold ornaments ha ve since been returned to                      
 India. The President of Portugal paid a State visit to India in January 1992, the first                   
 such visit by a Portuguese President. He was the Chief Guest at India's Republic Day                      
 celebrations.                                                                                             
                                                                                                           
 The President of Malta paid a State visit to India in January 1992. He ha d friendly                      
 and useful discussions with the President, Prime Minister and other Indian leaders. A                     
 Cultural Agreement and an Agreement on Economic, Industrial, Scientific and                               
 Technological Cooperation were signed during the vis it.                                                  
                                                                                                           
 A European Parliamentary delegation visited India in November 1991. The Indo-EC Joint                     
 Commission meeting was held in New Delhi in November 1991. Earlier Mr Andriessen, Vice                    
 President of EC, visited India in October 1991 and had extensive discussions with                         
 Commerce Minister on multilateral trade issues. An Indo-EC Business Forum is being                        
 established for regular interaction between the businessmen and the Government of India                   
 with the EC and the European business leaders. This will be inaugurated by Mr A                           
 Matutes, Commissioner EC, in March 1992 in New Delhi. The next round of Indo-EC Troika                    
 talks are to be held in March 1992.                                                                       
 1991                                                                                                      
 The Americas                                                                                              
                                                                                     Top                   
 North America                                                                                             
                                                                                                           
 The end of the Cold War, which brought about a qualitative change in the international                    
 situation, has had a positive impact on Indo-US relations and has contributed to the                      
 consolidation and strengthening of bilateral ties.                                                        
                                                                                                           
 Contacts at political and official levels have been frequent. Vice Presi dent Dan                         
 Quayle attended the funeral of former Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi. Among other                      
 prominent visitors were Senators Daniel P Moynihan and Larry Pressler, Congressman                        
 James Mcdermott, former Senator Charles Percy, Congressman Mike Kopetski and the US                       
 Trade Representative, Ms Carla Hills.                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 The Minister for External Affairs visited New York for the annual session of the UN                       
 General Assembly. He met Secretary of State James Baker for discussions on bilateral                      
 and multilateral issues. He also visited Chicago for discussions with businessmen and                     
 non-resident Indians. The Ministers of State for Commerce and Finance also visited the                    
 USA for bilateral trade talks and for the promotion of investment from NRIs.                              
                                                                                                           
 The Prime Minister met President George Bush at New York during the summit meeting of                     
 the members of the UN Security Council. At the official level, there were visits by the                   
 US Under Secretary of St ate for International Security Affairs, the Permanent                            
 Representative to the UN, the Assistant Secretary of State for Consular Affairs and the                   
 Director of the US Information Agency. The US Deputy Assistant Secretaries of State for                   
 Consular Affairs and Near East and South Asia Bureau were also among the visitors.                        
                                                                                                           
 On the defence side there was an exchange of high level visits. The Commanding General,                   
 US Army Pacific Command and the US Commander-in- Chief, Pacific Command visited India.                    
 The US Chief of Naval Operations returned the visit of Indian Chief of Naval Staff.                       
 Among the other noteworthy visits was that of a team from the US National War College.                    
 India's Chief of Army Staff visited the USA in August 1991. Indo-US cooperation in the                    
 field of defence technologies have progressed mainly in the Light Combat Aircraft                         
 Project. Commercial purchases of defence items from the USA have continued but there                      
 has been no major acquisition of military hardware of US origin. In the-fields of                         
 training and other professional military interaction, cooperation between the Armed                       
 Forces of the two countries has expanded to some extent.                                                  
                                                                                                           
 The annual review meeting of the Indo-US Memorandum of Understanding on transfer of                       
 high-technology was held in Delhi. The meeting covered a whole range of issues and                        
 sought to smoothen the flow of high-technology trade between the two countries.                           
 However, US concerns on nuclear and missile proliferation have impeded the trade in                       
 high technology items. Negotiations on the upgradation of the Supercomputer at the                        
 National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting, Department of Science and                           
 Technology at Delhi have been concluded. Negotiations for the second Supercomputer for                    
 the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore are continuing. Indo-US cooperation in joint                   
 projects in the agricultural and medical sciences have continued satisfactorily .                         
                                                                                                           
 The USA is India's largest trading partner with total trade turnover in 1990-91 of                        
 around Rs 10,040 crores. India has had a favourable balance of trad e over several                        
 years. This trend was reversed in 1990-91. Indian exports were o f the order of Rs                        
 4,796.48 crores and imports around Rs 5,244.64 crores. Trade protectionism in the USA                     
 and stringent health and sanitary regulations have inhibited faster growth of Indian                      
 exports to the USA.                                                                                       
                                                                                                           
 In April 1991, the US Government named India as "Priority Foreign Country" under the                      
 so-called Special 301 provision of a US Trade Act. The USA cited India's laws on                          
 Intellectual Property Rights, such as patents, copyrights and trade marks as                              
 inadequate. Consultations have been held with the USA in the context of the                               
 multilateral negotiations on these issues at the Uruguay Round of GATT. While there has                   
 been a narrowing of differences on copyrights, trade marks, etc discussions have                          
 continued to seek mutually acceptable solutions on certain aspects of patents.                            
                                                                                                           
 The USA is an important source of investments and technology for India. The liberalised                   
 policies on foreign investment and technology tie-ups have give n a new impetus to                        
 Indo-US cooperation in these areas. Several important investment proposals from US                        
 companies have been approved by the Government. In 1991, investment proposals worth Rs                    
 186 crores were approved. The US attitude in multilateral financial institutions                          
 towards India's req uest for assistance to tide over the temporary adverse balance of                     
 payments situation has been sympathetic and helpful. Bilateral US assistance to India                     
 is marginal , consisting mainly of food aid and some funding for military exchanges and                   
 training.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                           
 Indo-Canadian relations have been traditionally friendly. The Government 's new                           
 economic policies have given a fresh impetus in strengthening the economic ties between                   
 the two countries.                                                                                        
                                                                                                           
 The Canadian Secretary of State for External Affairs visited India twice. She                             
 represented Canada at the funeral of former Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi, in May                     
 1991, and chaired the meeting of the Commonwealth Committee of the Foreign Ministers on                   
 South Africa held in Delhi in September 1991. A Canadian Parliamentary delegation                         
 participated in the 37th Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference at New Delhi.                              
                                                                                                           
 The Minister for External Affairs visited Canada in October 1991 for bilateral talks.                     
 The Prime Ministers of the two countries met at the Harare Commonwealth Heads of                          
 Government Meeting (CHOGM) in October 1991.                                                               
                                                                                                           
 The Indo-Canadian Joint Business Council met in September 1991 to review trade and                        
 economic relations in the aftermath of new economic policies on investments and                           
 technology cooperation.                                                                                   
                                                                                                           
 India has appreciated the stand taken by Canada in multilateral financial institutions                    
 on India's request for loans. The total trade turnover with Canada has gone up to                         
 around Rs 840 crores in 1990-91. India's exports have increased marginally to around Rs                   
 280.875 crores, whereas imports have been relatively higher at around Rs 559.231 crores                   
 , leaving an adverse trade balance of around Rs 278.356 crores. India's adverse trade                     
 balance has been a consistent trend in Indo-Canadian trade. Renewed efforts to address                    
 and rectify this trend have been made. Quota restrictions o n certain exports from                        
 India and protectionist measures are factors inhibiting bilateral trade.                                  
                                                                                                           
 Canadian investments in India are minimal. Canada is interested in participating in                       
 infrastructural projects in India in the fields of Power, Telecommunications and Urban                    
 Transport Systems.                                                                                        
                                                                                                           
 An Indo-Canadian Memorandum of Understanding on Cultural Exchanges is under                               
 negotiation. The new building of the Shastri Indo-Canadian Institute was inaugurated by                   
 the President in Delhi. To mark the occasion, an academic seminar was held at Simla to                    
 discuss educational and cultural issues. Security cooperation with Canada in tackling                     
 terrorism has been satisfactory.                                                                          
                                                                                                           
 Three members of the Canadian Parliament visited Punjab in January 1992 to see for                        
 themselves about the alleged human rights violation by Indian securi ty forces. During                    
 their stay, they had meetings with Central and Punjab Government officials in New                         
 Delhi, Chandigarh and Amritsar. They also met other private individuals and groups.                       
 Central and South America and the Caribbean                                                               
                                                                                     Top                   
 During the period under review, India's relations with the countries in Latin America                     
 and the Caribbean progressed satisfactorily. In order to intensi fy her relations with                    
 these countries, India interacted with them through international organizations, like                     
 the Commonwealth and the Non-Aligned Movement and at various international fora as well                   
 as at bilateral levels throu gh exchange of visits and delegations in diverse areas of                    
 mutual interest.                                                                                          
                                                                                                           
 Prospects of cooperation in defence were explored by the then Chief of Air Staff of                       
 India during his visit to Argentina and Brazil in April 1991, the firs t ever visit by                    
 an Indian Air Chief to Latin America.                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 Following the grant of permanent observer status to India in May 1991 by the                              
 Organization of American States (OAS), India attended for the first time the OAS                          
 General Assembly session in Chile in June 1991. India's association as the 27th                           
 permanent observer to the 35-member body with headquarters at Washington will provide                     
 an opportunity for enhancing the political and economic links with the region.                            
                                                                                                           
 Dr Reinaldo Figuerado, Venezuela's former Foreign Minister, visited New Delhi in June                     
 1991 as President's special envoy to convey that country's condolences on the sad                         
 demise of the former Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi. He called on the President and                    
 had also meeting with the Foreign Secretary. The Panamanian Foreign Minister deeply                       
 appreciated Indian consignment of medicines and medical equipment handed over to him in                   
 July 1991 for the relief of earthquake victims in Panama.                                                 
                                                                                                           
 Guyana and Nicaragua closed down their Missions in New Delhi due to resources                             
 constraints but assured India of reopening them when their economic situation improved.                   
                                                                                                           
 Minister for External Affairs received Dr Cedric Grant, Special Adviser on Foreign                        
 Affairs to the President of Guyana, who brought a written message from his President                      
 for Prime Minister. The Special Adviser was in New Delhi to attend the meeting of the                     
 Commonwealth Committee of Foreign Ministers on Southern Africa held on 13 and Sep 14,                     
 1991. Trinidad and Tobago's Junior Minister of Tourism and Industry led his country's                     
 delegation to the 37t h Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference held in New Delhi from 23                   
 to 29 September 1991.                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 Argentina's withdrawal from the Non-Aligned Movement on 19 September 1991 reduces the                     
 number of member-states from the Latin America and the Caribbean to 16. However,                          
 Chile's participation in the Movement after many years and the admission of Guatemala                     
 and Honduras as observers demonstrated the region's continuing interest in the                            
 Movement.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                           
 While in New York in September/October 1991 for the UN General Assembly session, the                      
 Minister for External Affairs met with the Foreign Ministers of Colombia and Cuba. At                     
 the Harare CHOGM in October 1991, the Prime Minister had talks with the Prime Minister                    
 of Trinidad and Tobago.                                                                                   
                                                                                                           
 Four countries from the region, viz Argentina, Cuba, Mexico and Peru were represented                     
 in the International Conference on Hispanism in the 20h Century organized in New Delhi                    
 in November 1991 by the Jawaharlal Nehru University in collaboration with the Indian                      
 Council for Cultural Relations. Pr of. Rene Maria Cura (Padma Shree) of Argentina was                     
 among the 30 eminent foreign scholars.                                                                    
                                                                                                           
 The Prime Minister accompanied by the Minister for External Affairs attended the second                   
 G-15 Summit in Caracas in November 1991. His bilateral discussions with President Perez                   
 of Venezuela and President Salinas of Mexico covered various issues of common interest.                   
                                                                                                           
 The Prime Minister in his meeting with the Indian businessmen who were in Caracas                         
 during the G-15 Summit highlighted the prospects for Indian exports and investments in                    
 Latin America and the Caribbean and assured them of the Government's encouragement and                    
 support to new ventures.                                                                                  
                                                                                                           
 Cuba's Foreign Minister, Mr Isidoro Malmierca, called on the Prime Minister and the                       
 Minister for External Affairs when he visited New Delhi from 16 to 26 December 1991. He                   
 also had meetings with the Commerce Minister and the Minister of State for External                       
 Affairs. Views were exchanged on the latest developments in the international scene,                      
 especially the transformations in the former Soviet Union.                                                
                                                                                                           
 A 6 member delegation from the Engineering Exports Promotion Council undertook an                         
 export promotion tour of Mexico, Venezuela and Brazil. Measures for improving bilateral                   
 and economic relations with Argentina were discussed at the second meeting of the                         
 Indo-Argentine Joint Trade Committee held in Buenos Aires in August 1991.                                 
                                                                                                           
 Indian exports to the region are on the rise but the imports are increasing at a higher                   
 rate. In 1990-91, India's exports to the region accounted for 0.6 per cent of her total                   
 exports while imports from the region were 2.44 per cent of t he total imports.                           
                                                                                                           
 The first ever cultural agreement between India and Colombia was signed in New Delhi in                   
 August 1991. Peru's Vice President inaugurated the "Images of India" exhibition at the                    
 National Museum in Lima. Cultural links with the Caribbean countries were maintained                      
 through the two Indian Cultural Centres in Guyana and Suriname. A project for                             
 constructing a similar Centre in Trinidad and Tobago was set in motion when their                         
 Minister of External Affairs and International Trade and Indian High Commissioner                         
 signed the requisite protocol in Port of Spain on 29 November 1991. The Minister                          
 described the event as "a significant and historical day" in his country's cultural                       
 life.                                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 Enhancing India's ties with the countries in the region through various academic and                      
 cultural programmes will be a major objective of the recently reconstituted ICCR                          
 Advisory Panel for Latin America and the Caribbean.                                                       
 1991                                                                                                      
 United Nations And International Conferences                                                              
                                                                                     Top                   
 The deliberations and decisions of the United Nations (UN) in 1991 were wide-ranging,                     
 substantive, and often precedent setting. The reinvigoration of the UN and its                            
 energetic activities were, at one level, reflective of the ma jor changes in the world,                   
 at the same time, at another level, these UN activities themselves influenced changes                     
 in many parts of the world. During the year, fou r new UN Peace-Keeping Operations were                   
 launched. UN was involved in conflict resolution and peace keeping in diverse                             
 situations, such as Iraq-Kuwait crisis, Central America, Cambodia, Yugoslavia, Western                    
 Sahara and Angola.                                                                                        
                                                                                                           
 Apart from the heavy political agenda and significant activities in the maintenance of                    
 international peace and security, UN focussed on diverse issues such as development,                      
 human rights, economic issues, environment and drug abuse control. The issue of                           
 restructuring of the UN system, rationalisation of the work of the UN bodies and the UN                   
 Secretariat reforms were also discussed.                                                                  
                                                                                                           
 At the end of 1991, Dr Boutros Ghali of Egypt had been elected as Secretary-General of                    
 the UN, the first representative of Africa and the Arab world to assume this high                         
 office.                                                                                                   
                                                                                                           
 India continued to play an active and constructive role in multilateral for a,                            
 including the UN, the Non-Aligned Movement and the Commonwealth. India became a member                    
 of the Security Council of the UN for the period 1991-92 and in this capacity was                         
 actively engaged in the deliberations of the Council on a number of major political                       
 issues. India also urged an expansion in the membership of the Security Council to make                   
 it more representative as also to reflect the changing international realities.                           
                                                                                                           
 The Prime Minister, Shri Narasimha Rao, attended the unprecedented summit level meeting                   
 of the Security Council held on Jan 31, 1992. The theme of the meeting was "The                           
 responsibility of the Security Council in the maintenance of international peace and                      
 security". At the end of the meeting, the President of the Security Council read out a                    
 statement which referred to th e UN's role in peace making and peace keeping,                             
 collective security, disarmament and arms control. The leaders collectively agreed to                     
 further strengthen the ro le of the UN in carrying out its activities in accordance                       
 with the UN Charter. Th e Prime Minister's address at the meeting put across                              
 effectively the point of vie w of India, of the Non-aligned and developing countries on                   
 a number of global issues, and the role of the UN in addressing these issues. The Prime                   
 Minister led the Indian delegation to the Commonwealth Summit of in Harare, Zimbabwe.                     
 Pakistan's efforts to bring the Kashmir issue to the fore in the UN and other                             
 multilateral fora were effectively countered by India.                                                    
 Political Issues                                                                                          
                                                                                     Top                   
 The Gulf crisis was a major issue, which engaged the UN throughout 1991. Once the                         
 military action against Iraq was launched on 16 January 1991 with the objective of                        
 forcing a withdrawal from Kuwait in accordance with Security Council Resolutions, India                   
 supported the twin objectives of limiting the armed conflict and minimising human                         
 suffering. India's initiatives in the Security Council were aimed at ensuring that the                    
 Council was fully briefed on the military action and underscoring its role in bringing                    
 about a ceasefire and restoration of peace. India welcomed the liberation of Kuwait and                   
 restoration of its independence. Since then the Security Council has taken a series of                    
 innovative and far-reaching decisions which affect Iraq, the region, and other                            
 countries of the international community as well.                                                         
                                                                                                           
 The Sanctions against Iraq have continued as Iraq has not accepted all the Security                       
 Council Resolutions. India's approach has been to support all the efforts at creating                     
 conditions for lasting peace. At the same time, India has addressed the humanitarian                      
 aspects of the situation, including the plight of th e Iraqi civilians. India also                        
 called for remedial measures for countries adverse ly affected by the Sanctions.                          
                                                                                                           
 Initiatives on the Cambodian issue culminated in a comprehensive Peace Agreement signed                   
 in Paris on 23 October 1991. Since then the UN has begun preparations for a major                         
 deployment of UN personnel in Cambodia. The United Nations Advance Mission in Cambodia                    
 (UNAMIC) has been deployed, to which India has also made a contribution. India will                       
 also participate in the United Nations Transitional Authority for Cambodia (UNTAC), the                   
 authority which will help administer Cambodia in the interim period upto consitution of                   
 a new Government.                                                                                         
                                                                                                           
 The violent internal conflict in Yugoslavia has been a cause of concern. Towards the                      
 end of 1991, the UN endorsed in principle the idea of a UN Peace Keeping Force if                         
 conditions for a ceasefire were favourable. India's view is t hat any multilateral                        
 effort to promote peace should be undertaken in the context of a request and with the                     
 agreement of the Government of Yugoslavia and the concerned parties.                                      
                                                                                                           
 India maintained its consistent position of support for the 1971 Declara tion of the                      
 Indian Ocean as Zone of Peace. The adhoc committee on the Indian Ocean continued its                      
 deliberations on the convening of the proposed Conference on the Indian Ocean. However,                   
 the prospects for an early Conference remained uncertain since many Western and major                     
 maritime users of the Ocean continued to have reservations on participation. The                          
 General Assembly adopted a Resolution which reflected the Indian position that the                        
 cooperation and participation of the major powers was essential for the success of the                    
 Conference.                                                                                               
                                                                                                           
 The situation in West Asia, particularly Palestine, has remained an unresolved issue                      
 for long. India has supported a larger UN role in the US-USSR sponsored peace process                     
 which was launched in October 1991. India maintained her principled position of support                   
 to the cause of the Palestinian people, including their right to their homeland, as                       
 well as the recognition of the righ ts of all States in the region, including Palestine                   
 and Israel, to live in peace with in internationally recognized and secured boundaries.                   
 India's consistent position was given expression through her various statements,                          
 co-sponsorships and votes in the General Assembly, Security Council and other fora.                       
                                                                                                           
 The consideration by the UN of issues relating to South Africa and the apartheid took                     
 note of the rapid changes in the situation. Though several lega l pillars of the                          
 apartheid had been dismantled, the consequences of the apartheid in the form of                           
 socio-economic inequities continue and need to be redressed. Th e UN adopted a                            
 resolution for selective removal of people to people sanctions against South Africa,                      
 but continuing trade, financial and military sanctions ti ll such time as further                         
 progress is achieved towards the establishment of non-raci al and democratic South                        
 Africa. India continued to play an active role in the UN Special Committee against the                    
 apartheid.                                                                                                
                                                                                                           
 The UN involvement in finding a durable settlement to the conflict in Afghanistan                         
 gathered momentum as UNSG sought to reconcile differences between the various parties.                    
 The General Assembly adopted a Resolution on Afghanistan, as in previous years.                           
                                                                                                           
 There was some forward movement on the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Seas                   
 (UNCLOS). During the year, there were detailed discussions on possible amendments which                   
 would enable the US and some industrialised countries to become members of the                            
 Convention. The US, which had all along voted against the Resolution on UNCLOS, changed                   
 its vote to abstention. India played a significant role in the informal discussions as                    
 als o in the negotiations prior to voting in the UNGA.                                                    
                                                                                                           
 One important issue during the year was the initiative in the General Assembly to                         
 revoke a Resolution passed in 1975 equating Zionism with Racism. The revocation of the                    
 determination was approved with a large majority. In keeping with her position that it                    
 is certain policies and practices attributed to Zionism which are discriminatory, and                     
 in the hope and expectation that this would remove an obstacle in the path to peace in                    
 West Asia and facilitate more active role for the UN in the peace process, India voted                    
 for the proposal. India welcomed the admission of North and South Koreas to the UN, as                    
 also the membership of the three Baltic States, the Marshall Islands and the Federated                    
 States of Micronesia. In the wake of the collapse of the USSR and the emergence of                        
 Commonwealth of Independent States, the Russian Federation has assumed the duties and                     
 obligations of the erstwhile USSR, including permanent membership of the Security                         
 Council.                                                                                                  
 Disarmament Issues                                                                                        
                                                                                     Top                   
 During 1991, India continued to play a leading role in the three main multilateral                        
 disarmament fora, viz. the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, the UN Disarmament                        
 Commission and the First Committee of the UN General Assembly. In addition, India also                    
 made significant contributions at the 3rd Biological Weapons Review Conference held at                    
 Geneva from 9 to 27 September 1991.                                                                       
                                                                                                           
 The Indian approach to disarmament continued to be guided by the basic philosophy that                    
 in the nuclear age and especially after the end of the cold war , disarmament measures                    
 should be taken in a time bound manner for the survival of mankind and for promoting                      
 development. India maintains the view that the priorities for disarmament are                             
 postulated in the consensus final document of th e 1978 first session devoted to                          
 disarmament. The Indian approach to disarmament is best reflected in the "Action Plan"                    
 for a "Nuclear-weapon free and Non- violent World Order" that was tabled at the Third                     
 Special Session of the General Assembly devoted to Disarmament and also in the                            
 Conference on Disarmament in the same year.                                                               
                                                                                                           
 In the Conference on Disarmament, which is the sole multilateral negotiating body,                        
 India played a leading role in the group of neutral and non- aligned countries                            
 otherwise known as G-21. The Indian delegation chaired the Ad hoc Committee on the                        
 crucial issue of "Nuclear Test Ban". An ad hoc Committee on this issue was                                
 re-established in the Conference on Disarmament after a gap of seven years at the end                     
 of 1990 and functioned during the three sessions of the Conference on Disarmament in                      
 1991. India continued to highligh t the urgent need for commencing negotiations for a                     
 Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, stressing that its scope should be consistent with what the                      
 preamble of the Partial Test Ban Treaty of 1963 seeks to achieve, viz. a total ban on                     
 all tests of nuclear weapons in all environments and for all time. India also                             
 coordinated t he G-21 position on the agenda item relating to the "cessation of the                       
 Nuclear Arms Race and Nuclear Disarmament". In the Ad hoc Committee on Chemical Weapons                   
 Convention India endeavoured to ensure that discriminatory and short-term measures are                    
 effectively rejected. India also continued to be associated with the meetings of the Ad                   
 hoc Group of Scientific Experts working towards the eleboration of a global seismic                       
 monitoring system for a comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and their related experiments.                      
 India was also represented in the meeting with the chemical industry held in June 1991                    
 at Geneva in the context of the chemical weapons negotiations.                                            
                                                                                                           
 At the 46th session of the UN General Assembly, India introduced two resolutions in the                   
 First Committee. The first resolution, entitled "Convention on the Prohibition of the                     
 use of Nuclear Weapons" highlights the threat which nuclear war poses to the life on                      
 the planet and the urgent task of preventing such a war. The resolution contains a                        
 draft convention which could form the basis for such an agreement. It enjoyed broad                       
 support with 112 countries votin g in its favour. The second initiative taken by India                    
 and Mexico following SSOD- II in 1982 for drawing the attention of the world community                    
 towards the important aspect of nuclear disarmament. The Resolution enjoyed wide-spread                   
 support with 119 countries voting in its favour.                                                          
                                                                                                           
 India participated actively in the deliberations of the UN Disarmament Commission,                        
 which met in New York from 22 April to 13 May 1991. The agenda included "Role of                          
 Science and Technology in the context of International Security, Disarmament and                          
 Related Fields", a topic based on the Indian sponsored resolution entitiled "Scientific                   
 and Technological Developments and Their Impact on International Security". At the 3rd                    
 Biological Weapons Review Conference held at Geneva in September 1991, India was                          
 elected as one of the Vice-Chairmen and introduced a number of proposals which were                       
 reflected in the final declaration and which helped in strengthening the role of the                      
 Biological Weapons Convention. Outside the three main multilateral disarmament fora,                      
 India continued to support disarmament initiatives taken by non-governmental                              
 organizations and participated actively in the meetings organized by them.                                
 Economic Issues                                                                                           
                                                                                     Top                   
 The year under review saw significant developments in the economic field. A number of                     
 important meetings took place, including the meeting of the Economic and Social                           
 Council, the negotiations in the Second Committee of the General Assembly, the meeting                    
 of the subsidiary bodies and the traditional meeting of Foreign Minister of G-77 on the                   
 eve of the 46th General Assembly.                                                                         
                                                                                                           
 India participated in a number of multilateral meetings of global environmental issues                    
 held during the year. The Indian approach was based on her conviction that                                
 environmental problems cannot be isolated from the general issue of development and                       
 must be viewed as an integral part of development efforts. India constructively                           
 contributed to the meetings of the Preparatory Committee for the 1992 UN Conference on                    
 Enviornment and Development with the expectation that the twin issues of environment                      
 and development would be addressed in a balanced way and in their totality at the 1992                    
 Conference. Indi a also actively projected her concern and promoted her interests while                   
 participating in the intergovernmental negotiating sessions for drafting a Framework                      
 Convention on Climate Change and a Convention on Biological Diversity.                                    
                                                                                                           
 The second regular session of ECOSOC was held in Geneva in June 1991. India has been                      
 elected as a member for a 3-year term beginning 1992. For the first time ECOSOC held a                    
 special high-level meeting on the impact of the recent evolution of East-West relations                   
 on the growth of the world economy and its implications for developing countries. It                      
 also considered the report of the So uth Commission, the economic, social and                             
 environmental consequences of the Iraq- Kuwait war and the strengthening of                               
 multilateral cooperation. At the summer session of the ECOSOC, UNSG suggested the                         
 convening of an international conference on the financing of development. This proposal                   
 was welcomed by India and endorsed in the Ministerial Declaration of G-77 On the eve of                   
 46th General Assembly, Foreign Ministers of G-77 met in New York and adopted a                            
 Ministerial Declaration which expressed concern at the deteriorating economic                             
 situation. The Minister for External Affairs addressed the meeting.                                       
                                                                                                           
 At the 46th General Assembly, the issues of special focus were: the long- standing                        
 proposal for restructuring and revitalisation of the UN in socio- economic fields (with                   
 the emergence of the contours of consensus resolution which will oversee expertisation                    
 of subsidiary bodies); the report of the ECOSOC (which included a resolution on the                       
 impact of East-West relations and on convening of an international conference on                          
 financing of development); trade and development (with specific reference to the                          
 problems of the land-locked developing countries); international code of conduct on                       
 transfer of tecnology; economic and technical cooperation among developing countries;                     
 environment (large scale pellagic drift net fishing); science and technology for                          
 developmen t; entrepreneurship and operational activities for development; and better                     
 coordination of humanitarian assistance.                                                                  
                                                                                                           
 The Indian delegation actively participated in all deliberations, emphasisin g the                        
 urgent need to address development issues. India's efforts for a greater integration                      
 into the international economy as well as far-reaching macro economic and domestic                        
 reforms were brought to the attention of the General Assembly.                                            
                                                                                                           
 In the context of South-South Cooperation, progress was made with regard to the                           
 specific projects identified at the first meeting of the Summit Level Gr oup on                           
 South-South Consultation and Cooperation (G-15), which was held in Kuala Lumpur in June                   
 1990. The Heads of State/Government of G-15 member countries had mandated India to                        
 develop projects on the establishment of a Gene Bank for Medicinal Plants and Herbs in                    
 developing countries and Solar Energy Applications for fabrication of Small                               
 Refrigerators. In pursuance of th is mandate, a meeting of the Group of Experts from                      
 G-15 member countries was convened by the Government of India in New Delhi from 23 to                     
 25 September 1991 to define and finalise these two projects. The meeting was attended                     
 by Experts/Senior Officials from Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Egypt, Indonesia, India,                     
 Mexico, Malaysia, Nigeria, Peru, Venezuela, Yugoslavia and Zimbabwe.                                      
 At the Second G-15 Summit held in Caracas, Venezuela from 27 to 29                                        
 November 1991, the Heads of State/Government approved the two Indian projects. The                        
 Summit also approved other specific projects to promote South- South Cooperation and                      
 decided on a series of follow-up measures to coordinate future activities of the G-15.                    
 India articulated the position of the G-15 coun tries on the evolution of a consensus                     
 on ensuring that development remained at the centre of international attention and that                   
 modalities were found to place the issues of economic development and international                       
 cooperation at the centre of the multilateral agenda. This was fully reflected in the                     
 Joint Communique adopted at the end of the Summit. Decisions arrived at during the                        
 Caracas Summit have led to a further institutionalisation and consolidation of G-15 to                    
 act as a catalyst to promote South-South Cooperation and to constitute a credible                         
 platform to act as an interlocutor with the industrialised countries.                                     
                                                                                                           
 The Summit level meeting of the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN), which                    
 met in Singapore on 27 and 28 January 1992, approved that India would be a sectoral                       
 dialogue partner of ASEAN. The sectoral dialogue is expected to commence as soon as                       
 modalities for these are mutually finalised. The sectoral dialogue will strengthen                        
 India's economic cooperation in various fields with the ASEAN countries, including in                     
 the areas of trade, human resource development, science and technology, and tourism.                      
 Besides ASEAN, India has been making efforts to associate itself with other regional                      
 and sub-regional groupings in the region, such as Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation                       
 (APEC).                                                                                                   
                                                                                                           
 As far as developments in the international trading system were concerned, the Uruguay                    
 Round of Multilatral Trade Negotiations continued to be a focus of attention. The                         
 outcome of these negotiations, however, remain uncertain, especially for the developing                   
 countries. Apart from the impasse over agricultural, trade and subsidies, agreement in                    
 the so-called new areas of TRIPS, TRIMS and Services have continued to elude the                          
 negotiators. There are apprehensions that a failure of the Uruguay Round would lead to                    
 a break-down of multilateralism, further fragmentation of the international trading                       
 system and an increasing resort to unilateral and bilateral measures.                                     
                                                                                                           
 Little progress was made in the area of North-South Cooperation. The external                             
 environment facing the developing countries continued to be adverse and was                               
 characterised by a lack of resource flows and access to markets and technologies. The                     
 debt problem of the developing countries remained a cause of worry. There was also a                      
 growing tendency on the part of developed countries to shift the focus away from hard                     
 development issues to issues like popular participation, political pluralism, human                       
 rights, environment, military expenditures, etc and to attach non-economic                                
 conditionalities to development assistance.                                                               
 Administrative and Budgetary Matters                                                                      
                                                                                     Top                   
 The two most important issues before the 5th Committee in 1992 related to the programme                   
 budget and the scale of assessment for contributions to the UN regular budget.                            
 Argeement on both issues was reached without recourse to voting. The budget resolution                    
 included a chapter on the proposed structure and policies of the UN Drug Control                          
 Programme. India played an important role in striking a balance between the need for                      
 managerial flexibility for the programme and the need for adherence to UN financial                       
 rules and regulations and personnel policies. India's concern relating to the need for                    
 devising ways and means for increasing access to licit opiates for medical purposes in                    
 developing countries was endorsed by the General Assembly and the budget resolution                       
 stressed the need for allocation of adequate resources for activitie s in this sphere.                    
                                                                                                           
 The scale of assessment for the contribution to the UN regular budget was adopted for                     
 the period 1992-94. India's contribution has declined from 0.37% i n the previous scale                   
 to 0.36% in the present scale. This would not only reduce h er contributions to the UN                    
 regular budget but also to various specialised agencies of the UN whose contributions                     
 are linked to the UN regular budget. The financial crisis affecting the UN was also                       
 highlighted. The UN Secretary General made a number of new suggestions to overcome the                    
 serious problems faced by the UN due to paucity of funds. Discussions on this issue                       
 were inconclusive.                                                                                        
 Social and Humanitarian Issues                                                                            
                                                                                     Top                   
 India continued to play an active role in the consideration by the UN bodies such as                      
 the General Assembly, ECOSOC and the Commission on Human Rights of social and                             
 humanitarian issues. India's stand on such issues was bas ed on her principled position                   
 on matters pertaining to human rights and social justice and her deep and abiding                         
 commitment to democracy, the rule of law and the protection and promotion of human                        
 rights, and fundamental freedoms. India welcomed changes around the world that served                     
 to strengthen human rights. India played an important role in the deliberations of the                    
 Third Committee at the 46th Session of the UN General Assembly and participated                           
 actively in the 43rd Session of the UN Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination                     
 and Protection of Minorities held in Geneva in August 1991 and the 48th Session of the                    
 Human Rights Commission also held in Geneva from 27 Janaury to 6 March 1992.                              
 Decolonisation                                                                                            
                                                                                     Top                   
 India continued to play an active role in the UN Committee on Decolonisation. Of the 18                   
 remaining non-governing territories on the UN agenda, the focus was primarily on the                      
 Western Sahara, where preparations for a referendum on self-determination are underway                    
 under the supervision of the Security Council. India has traditionally supported the                      
 Saharawi self- determination and is amongst the countries expected to participate in                      
 the UN Peace Keeing Operation (MINURSO) which will organize and supervise the                             
 referendum.                                                                                               
                                                                                                           
 Elections to UN Bodies and other International Organisations                                              
                                                                                     Top                   
 In 1991 India was elected to the Economic and Social Council of the UN winning 127                        
 votes, the highest for any contesting candidate. Previously India was member of this                      
 body during 1988-90 and with this selection she would be member of both the main                          
 charter organization of the UN, i.e. the Security Council and the ECOSOC during 1992.                     
                                                                                                           
 Dr P S Rao was re-elected as member of the Internaitonal Law Commission on 14 November                    
 1991. India was also reelected to the UN Commission on International Trade Law, the                       
 Governing Council of the UN Environment Programme, the UN Commission on Human Rights                      
 and the UN Commission on Narcotic Drugs.                                                                  
                                                                                                           
 India was elected as a Category 'B' member in the International Maritime Organization                     
 Council.                                                                                                  
 Activities of the Non-aligned Movement                                                                    
                                                                                     Top                   
 The major event during the year was the 10th Ministerial Conference of Non-aligned                        
 countries which was held in Accra from 2 to 7 September 1991. In many ways this was a                     
 landmark event for the Movement which has completed 30 years since its inception. The                     
 meeting took place against the backdrop of far-reaching changes in the international                      
 political scenario. The Conference undertook an indepth assessment of the role,                           
 objectives and activities of NAM while reaffirming the continuing relevance of its                        
 principles and agenda. The Conference took several important decisions to strengthen                      
 the capacity of the Movement to respond effectively to the emerging opportunities in                      
 the evolving world order. It also considered issues relating to international security,                   
 disarmament, external aid, North-South and South- South cooperation, the situation in                     
 South Africa, human rights, drug abuse, environment and other emerging issues on the                      
 international agenda. It also took special position to convene a special Ministerial                      
 meeting of Non-aligned countries prior to 1992 UNCED, as also to hold 7th meeting of                      
 the coordinating countries of the Action Programme for Economic Cooperation before the                    
 Ministerial meeting of the Coorodinating Bureau which is held prior to a Summit. It was                   
 also decided that the 10th Summit would be held in Indonesia in 1992.                                     
                                                                                                           
 During the year, the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement met regularly in                     
 New York to deal with matters of concern to the Movement. In addition, in December 1991                   
 the Coordinating Bureau adopted a statement on the situation in Yugoslavia The                            
 non-aligned members of the Security Council remained active during the year taking                        
 initiatives and adopting common positions wherever possible on issues that came up                        
 before the Council.                                                                                       
                                                                                                           
 India played a leading role in the deliberations of the Ministerial meetin g in Accra                     
 as also in the Non-Aligned Coordinating Bureau meetings. As a member of the Security                      
 Council, India played a leading role in the formulation of common positions and in                        
 maintaining the unity of Non-aligned countries - a role which attracted appreciation                      
 from other Non-aligned countries.                                                                         
                                                                                                           
 Other Non-Aligned Meetings which were held during the year included the meeting of the                    
 Committee of 9 NAM countries on Palestine held in September 1991, Ministerial meeting                     
 on the eve of 46th General Assembly held in September 1991, 15th Meeting of Health                        
 Ministers of NAM countries held in May 1991, NAM News Pool Agency Meeting in Havana                       
 held in the last quarter of 1991 and 10th meeting of NAM Foreign Ministers in Accra                       
 held in September 1991.                                                                                   
 Commonwealth                                                                                              
                                                                                     Top                   
 The 6th meeting of the Commonwealth Committee of Foreign Ministers on Southern Africa                     
 (CCFMSA) was held in New Delhi on 13 and 14 September 1991. The Foreign Ministers of 8                    
 countries - Canada, Australia, Guyana, Malaysia, Nigeria, Tanzania, Zimbabwe and Zambia                   
 took part in the deliberations. Canada is the Chairman of the Committee. The Prime                        
 Minister inaugurated the meeting. The Minister for External Affairs participated in its                   
 deliberations.                                                                                            
                                                                                                           
 The meeting decided to recommend to the Commonwealth Heads of Government the need to                      
 lift people to people related sanctions in view of the substantial progress that had                      
 been made in South Africa. However, it was decided that trade and financial sanctions                     
 would continue till a transitional mechanism satisfactory to the majority community                       
 parties were agreed upon. It was also decided that the arms embargo would not be lifted                   
 till a non-racial an d post-apartheid new South African Government was established with                   
 full democratic control.                                                                                  
                                                                                                           
 The Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) was held in Harare from 16 to 22                     
 October 1991. The meeting adopted the Harare Declaration which identified priorities of                   
 the Commonwealth in 1990s and beyond. Apart from reaffirming the traditional emphasis                     
 on such issues as the struggle against apartheid and cooperation for development, the                     
 declaration stressed the importance of democratic institutions, human rights and the                      
 rule o f law. On South Africa, the CHOGM endorsed the recommendations of the New Delhi                    
 Meeting of the Commonwealth Committee of Foreign Ministers on Southern Africa for a                       
 "programme management" and phased easing of sanctions. A wide range of international                      
 issues and Commonwealth matters were also discussed.                                                      
                                                                                                           
 The Indian delegation, led by the Prime Minister, which also included Minister for                        
 External Affairs, played an active part. As a lead speaker on glo bal review                              
 (political), the Prime Minister put across the perspective of the developing world on                     
 the issues and challenges facing the world today. The Indian delgation made a                             
 significant contribution to securing a balanced declaration, fully reflecting the                         
 priorities India attaches to the issues on th e agenda of the Commonwealth.                               
 Conferences                                                                                               
                                                                                     Top                   
 Conference Division is entrusted with the responsibility of providing the logistical                      
 support and managerial assistance in the organization of internation al conferences                       
 convened by the Ministry of External Affairs and other Ministries/ Departments of the                     
 Government of India. During the year, following international conferences/meetings were                   
 organized:                                                                                                
                                                                                                           
 (i) SAARC Meeting of Experts to Prepare Plan of Action for Children pertaining to South                   
 Asian countries was held in New Delhi on 10 and 11 April 1991. The Department of Woman                    
 and Child Development, Ministry of Welfare was also associated.                                           
                                                                                                           
 (ii) SAARC Meeting of National Coordinators to finalise Regional Study on Trade                           
 Manufacturers and Services was held in New Delhi from 3 to 5 June 1991. Delegates from                    
 SAARC countries and Secretary General, SAARC Secretariat participated.                                    
                                                                                                           
 (iii) The Meeting of Commonwealth Committee of Foreign Ministers on Southern Africa was                   
 held in New Delhi on 13 and 14 September 1991. The meeting was attended by Foreign                        
 Ministers of 11 countries and Commonwealth Secretary General.                                             
                                                                                                           
 (iv) International Meeting of Experts of G-15 Countries on Science and Technology                         
 Projects-Gene Bank and Solar Energy-was held in New Delhi from 23 to 25 September 1991.                   
 The Meeting was attended by 48 experts from India and abraod.                                             
                                                                                                           
 (v) UN Conference on Environment and Development convened by the Department of                            
 Bio-Technology was held at Surajkund (Haryana) from 23 to 26 October 1991.                                
                                                                                                           
 (vi) Indo-EEC Joint Commission Meeting convened by the Ministry of Commerce was held in                   
 New Delhi on 13 and 14 November 1991.                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 (vii) Indo-German Joint Commission Meeting was held at New Delhi on 18 and 19 November                    
 1991 under the auspices of the Ministry of Finance. Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha                             
 Secretariats were advised and assisted in organizing Commonwealth Parliamentary                           
 Conference which was held in New Delhi from 23 to 29 September 1991.                                      
                                                                                                           
 Advice and assistance were also tendered to the Indian Association of Diplomats for                       
 organizing the Fifth Indira Gandhi Memorial Lecture by the President of Hungary, Mr                       
 Arpad Goncz. The Division was also entrusted with the task of making boarding, lodging                    
                                                                                                           
 and transport arrangements for a large number of delegations, many of them led by Heads                   
 of State/Government, during the funeral of former Prime Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi.                      
 International Law : Development and Activities                                                            
                                                                                     Top                   
 The United Nations General Assembly (Sixth Committee) at its 46th Session considered 13                   
 agenda items during its deliberations from 17 September to 28 November 1991. The                          
 important items among these related to the work of the International Law Commission                       
 (ILC), the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), the United                    
 Nations Special Committee on the Charter and the Strengthening of the Organisation,                       
 measures to prevent international terrorism, New International Economic Order and                         
 United Nations Decade of International Law. The Indian delegation expressed its                           
 happiness over the work done by the ILC in completing the draft text on jurisdictional                    
 immunities of States and their property and commented on the progress made by the                         
 Commission in its 43td Session in the areas of draft Code of Crimes against peace and                     
 security of mankind, on the non-navigational uses of international rivers and the                         
 international liability for injurious consequences arising out of acts not prohibited                     
 tinder international law. On other items, t he Indian delegation actively participated                    
 in the deliberations of the Committee, including its consultations in several areas                       
 concerned.                                                                                                
                                                                                                           
 The 30th Session of the Legal Sub-Committee of the UN Committee on Peaceful Uses of                       
 Outer Space was held in New York from 25 March to 19 April 1991. The Sub-Committee                        
 discussed the issues concerning the development of the draft principles on Nuclear                        
 Power Sources (NPS), Geo-Stationary Orbit (GSO) and definition and delimitation of                        
 Outer Space, and Outer Space benefits taking into account the needs of the developing                     
 countries. Consensus was reached on some outstanding principles dealing with the                          
 guidelines and standards for safe use in NPS in space objects. On the other two items,                    
 the discussions held have yet to achieve agreement.                                                       
                                                                                                           
 The 30th Annual Session of Asian African Legal Consultative Committee (AALCC) was held                    
 in Cairo from 22 to 27 April 1991. As in the past, the AALCC provided a forum for the                     
 Legal Experts of the two continents to come together to exchange views on several                         
 contemporary legal issues, such as the status and treatment of refugees, law of the                       
 sea, definition of terrorism and to distinguish it from liberation struggles, Geneva                      
 Conventions on law of war and deportation of Palestinians, environment and development,                   
 and UN Decade of International Law. Views were also exchanged on legal issues                             
 concerning international trade law being discussed in UNCITRAL and other fora.                            
                                                                                                           
 India participated in a meeting of legal experts held in Colombo from 30 September to 2                   
 October 1991 to review the implementation of the SAARC Convention on Suppression of                       
 Terrorism. India has actively participated in several meetings and consultations hold i                   
 n connection with the developments in the law of the sea, especially under the aegies                     
 of PREPCOM, Antarctica Treaty and the development of environmental law, in general, as                    
 well as in specific field such as climate change and bio- diversity. India has also                       
 played an active role in the various Working Groups, Groups of Legal Experts and the                      
 PREPCOM for UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), 1992.                                   
                                                                                                           
 As in the past years, the Ministry undertook drafting and processed for signature,                        
 ratification/accession of several bilateral and multilateral agreeme nts involving                        
 India. The bilateral treaties which India entered into with other countries include                       
 Consular Convention and Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in Space Activities                    
 with China, Treaties on Trade and Transit, and Curbing of Unauthorised Traffic with                       
 Nepal. At the multilateral level, India became a party to the Vienna Convention for                       
 Protection of Ozone layer, the International Labour Organization Convetion No. 136                        
 concerning Protection against Hazards and Poisoning arising from Benzens, and INMARSAT                    
 Agreement on Ship-Earth Stations within the Terrorial Sea and Ports. A complete list of                   
 treaties entered into by India during the year is placed at Appendix II.                                  
 1991                                                                                                      
 Foreign Economic Relations                                                                                
                                                                                     Top                   
 During the year, the commercial content of the Economic Division's work has been                          
 further augmented with a view to assisting in the efforts to optimise exports.                            
 Commercial queries and information about possible business opportunities abroad were                      
 regularly received by the Division and disseminated to the concerned parties. To assist                   
 commercial representatives in Indian Missions, the Division compiled and circulated a                     
 Trade Directory containing references of export promotion bodies, commodity boards,                       
 important public sector organizations, institutions dealing with credit and finance                       
 besides references of Government officials dealing with the foregoing subject matter.                     
 The Directory has been found to be a handy guide by India's commercial representatives                    
 abroad.                                                                                                   
                                                                                                           
 Approximately 600 nominees (including some from the previous year) underwent training                     
 under Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) programme and Special                              
 Commonwealth African Assistance Programme (SCAAP) for a period ranging from six months                    
 to one and a half years. A broad range of training courses from small scale industries                    
 to advance level telecommunications, legislative drafting to foreign trade, diplomacy                     
 and civil aviation were covered under the programmes.                                                     
                                                                                                           
 During the year, 57 experts were on deputation under ITEC programme to various                            
 countries. The major beneficiaries have been Afghanistan, Cambodia, Ethiopia, Gambia,                     
 Ghana, Mauritius, Namibia, Seychelles, Uganda, Vietnam, Yemen and Zambia. The areas of                    
 their specialisation include engineering, medicine, small scale industry and general                      
 academic teaching.                                                                                        
                                                                                                           
 Over 300 military personnel from nearly 30 countries underwent training in defence                        
 courses of instructions in India. A large number of them came from South Asian and                        
 African countries. Sustained interests continued to exist to avail of training                            
 facilities at India's military establishments.                                                            
                                                                                                           
 Major projects completed during the year with ITEC assistance included the Farmers                        
 Service Centre in Mauritius and Common Facility Centre for the Industrial Estate                          
 Project and a Chalk Manufacturing Unit in Afghanistan. The Indira Gandhi Institute of                     
 Child Health Expansion project in Kabul is nearing completion. The sixth phase of the                     
 Angkor Vat restoration project in Cambodia is in progress.                                                
                                                                                                           
 Emergency relief assistance was extended to Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Cambodia, China,                     
 Ethiopia, Iran, Mauritius, Peru, the Philippines and Zambia. These countries had                          
 suffered either natural calamities or epidemics, resulting in large scale destruction                     
 of property and loss of human lives. The assistance given included medicines, milk                        
 powder, food items and blankets.                                                                          
                                                                                                           
 The sixth meeting of the India-Mauritius Joint Commission was held in August 1991 in                      
 Port Louis. Several areas of future cooperation were identified at the meeting. It was                    
 also decided that India would give priority in helping Mauritius in human resource                        
 development programmes in future.                                                                         
                                                                                                           
 The ITEC programme was extended to China, Soviet Republics, particularly Central Asian                    
 Republics and East European countries like Czech and Slovak Federal Republic, Hungary,                    
 etc during the year.                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 For the first time since the inception of the programme in 1964, ITEC "Alumni                             
 Associations" were formed by Indian Missions. It was also decided to celebrate 15                         
 September every year as the "ITEC Day". According to reports received ITEC Day was                        
 celebrated with much, enthusiasm in some 30 Missions this year. The scheme is expected                    
 to be extended to remaining Missions being covered under ITEC programme next year. A                      
 handbook on guidelines for the trainees who come to India under ITEC/SCAAP programme                      
 and a presentation brochure on the ITEC/SCAAP programme were also produced and                            
 distributed during the year.                                                                              
                                                                                                           
 The Division in collaboration with XP Division has produced a 30 minute film on the                       
 ITEC programme. The film projects the philosophy behind the inception of the ITEC                         
 programme besides of recounting its accomplishment.                                                       
                                                                                                           
 Under the scheme of inviting foreign delegations from developing countries aimed at                       
 exposing them to the industrial progress made in India, study visits from Uganda,                         
 Mongolia, Indonesia and Botswana were conducted. The visits were found to be helpful in                   
 identifying areas in which future collaboration may be developed.                                         
                                                                                                           
 The Economic Coordination Unit (ECU) was set up in August 1990. Its original mandate                      
 covered studying from the economic standpoint and formulating appropriate policy                          
 orientations on a range of specific issues such as EC-92, the Gulf crisis, the changes                    
 in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, etc. During the first six months of its                           
 inception, the ECU prepared indepth studies on each of these issues. It also became the                   
 nodal Unit for a number of specific subjects which were of an inter-departmental nature                   
 and which had a substantial economic content. These included the proposals for forging                    
 a speci al relationship with the EC, the setting up of an Indo-EC Business Forum and                      
 membership of the EBRD, apart from coordinating the participations of the Ministry of                     
 External Affairs in the India-Japan Study Committee and dealing with issues such as the                   
 non-economic conditionalities being attached to foreign aid. It also monitored major                      
 international developments such as the trend towards formation of regional economic                       
 groupings and attempted to analyse the implications of these developments for India.                      
                                                                                                           
 Since July 1991, the activities of the ECU have acquired a new dimension as a result of                   
 the changes in economic policy announced by the Government. ECU has played a major                        
 coordinating role in obtaining details of the new policies from the concerned                             
 ministries and quickly transmitting them to India's Missions abroad. It has also                          
 assisted in the formulation of guidelines for Missions so that they can reorient their                    
 priorities in line with the new econom ic policies and the changing global economic                       
 situation. Action on the responses received from Missions has already been initiated.                     
                                                                                                           
 In addition, the ECU has also been playing the role of an investment promotion agency                     
 at a time when there is no established institutional framework for performing this                        
 important activity. A major investment seminar was held in Singapore in October to                        
 attract FDI to India and to create greater awareness of the new economic policies among                   
 potential investors. A Composite media package entitled "Doing Business with India"                       
 comprising a set of brochures, a floppy diskette and a video film was prepared                            
 especially for this occasion. Bo th the seminar and the package were regarded as a                        
 success. Proposals for similar seminars in Japan and the USA have already been approved                   
 and preparations have been initiated, Action-has also been initiated to update the                        
 media package in the light of changes in economic policies made during the last two                       
 months, and to prepare Japanese, German, French and Arabic versions of the package.                       
 Apart from this promotional work, ECU has also been servicing investment related                          
 queries from the Missions by liaising with the concerned Ministries through an informal                   
 inter-ministcrial group which is coordinated by the ECU.                                                  
 1991                                                                                                      
 Policy Planning And Research                                                                              
                                                                                     Top                   
 The Policy Planning Division was actively engaged in preparing briefs and background                      
 papers on wide-ranging issues concerning India's Foreign Policy. and her role in the                      
 rapidly evolving international situation.                                                                 
                                                                                                           
 The Division is also the nodal point for interaction with the Joint Intelligence                          
 Committee, the University Grants Commission and its affiliated Area Study Centres                         
 attached to various Universities. These activities were strengthened during the year.                     
                                                                                                           
 The Historical Division, which provides research input to the Ministry, prepared                          
 research papers and background notes on various issues relating to international                          
 developments. The Division interacts with the Territorial Divisi ons of the Ministry in                   
 the preparation of the research papers and background notes. The Division also renders                    
 all possible help to the Territorial Divisions as wel l as Indian Missions abroad                         
 whenever specific information or documents on international relations are required.                       
                                                                                                           
 During the year, the Division extended all required assistance to the concerned                           
 Territorial Divisions on India's international boundary problems. The Division examines                   
 the incorrect depiction of India's international boundaries in foreign                                    
 publications-private as well as official-and maintains contacts with the Missions                         
 abroad for taking up the matter with the concerned publishers or the Government                           
 authorities for proper depiction and necessary corrective measures.                                       
                                                                                                           
 The Division also closely coordinates with the Survey of India and the Ministry of                        
 Defence on the question of supply of map sheets to various Government and                                 
 semi-Government agencies for use in their official work, The Division deals with the                      
 requests from research scholars in consultatio n with the concerned Territorial                           
 Divisions for access to the records of the Government of India relating to the                            
 restricted areas or the closed period as la id down in the Access Rules. It also                          
 scrutinises the excerpts of the closed perio d records submitted by the research                          
 scholars and gives final clearance in consultation with the concerned Territorial                         
 Divisions.                                                                                                
                                                                                                           
 An important task of the Division is to edit and supervise printing of the Annual                         
 Report of the Ministry on the basis of the material prepared by the various Divisions.                    
 The Printing of Old Records (POR) Unit of the Division edits and prints selected old                      
 policy files of the Ministry. The POR Unit also undertakes the review/weeding of old                      
 files in the Record Management Section of the Ministry and also coordinates with the                      
 Missions abroad in the same work. Similarly, the Unit reviews old records of the                          
 Ministry which were transferred to the National Archives of India in the past.                            
                                                                                                           
 Research Section of the Division coordinates the distribution Of Periodic al reports                      
 received from Indian Missions abroad. To support the research efforts, a library                          
 equipped with modern facilities and large resource material is maintained with over one                   
 hundred thousand books and documents in its collection. During the last year 1350                         
 books, 60 maps, 500 pamphlets, and 30 reels of microfilm were added. The Library                          
 subscribes to 600 periodical titles.                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 Library is equipped with in-house computer system with 9 terminals two of which support                   
 data entry and retrieval in Indian languages; a microfilm/fiche reader printer and a                      
 plain paper photocopier. Documentation/Bibiliographic Services as well as other library                   
 operations and services were computerised using an integrated software package                            
 developed in India. Information about books and selected periodical articles received                     
 in Library since 1986 is available on-line through each terminal. All new documents                       
 received in Library-books, maps, microfilms, selected articles from periodicals, etc                      
 are being fed into the in-house computer system to create Database on Foreign Affairs.                    
 Using this Database, the Library provides Current Awareness Service and Bibliographical                   
 Services. In additions, the Library regularly issued a monthly Chronicle of Events, a                     
 Foreign Affairs Documentation Bulletin and an annotated monthly list of recent                            
 additions to the Library.                                                                                 
                                                                                                           
 Library users including Research Scholars can have access to on-line computer-based                       
 information held in Library in different databases through Foreign Affairs Information                    
 Retrieval System (FAIRS). Photocopying and Computer Print-out facilities are also                         
 available to all Library users including Research Scholars.                                               
 1991                                                                                                      
 External Publicity                                                                                        
                                                                                     Top                   
 THE External Publicity Division is charged with the responsibility of projecting                          
 India's position on various issues and developments in India; different aspects of                        
 Indian life, art and culture; as well as countering distor ted and malicious propaganda                   
 against India, sponsored by vested interests overseas. In order to meet these                             
 objectives the XP Division utilises a variety of channel s which include: briefing of                     
 journalists, transmission of information to Indian Missions, purchase and publication                     
 of books, and production of documentaries and audio visual material.                                      
                                                                                                           
 The XP Division conducts regular briefings for foreign and Indian journa- lists on                        
 developments that impinge upon India's foreign policy interests. In addition to the                       
 regular briefings, the Division also arranges detailed backgrou nd briefings for select                   
 foreign and Indian journalists on topical issues so that a n accurate perception of                       
 India's position is projected in the media. For instanc e, during the Gulf War, regular                   
 background briefings were conducted to emphasise India's stand on the conflict, her                       
 support for the UN Resolutions and her commitment to ensuring that all disputes are                       
 resolved without recourse to force . The Government of India's success in taking care                     
 of the Indians stranded in the war zone was particularly emphasised and the foreign                       
 media lauded the manner in which the Government had executed such a difficult                             
 undertaking. Other issues on which special briefings were held included the                               
 developments in the former USSR, Yugoslavia, India's views on NAM, Indo-Pak relations,                    
 Indo-US relations, Kashmir and Punjab, etc.                                                               
                                                                                                           
 The Division also continued its programme of inviting foreign journalists to visit                        
 India. During. the year, the Division hosted 25 journalists from differe nt countries                     
 including Germany, Japan, Switzerland, China, Vietnam, Bangladesh, the USA and the                        
 United Kingdom. Visits to different cities and industrial unit s, meetings with                           
 government officials and media personnel and briefings on issues of concern to India as                   
 well as on developments in India were organized for the visiting journalists. The                         
 articles written by these journalists on return to t heir countries testify to the                        
 positive results of the programme. In addition, the Division cleared temporary                            
 accreditation for 571 visiting foreign journalists. A large number of proposals from                      
 foreign producers to make documentaries on different aspects of India were examined and                   
 cleared. These included documentaries on culture, tourism, environment, etc as well as                    
 current affairs programmes.                                                                               
                                                                                                           
 On the domestic front, the assassination of Shri Rajiv Gandhi, and the Indian General                     
 Elections attracted considerable international media attention. In the aftermath of the                   
 assassination nearly 400 foreign journalists arrived in In dia to cover the funeral                       
 rites. All arrangements for the visiting journalists were made by the XP Division. The                    
 Division's efforts were well appreciated by the journalists who even wrote about it.                      
                                                                                                           
 Many of the journalists who covered the assassination of Shri Rajiv Gandhi stayed on to                   
 cover the General Elections. The Division briefed the visiting journalists about the                      
 democratic traditions of India, the strengths of the Indi an polity and the manner of                     
 the conduct of elections. A major effort was undertaken to dispell gloomy predictions                     
 of imminent chaos following the assassination of Shri Gandhi. Its success was                             
 underscored by the articles in m any foreign publications which stressed that the                         
 democratic tradition in India had the strength to withstand such shocks and India would                   
 remain true to its secular ethos. In connection with the General Elections the Division                   
 produced a ten minute news clip on India's democratic system which was sent to Missions                   
 abroad to be used by local television stations. In addition, the Division prin ted                        
 brochures giving basic facts about India, the different parties, the results of                           
 previous elections, and a brief write up on the Indian polity. These brochures were                       
 distributed abroad to journalists and writers by the Indian Missions. On the new                          
 Government taking office, the division briefed the international media on the                             
 Government's priorities and programmes and its foreign policy concerns. Special                           
 emphasis was laid on the economic initiatives taken by the new Government. A brochure                     
 entitled "Doing Business with India" and a documentary "India: The Land of New                            
 Opportunities" highlighting the new policy initiatives and the viability of India as an                   
 economic and trade partner were produced and distributed overseas. This material was                      
 also distributed at the Seminar organized in Singapore on Oct 18, 1991. The package of                    
 material was well received and complimented upon by the media. Detailed briefings were                    
 arranged for select foreign and Indian journalists to acquaint them with the                              
 Government's economic programmes. The foreign media's coverage of the Government's                        
 economic policy initiatives has been uniformly positive and in some cases laudatory.                      
                                                                                                           
 The Division looked after the media arrangements during the visits abroad of the Prime                    
 Minister to Bonn for the Festival of India in October 1991, Caracas for the G-15 Summit                   
 in November 1991, Colombo for the SAARC Summit in December 1991, New York in January                      
 1992, Davos (Switzerland) in February 1992 and Port Louis (Mauritius) in March 1992.                      
 Similarly, it organized media coverage of the visits of the German President in                           
 February-March 1991; the President of Malta, President Yasser Arafat and the President                    
 of Portugal in January 1992; and the Prince and Princess of Wales, and the Presidents                     
 of Kazakhstan and Namibia in February 1992.                                                               
                                                                                                           
 The year witnessed an escalation of propaganda against India on the Kashmir and Human                     
 Rights issues, and attempts by interested parties to internationalise the Kashmir                         
 issue. The Division through its audio visual programmes and print programmes and                          
 briefings of the foreign media highlighted the fact that the problem in Kashmir and                       
 Punjab was the result of direct interference by Pakistan which was training and arming                    
 the militants. Independent producers were encouraged to make documentaries which                          
 projected a true historical perspective of the Kashmir issue and Pak involvement. While                   
 in the past the foreign media had tended to give Pakistan the benefit of doubt by                         
 stating that India "alleged" that Pakistan was involved, during the year there was                        
 increasing and categorical acknowledgement in the foreign media of Pakistan's training                    
 and arming the terrorists. This shift in the reporting in the international media was a                   
 major achievement and possibly, influenced the position taken by many governments on                      
 Pakistan's involvement in subversion in Kashmir and Punjab and their response to                          
 Pakistan's attempts to internationalise the Kashmir issue.                                                
                                                                                                           
 The Division continued to send on a daily, weekly or bi-weekly basis detailed news to                     
 Indian Missions on developments in India. Material on the situation in Kashmir and                        
 Punjab was sent to select Missions to enable them to counter anti-Indian propaganda and                   
 to accurately brief their host governments and the media.                                                 
                                                                                                           
 The publication of books, the production of documentaries and the dissemination of                        
 audio visual and printed material formed Part of the programme to create a greater                        
 awareness abroad of the different facets of Indian life. In addition to sending                           
 presentation books and books on topical issues to Indian Missions, the Division's                         
 publication "Muslims In India" was printed in Urdu, Hindi, Arabic and French. The book                    
 highlighted the contribution of Indian Muslims to the making of modern India and                          
 projected India's secular polity. The publication was highly appreciated by all                           
 recipients abroad including in Pakistan.                                                                  
                                                                                                           
 The Second edition of "Muslims In India" and a similar book on "Christians In India"                      
 are nearing completion.                                                                                   
                                                                                                           
 The Division's monthly magazine "India Perspectives" which has a circulation of 37,000,                   
 was highly commended in reviews in the Indian Press and in letters received from                          
 readers in different countries. The magazine which is published in English, French,                       
 Urdu, Arabic and Spanish focuses on different aspects of Indian life, art and culture                     
 and also includes material of touristic interest. The emphasis has been on obtaining                      
 the maximum number of articles by foreign authors on different topics and during the                      
 year authors from Germany, Bangladesh, Nepal, Australia, Afghanistan and France                           
 contributed to the "India Perspectives". The Government has agreed to the publication                     
 of the "India Perspectives" in Hindi, Bhasa Indonesia, Russian and Portugese and the                      
 first issues in these languages are likely to be brought out in the first quart er of                     
 1992. The magazine is being subscribed to by public sector units, the hotel industry,                     
 etc and has attracted advertisements from State Governments and Public Sector units.                      
 During the year, a total revenue of Rs. 1,60,000 was earn ed through advertisements.                      
                                                                                                           
 Six special feature articles were commissioned and sent to Indian Missions/ Posts                         
 abroad for publication on the Republic Day, 1992. These articles were widely read and                     
 appreciated. On the audio visual front a number of documentaries were produced by the                     
 Division either directly or by encouraging independent producers. "Pastures New", on                      
 Indian Muslims settled abroad was telecast in the USA. Documentaries on the                               
 Environment, Telecommunications, Indian Democracy, etc were distributed for screening                     
 by Indian Missions. A documentary on three contemporary painters, entitled "Figures of                    
 Thought" won the First Prize for non-feature films at the 38th National Film Festival                     
 during the year. It also won the first prize for short documentaries at the Athens                        
 (Ohio) Film Festival 1991 . This documentary was telecast in Ireland and sent to many                     
 other countries where TV Networks had shown interest in its telecast. Under an                            
 arrangement entered into with the producer of the documentary, the Division received 60                   
 per cent of the royalty from the telecast. Another documentary "Sanchari" on the Bharat                   
 Natyam dancer, Leela Samson, was released during the year and received excellent                          
 reviews in the media. The Division's film "People of Peace-Christianity in India" was                     
 released on 2 February 1992. In addition, a film "Bhavantarana", on the Odissi maestro                    
 Guru Kelucharan Mahapatra sponsored by this Division, was screened at the Bangalore                       
 Film Festival and the Bombay International Festival of Documentary, Short and Amination                   
 Films and had won an International Critics Prize award at the latter festival. Projects                   
 nearing completition include among others documentaries on Indian Muslims and the ITEC                    
 programme. The Division also supplied films to Missions abroad in connection with Film                    
 Festivals organized in the host countries. Film Festiv als were held in Muscat,                           
 Windhoek, Port of Spain, Abu Dhabi amongst others.                                                        
 1991                                                                                                      
 Indian Overseas                                                                                           
                                                                                     Top                   
 It is estimated that there are about 12 million persons of Indian origin resi- ding in                    
 different parts of the world. It is the consistent policy of the Government that                          
 persons of Indian origin who have taken foreign nationality should identify themselves                    
 with and integrate in the mainstream of social and political life of the country of                       
 their domicile. The Government naturally rema ins alive to their interests and general                    
 welfare and encourages cultural contacts w ith them. As far as Indian citizens residing                   
 abroad are concerned, they are the responsibility of the Government of India and the                      
 Government continue to exercise due care for their safety and welfare and takes all                       
 necessary steps in this regard.                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 Wherever they may be living, people of Indian origin have always cherished and retained                   
 their cultural and personal ties with their motherland. The Government of India                           
 consciously and on a continuous basis strives to strengthen their cultural and                            
 emotional tics by setting up cultural centres, exchange of cultural troupes, and                          
 teaching of Indian music, languages and philosophy in foreign countries.                                  
                                                                                                           
 The Overseas Indians Division was set up to develop social, economic and cultural                         
 contacts between India and the Overseas Indians. Indian Missions have been instructed                     
 to maintain close contacts with Overseas Indians and render them all possible                             
 assistance. The Division also disseminates information about matters of interest to                       
 Overseas Indians like investment procedures in India through the Missions abroad.                         
                                                                                                           
 The Overseas Indians have been projecting a number of demands to the Government of                        
 India relating to further liberalisation in the Indian economy, relaxation in the rules                   
 and regulations in respect of taxation, Foreign Exchang e Regulation Act (FERA), bank                     
 and portfolio investment, project and industrial investment, educational needs of the                     
 children of Overseas Indians and resettlement requirements including housing. The                         
 revised economic policy of th e Government has acceded to a number of these demands by                    
 encouraging investment in new sectors such as housing, infrastructure and real estate                     
 development on a repatriation basis, remittances in foreign exchange to any person in                     
 India without being subject to gift tax and total immunity from any                                       
 investigation/enquiry, issue of India Development Bonds, investment upto 100% equity in                   
 high priority industries with full benefit of repatriation of capital invested and                        
 income accruing thereon including investments for extension and diversification of                        
 existing industrial undertakings.                                                                         
                                                                                                           
 To discuss the remaining problems and demands of the Overseas Indians, for the first                      
 time an All-India meeting of organizations representing Overseas Indians was convened                     
 under the Chairmanship of the Minister of State for External Affairs in September 1991                    
 after an Inter-Ministerial meeting in July. As a follow-up to the points which emerged                    
 at the meeting, favourable decisions have resulted in placing six more categories of                      
 emigrants comprising supervisor s, skilled workers, semi-skilled workers, vehicle                         
 drivers, clerical workers includ ing store keepers, etc and cooks excluding those in                      
 domestic employment, under the "Emigration Clearance not required" category on an                         
 experimental basis and formulation of guidelines for setting up of schools, colleges,                     
 etc with NRI fun ds where a certain number of seats could be reserved for children of                     
 Overseas Indians. A scheme for Overseas Indians and Non-Resident Indians relating to                      
 housing and real estate development is being finalized by the Ministry of Urban                           
 Development in consultation with the Overseas Indians Division.                                           
 1991                                                                                                      
 Protocol                                                                                                  
                                                                                     Top                   
 During the year under review, Heads of Mission of the following 22 countries left India                   
 on completion of their tenure:                                                                            
                                                                                                           
 Nigeria, Peru, Kuwait, Yemen, Belgium, Yugoslavia, China, Republic of Korea, Algeria,                     
 EEC, Arab Republic of Egypt, Finland, Tunisia, the USSR, Myanmar, the UK, Uganda,                         
 Cambodia, Nepal, Saudi Arabia, Thailand and Turkey.                                                       
                                                                                                           
 During the same period, Heads of Mission of the following 22 countries presented their                    
 Credentials to the President of India:                                                                    
                                                                                                           
 Colombia, Sri Lanka, Bulgaria, Nigeria, Kuwait, Czech & Slovak Federal Republic,                          
 Swaziland (non-resident), Yemen, Finland, China, Republic of Korea, Arab Republic of                      
 Egypt, the USSR, EEC, Belgium, Romania, Uganda, Turkey, the UK, Tunisia, Nepal and                        
 Benin (non-resident).                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 India decided to grant diplomatic status to the Asian African Legal Consultative                          
 Committee in New Delhi with effect from February 1991. It was decided to extend                           
 privileges and immunities granted to the International Committee of Red Cross in New                      
 Delhi for another 5 years starting June 1991.                                                             
                                                                                                           
 A list containing names of foreign dignitaries who visited India during 1991 along with                   
 the dates of such visits is at Appendix XV.                                                               
 1991                                                                                                      
 Passport And Consular Services                                                                            
                                                                                     Top                   
 The year 1991 witnessed heavy increase in number of input applications for passports                      
 and miscellaneous services. During the year, a total of 35,02,973 applications were                       
 received compared to 24,25,604 received in 1990, registering a growth of 44%. During                      
 the same period total output of all the Passport Offices in India also increased by                       
 about 3 lakh services, from 23.8 lakhs in 1990 to 26.9 lakhs in 1991, registering a                       
 growth of about 13%.                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 During the last year several measures were introduced by the Consular, Passport & Visa                    
 (CPV) Division to further simplify the passport procedures. Attestation of photograph                     
 of applicant by any Gazetted Officer for submission alongwith application form has been                   
 dispensed with. The application forms complete in all respects will be accepted at                        
 counters of Passport Offices even from persons other than applicants. But passports                       
 will be despatched only through Registered Post to avoid any malpractices where                           
 applications were not submitted by recognized travel agents.                                              
                                                                                                           
 Passport Officers have been instructed to accept a copy of letter of employment from,                     
 reputed employers towards proof of stay of applicant within jurisdiction of a Passport                    
 Office. Sitting MPs, MLAs and MLCs have been exempted from the requirement of prior                       
 police verification where they choose to apply for ordinary passports. Relevant                           
 guidelines to fill an application form have been printed and appended to each EAP (1)                     
 application form so that an applicant on his own may fill up the application.                             
                                                                                                           
 This form was introduced from June 1991. The recognized travel agents have also been                      
 authorised to print application forms and give to public free of any charge. Some                         
 Passport Offices have been able to arrange sale of blank application forms through                        
 branches of some backs. Attempts are being made to resume sale of application forms                       
 through head post offices all over India. In case of Gulf evacuees it has been decided                    
 to issue police clearance certificate based on verification certificates issued by                        
 concerned di strict Superintendent of Police.                                                             
                                                                                                           
 Indian passports have been made valid for travel to South Africa. Indian nationals                        
 therefore can feely travel to South Africa. Indian Missions have bee n authorised to                      
 issue Indian visas to South African nationals on the same basis a s Indian tourist                        
 visas are given to other foreign tourists. Tourist visas will a lso be given to South                     
 African diplomats and officials wishing to visit India for touri st purpose.                              
                                                                                                           
 With a view to further facilitate foreign travel of Indian nationals, it has been                         
 decided that Indian nationals who earlier required special approval from a Protector of                   
 Emigrant will no longer require it if travelling to North America or Europe.                              
                                                                                                           
 Passport Offices have been authorised to grant "Emigration Clearance not required"                        
 (ECNR) on passports of Iraq/Kuwait evacuees for Gulf region for a period of one year                      
 with effect from Apr 18, 1991 provided such applicants have any documentary evidence of                   
 offer of employment.                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 Six categories of workers have been added to the existing list of persons eligible for                    
 ECNR for a period of six months from 4 October 1991. Such persons have to apply to                        
 Protector of Emigrant or Passport Office through an authorised recruiting agent with                      
 passports having valid employment visa.                                                                   
                                                                                                           
 The visa fee structure was rationalised and made universally applicable to all foreign                    
 countries except those with which India has gratis visa or bilatera llyagreed visa fee                    
 agreements.This step will help Indian Missions to respond more quickly to visa fee                        
 queries and also help maintain proper internal accounting supervision.                                    
                                                                                                           
 During 1991, 3,335 cases of lost passports were referred to the CPV Division by various                   
 Passport Offices in India and Indian Missions/Posts abroad.                                               
                                                                                                           
 After consulting the concerned authorities, clearance for issue of passports was                          
 accorded in respect of 2,921 cases. For convenience of some category of applicants, it                    
 has been decided that where clearance is not received from concerned authorities within                   
 six weeks, the CPV Division may issue clearance.                                                          
                                                                                                           
 As a part of programme of expansion of computer based, data processing,the Regional                       
 Passport Office in Delhi has been computerised. It is proposed to undertake similar                       
 computerisation at other Passport Offices.                                                                
                                                                                                           
 The prevention of photo substitution and other types of forgeries on passports has been                   
 one of the prime concerns. Introduction of MSP in Indian ssions/Posts abroad has been                     
 taken up in phased manner. About 415 cases of forgery on non-MSP passports were                           
 detected during the year and concerned Passport Offices were asked to take necessary                      
 action in all cases.                                                                                      
 Four hundred and fifty cases for issue of identity certificates were proce ssed and                       
 approval conveyed to concerned Passport Offices.                                                          
                                                                                                           
 Prior to removal of restrictions on travel to South Africa, 75 requests for allowing                      
 endorsements on Indian passports for travel to South Africa were processed and                            
 approved.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                           
 Twenty seven appeals tinder Section 11 of the Passport Act were received during the                       
 year, of which 14 appeals have been decided.                                                              
                                                                                                           
 About 700 complaints in respect of delay in issue of passports by various Passport                        
 Offices were received in the CPV Division. Out of which 400 cases have been settled.                      
 This number of complaints received is negligible when seen in the light of 35 lakh                        
 input applications received and 26.9 lakh services rendered during the year.                              
                                                                                                           
 Licences of 172 travel agents were renewed and 71 fresh licences were issued to travel                    
 agents.                                                                                                   
                                                                                                           
 The Passport Liaison Office at Trivandrum has been upgraded to a full- fledged Passport                   
 Office w.e.f. 10 January 1992.                                                                            
                                                                                                           
 At a conference of the Passport Offices held in October 1991 ways and means to further                    
 increase productivity Of the Central Passport Organization was discussed and concrete                     
 measures taken which is reflected in the increased output.                                                
                                                                                                           
 During the year, Passport Offices in Goa, Bombay, Kozhikode, Cochin, Bareilly,                            
 Jalandhar, Chandigarh, Patna and Delhi were inspected. The Minister of State for                          
 External Affairs inspected the Passport Offices at Goa and Bangalore. "Open Passport                      
 Houses" on passport matters were organized at Goa and Bangalore. Based on inspection                      
 reports, necessary administrative actions were initiated against officers and staff                       
 found indulging in malpractices. At present three officials are tinder suspension.                        
                                                                                                           
 During the year, 16,15,019 new passports were issued and 10,75,384 scellaneous services                   
 were rendered by all Passport Offices in India. Detailed input-output figures in                          
 respect of passports and miscellaneous services are given at Appendix VII. In addition,                   
 a total of 969 diplomatic passports and 3669 official passports were issued by the CPV                    
 Division. About 6,000 ellaneous services pertaining to official and diplomatic                            
 passports were also rendered. A ll the 21 Passport Offices and 2 Passport Liaison                         
 Offices functioned normally except the Passport Office in Srinagar which continued to                     
 remain non-nctional. Presently, the work of Srinagar office is being looked after by                      
 the Passport Office, Delhi. A statement showing revenue earned and expenditure incurred                   
 by Passport Offices from 1 January to 31 December 1991 is at Appendix VIII.                               
                                                                                                           
 During 1991, 1,171 cases of deportation of Indian nationals by foreign Governments were                   
 brought to the notice of the Government of India. Indian Missions and Posts abroad                        
 repatriated 214 Indian nationals on Government cost.                                                      
                                                                                                           
 During the year, approximately 1,584 cases of Indian nationals arrested in foreign                        
 countries had conic to the notice of the Ministry. All possible consular assistance was                   
 rendered to them and in some cases their release and return to India was facilitated.                     
                                                                                                           
 Four hundred and five cases of death of foreign nationals in India were also handled.                     
 About 972 cases of death compensation in respect of Indian nationals (tied abroad were                    
 processed. One lakh fourteen thousand four hundred eighty documents received from the                     
 public for submission to foreign authorities were attested/authenticated by the CPV                       
 Division.                                                                                                 
 1991                                                                                                      
 Administration And Organization                                                                           
                                                                                     Top                   
 SHRI Madhavsinh Solanki assumed charge as Minister for External Affairs on Jun 21, 1991                   
 following change in the Government at the Centre. Shri Eduardo Faleiro assumed charge                     
 as Minister of State for External Affairs also on 21 June 1991. Earlier, Shri Digvijay                    
 Singh demitted charge as Deputy Minister for External Affairs on 21 June 1991.                            
                                                                                                           
 Shri J N Dixit assumed charge as Foreign Secretary on 1 December 1991. He took over                       
 from Shri Muchkund Dubey who retired on 30 November 1991. Shri J R Hiremath                               
 relinquished the charge of the office of Special Envoy of Prime Minister to Africa on                     
 14 November 1991 on expiry of his term.                                                                   
                                                                                                           
 Following internal disturbances in Somalia India's Mission in Mogadiscio was                              
 temporarily closed on 8 January 1991.                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 The Ministry now has 139 Resident Missions/Posts abroad manned by officials from India.                   
 In keeping with the economic austerity measures being undertaken by the Government of                     
 India, the Ministry is committed to meeting the requirements of the new Missions being                    
 opened in the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States (former Soviet Union)                   
 as well as in sonic other countries within the existing budgetary provisions and                          
 existing personnel strength as far as possible by reducing expenditure and posts in                       
 other Missions.                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 The total sanctioned strength of the IFS and IFS(B) at Headquarters and Indian                            
 Missions/Posts abroad is 3409. This includes certain posts borne oil th e budget of                       
 Ministry of Commerce but excludes posts held in abeyance ex-cadered. The cadrewise                        
 strength is at Appendix IX. The list of officers in this Ministry qualified in various                    
 foreign languages is at Appendix X.                                                                       
                                                                                                           
 On account of a freeze owing to budgetary constraints, fresh proposals for the                            
 acquisition of properties and commencement of construction were not taken up till                         
 recently. However, construction activity on ongoing projects continued . The                              
 Chancery-cum-residential complex at Lagos was completed and occupied.                                     
                                                                                                           
 The construction of an office-cum-residential block in New York for the Permanent                         
 Mission of India to the UN is at an advanced stage. The Chancery- cum-residential                         
 building for CGI, Dubai has been functionally completed and the offices occupied in                       
 December 1991. The Chancery-cum-residential building at Kuala Lumpur is expected to be                    
 completed in the first half of 1992. The new building at Kuwait suffered a setback due                    
 to the Gulf War during which the building sustained some damage. Repair work has been                     
 started and the building is expected to be ready for occupation by mid 1992.                              
                                                                                                           
 The construction of Embassy complexes at Riyadh, Kathmandu and Abu Dhabi and a                            
 residential block at Islamabad are at an advanced stage of planning. Tenders for the                      
 construction of the Indira Gandhi Cultural Centre at Mauritius are due to be floated                      
 soon. In India, the construction of buildings for the Regional Passport Offices in                        
 Cochin and Calicut is in progress and the construction of the Foreign Service Training                    
 Institute in New Delhi and the Regional Office of the ICCR at Calcutta are at advanced                    
 stages of planning.                                                                                       
                                                                                                           
 Administrative inspections of the Indian Missions at Kathmandu, Windhoek, Abidjan,                        
 Dakar, Accra, Prague, Sofia, Budapest, Thimpu, Mexico,- Kingston, Georgetown and Port                     
 of Spain were conducted during the year with a view to reviewing and improving the                        
 functioning of and working conditions in these Missions.                                                  
                                                                                                           
 Efforts continued to streamline and simplify procedures in several areas and to upgrade                   
 the quality of office equipment. Work in several areas of the Ministry and various                        
 Missions is being computerised. Proposals have been made to decentralise and to                           
 delegate decision-making powers to Missions abroad on various administrative matters.                     
 1991                                                                                                      
 Foreign Service Training Institute                                                                        
                                                                                     Top                   
 During the year under review, the Foreign Service Training Institute re- designed and                     
 restructured the existing training curricula for the IFS Probationers in tune with the                    
 evolving international realities and the current economic and commercial priorities of                    
 the Government. In order to enhance the capabilities of the trainees in major foreign                     
 languages, the FSTI introduced during the year language classes in French for IFS                         
 Probationers and in spoken Arabic for newly recruited Assistants. The Basic                               
 Professional Course meant for IFS(B) personnel being posted abroad was rehashed and                       
 retooled with more stress on finance, accounts and cash-book management. The computer                     
 Courses were made hands-on oriented so that the participants become familiar with real                    
 life situation from the very first day. The Refresher Course for Commercial                               
 Representatives was modified to help acquaint the CRs with the new monetary, fiscal,                      
 commercial and industrial policies of the Government and their implications for                           
 enhancing India's export, attracting foreign investment and facilitating technology                       
 transfer.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                           
 The FSTI organized the following training programmes during the year:                                     
 (i) Professional Course in Diplomacy and International Relations for IFS Probationers                     
 (1990 and 1991 batches)-2 courses;                                                                        
 (ii) Orientation Programme for Spouses-1 course;                                                          
 (iii) Refresher Course for Commercial Representatives-1 course (to be held in March                       
 1992);                                                                                                    
 (iv) Familiarization Programme for Resident Foreign Diplomats-1 course (to be conducted                   
 in February 1992);                                                                                        
 (v) Orientation Programme for Central Trade Service officers-1 course;                                    
 (vi) Basic Professional Course for IFS(B) Personnel being posted abroad-5 courses;                        
 (vii) Induction course for Assistants-1 course;                                                           
 (viii) Computer Courses-10 courses;                                                                       
 (ix) French Language Course for IFS (Probationers)-1 course; and                                          
 (x) Arabic Language Course for Assistants-1 course.                                                       
                                                                                                           
 The year-long Professional Course in Diplomacy and International Relations for 12 IFS                     
 Probationers of the 1990 batch consisted of 22 modules covering the following areas:                      
 International Relations; International Economic Relations; Multilateral Diplomacy;                        
 International Law; Cultural Diplomacy; Diplomatic Practice and Protocol;                                  
 Representational Skills; Hindi; Administration/Establishment/Finance and Accounts;                        
 Commercial Work and International Marketing; Parliamentary Processes and Procedures;                      
 External Publicity; Indian Foreign Policy and National Security Isues; Consular Work;                     
 Overseas Indians; Effective Communication; and Typing and Driving. The Institute also                     
 organized a comprehensive Bharat Darshan-cum-Study Tour and District Training Programme                   
 for the IFS Probationers (1990 Batch) during the summer months. Young diplomats from                      
 Botswana, the Maldives and Vietnam also attended a part of this Programme.                                
                                                                                                           
 The Programme for the IFS Probationers of the 1991 batch commenced on Dec 23, 1991 and                    
 will continue till December 1992. As in the past, a number of young diplomats from                        
 friendly countries attended this Programme from January to March 1992.                                    
                                                                                                           
 As part of FSTI's ongoing Programme, a total of 185 persons to be posted abroad                           
 attended the basic Professional Course which covered all aspects of functioning in                        
 Missions abroad. In collaboration with the BPC, short courses o n Computer                                
 Appreciation, Word Processing and Data base Management were organized so as to enable                     
 the participants familiarize themselves with modern office management tools and                           
 techniques.                                                                                               
                                                                                                           
 Under the UNDP Project No. IND/90/017, four IFS officers were sent for higher learning                    
 and training to the following Institutes:                                                                 
                                                                                                           
 (i) MIPP Programme - Johns Hopkins University, the USA;                                                   
 (ii) M.A. Degree Course in International Relations - Fletcher School of Law and                           
 Diplomacy, the USA;                                                                                       
 (iii) Diplomatic Associates Programme - Georgetown University, the USA; and                               
 (iv) Mid Career MPA - Harvard University, the USA.                                                        
                                                                                                           
 Also under the same project, indents were placed with the UNDP for purchase of a                          
 state-of-the-art computer assisted audio-visual equipment for the Language Laboratory                     
 to be set up, and softwares for setting up a Self Access Pair Learning (SAPL) Language                    
 booth.                                                                                                    
                                                                                                           
 The FSTI continued to maintain contacts with other training institutes both in India                      
 and abroad. As a part of this ongoing process, the Dean of the Instit ute visited                         
 various institutions in Geneva, London, Washington, Boston and New York in July-August                    
 1991 under grants made available through the UNDP Project No. IND/90/017.                                 
                                                                                                           
 As a part of its publication programme, the FSTI brought out a written symposium                          
 entitled "The Head of Mission". In addition, the FSTI also brought out the following                      
 background materials for its trainees:                                                                    
                                                                                                           
 (i) Fifth Refresher Course for Commercial Representatives;                                                
 (ii) Computer Appreciation Programme for Senior Officers;                                                 
 (iii) Basic Data Management Course;                                                                       
 (iv) Introduction to Passport, Consular & Visa work in Missions;                                          
 (v) Fifth Orientation Programme for spouses;                                                              
 (vi) Programme on Crisis Management;                                                                      
 (vii) Basic Professional Course: A Handout; and                                                           
 (viii) Professional Course in Diplomacy and International Relations for entrants to the                   
 Indian Foreign Service.                                                                                   
 1991                                                                                                      
 Use Of Hindi In Official Work                                                                             
                                                                                     Top                   
 The Ministry of External Affairs is charged with the dual responsibility of                               
 implementation of official language policy of the Union of India at Headqarters,                          
 Regional Passport Offices located in India and Indian Missions/ Posts abroad and                          
 propagation of Hindi abroad. The aforesaid work is accomplished by the Hindi Section of                   
 the Ministry. In addition, Hindi Section also caters to the entire translation work in                    
 the Ministry from English to Hindi and vice-versa.                                                        
                                                                                                           
 A Hindi Advisory Committee is working in the Ministry under the chairmanship of                           
 Minister for External Affairs to render advice and guidance to the Ministry in the                        
 field of implementation of Official Language Policy and allied matters. An Official                       
 Language Implementation Committee headed by JS(AD) is also working to oversee the                         
 progress in the progressive use of Hindi in the official work.                                            
                                                                                                           
 During the year, Ministry continued with various schemes of progressive use of Hindi at                   
 headquarters as well as at its various Passport Offices. Workshops for those who have                     
 attained working knowledge of Hindi were organized with a view to removing their                          
 hesitation in doing their official work in Hindi. In pursuance of the provisions of                       
 official language rules, PE Section of the Minis try has been nominated for doing its                     
 entire work in Hindi.                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 English typists were nominated for Hindi typing training and officers not possessing                      
 working knowledge of Hindi were also sent for Hindi training. In compliance of the                        
 Department of Official Language's instructions Hindi week was observed and various                        
 competitions were organized at the Headquarters, in some of the Indian Missions abroad                    
 and also in some of the Passport Offices located in India. Special Consultation Cell                      
 was set up at Akbar Bhavan during the week to remove the problems faced by the                            
 employees intending to do their official work in Hindi. On this occasion an appeal from                   
 the Minister for External Affairs was issued to all officers and employees requesting                     
 them to do their maximum work in Hindi. JS(AD) also took an active part in the                            
 organization of Hindi Week and. held a meeting of officers with a view to request them                    
 to encourage the use of Hindi. In addition, High Commission of India, Dhaka, Embassy of                   
 India, Tokyo, Embassy of India, Paramaribo and Passport Offices situated at Bhopal,                       
 Bareilly, Lucknow, Ahmedabad and Delhi have celebrated Hindi Week/Day and organized                       
 various competitions with a view to create suitable atmosphere for use of Hindi in the                    
 official work.                                                                                            
                                                                                                           
 This year too the Ministry continued with a Rajbhasha running shield scheme for its                       
 Regional Passport Offices located in India to encourage them to do their maximum work                     
 in Hindi. As a result Passport Offices in Ahmedabad, Bhopal, Bareilly, Lucknow and                        
 Delhi gave a good account of themselves in this field.                                                    
                                                                                                           
 In discharge of its obligation regarding propagation of Hindi abroad, the Ministry                        
 processed the demands received from the Governmental and Non- Governmental bodies and                     
 individuals engaged in the propagation of Hind abroad and sent the required Hindi                         
 teaching aid material, Hindi typewriters, etc to them through Indian Missions abroad                      
 free of cost. In addition, the Ministry donated kits of Hindi teaching aid material to                    
 a large number of Universities/ Institutions teaching Hindi abroad.                                       
                                                                                                           
 During the year, Indian Missions were requested to further improve the work of                            
 propagation of Hindi in the countries of their accreditation. Embassy of India, Seoul                     
 organized debates in the Hangcook University and the foreign Participants were suitably                   
 awarded. Hindi classes for children continued to be held in the Missions abroad and                       
 this scheme produced good results.                                                                        
                                                                                                           
 The aforesaid efforts have resulted in an atmosphere conducive to the use of Hindi in                     
 official work at headquarters, Indian Missions abroad and Passport Offices located in                     
 India.                                                                                                    
 1991                                                                                                      
 Cultural Relations                                                                                        
                                                                                     Top                   
 The Indian Council for Cultural Relations was established in 1950 to foster and                           
 strengthen the cultural relations and mutual understanding between India and other                        
 countries. The Council continued to work towards these objectives steadily during                         
 1991-92 by further strengthening and expanding its activities through its various Wings                   
 like publications, incoming and outgoing cultural troupes, incoming and outgoing                          
 distinguished visitors, incoming and outgoing exhibitions, foreign students, cultural                     
 centres abroad, etc. While maintaining the traditional and historical ties with all                       
 countries in the field of culture and education, the Council continued to make special                    
 efforts to strengthen its interaction and projection of culture in Asia, Africa and                       
 Latin America with particular emphasis on neighbouring countries. Among the highlights                    
 of this year's activities, the Council, as part of the Maulana Abul Kalam Azad                            
 Centenary Celebrations, organized an International Seminar on Sufism in New Delhi in                      
 November 1991. The participants in the Seminar included about 30 delegates from 18                        
 countries and over 50 participants from India. The foreign delegates came from                            
 Afghanistan, France, Pakistan, Iraq, th e UK, Russia, Bangladesh, Iran, Turkey, Japan,                    
 Malaysia, Czech and Slovak Federal Republic, the USA, Nepal, Thailand, Italy and the                      
 Sudan. Fifty papers were presented on the three major themes: "History and Philosophy                     
 of Sufism", "Contemporary Relevance of Sufism" and "Sufism and the Arts". A unique                        
 Exhibition of Calligraphy and Manuscripts pertaining to Sufism was arranged on the                        
 occasion in collaboration with the National Museum, New Delhi. A publication entitled                     
 `The Rubiyat of Sarmad' containing select qatrains of the Sufi Saint and Poet, Sarmad,                    
 with Maulana Abul Kalam Azad's essay `Sarmad Shaheed' rendered into English, was                          
 released on the occasion. The book, with a special Foreward by the Vice President, Dr                     
 Shanker Dayal Sharma, is being published in Urdu as well.                                                 
                                                                                                           
 As part of the Seminar, the ICCR organized performing arts events based on Sufi music,                    
 literature and poetry. Baul songs, Sufiana Kalam, Tarana, Qawwali, the musical `Sulagde                   
 Darya' based on Bulle Shah's verses, Lallan Geeti from Bangladesh and dances of the                       
 Whirling Dervishes from Turkey were presented on the occasion.                                            
                                                                                                           
 It was the first time ever that an International Seminar on Sufism on such a broad                        
 scale had been organized in India. The Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International                           
 Understanding for 1989 was awarded to President Robert Gabriel Mugabe of Zimbabwe at a                    
 function held on Nov 14, 1991 at Rashtrapati Bhawan. The President, Shri R                                
 Venkataraman, presented the Award in the presence of the Vice President, Dr Shanker                       
 Dayal Sharma, Prime Minister, Shri P V Narasimha Rao and a large number of high                           
 dignitaries.                                                                                              
                                                                                                           
 The Jury for the Jawaharlal Nehru Award, chaired by the Vice President, announced its                     
 decision to confer the Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding for 1990                    
 on Dr Helmut Kohl, Federal Chancellor of Germany. During the year, a 55-member ballet                     
 group led by the renowned Bolshoi Ballet Soloist V Gordeev and a 22-member music group                    
 led by popular singer, V Leontiev, from Russia visited India on the occasion of the                       
 20th Anniversary of Indo-USSR Treaty for Peace, Friendship and Cooperation. As a part                     
 of the Swedish Cultural Manifestation in India, a composite group of Swedish dance and                    
 music visited India during December 1991 and performed in Delhi, Ahmedabad, Bombay,                       
 Calcutta and Imphal. In August 1991, the prestigious dance and music group `Amandla' of                   
 the African National Congress visited India and performed in Delhi, Calcutta and                          
 Bombay.                                                                                                   
                                                                                                           
 The Council played its part in observing the Bicentennial of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart by                   
 sponsoring visit and performances by two quartets from Austria, two Chamber Orchestras                    
 from Germany and the noted Pianist Kjell Baekkelund from Norway.                                          
                                                                                                           
 As a part of the "Switzerland in India", two groups of BRYNOSPOERRI RETO WEBER DUI and                    
 KURT HESS/SUE LOH visited India to give performances.                                                     
                                                                                                           
 Apart from this, cultural groups from Afghanistan, Australia, Bangladesh, France,                         
 Germany and Portugal were invited by the Council for performances in Delhi and other                      
 cities of India. In connection with the visit of foreign and o ther dignitaries, the                      
 Council organized six performances by Indian artists in Delhi.                                            
                                                                                                           
 The Council collaborated with the Centre for Spanish Studies of Jawaharlal Nehru                          
 University in organizing the Second International Conference on 20th Century Hispanism                    
 in November 1991 in New Delhi. A one-day colloquium on Victoria Ocampo, the Argentinian                   
 poetess, and her interaction with Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore was held on this                            
 occasion. The Council invited eminent and distinguished scholars from Latin America and                   
 the Philippines in addition t o several Indian scholars.                                                  
                                                                                                           
 The Council collaborated with the National Centre for Performing Arts, Bombay, in                         
 organizing a 7-day Seminar on the subject `Actor at Work' in November 1991.                               
                                                                                                           
 In 1989, the Council started conducting an essay competition to coincide with the                         
 centenary year of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad. The second essay competition for 1990 on                       
 `The Philosophy of Humanism as expressed in the Holy Quran' was conducted in English,                     
 Hindi and Urdu. The competition was open to the nationals of ail SAARC countries. The                     
 Council received a total of 54 entries in English, 39 in Hindi and 25 in Urdu.                            
                                                                                                           
 The Council was entrusted by the Department of Culture, Ministry of Human Resource                        
 Development, with the presentation of the entire performing arts component of the                         
 Festival of India in Germany, which was by far the single largest component of the                        
 Festival. A special Selection Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri H Y Sharada                        
 Prasad was set-up. The conceptualisation, selection and presentation of the Performing                    
 Arts Section involved painstaking efforts over a one year period. The Festival was                        
 inaugurated in Bonn on 7 September 1991 by the Prime Minister, Shri P V Narasimha Rao,                    
 and the Federal Chancellor of Germany, Dr Helmut Kohl. About 150 artists, in 16 groups,                   
 participated in the inaugural phase of the Festival. Four classical gr oups were part                     
 of "Leela", the inaugural presentation. Twelve folk groups from different States of                       
 India participated in "Ranjani", the outdoor presentation h eld in squares and market                     
 places in eight cities of Germany. These and subsequent performing arts events have                       
 received an overwhelmingly Warm response and positive acclaim from the public and in                      
 the electronic and print media.                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 Three groups, i.e. puppet, chhau and kathakali were sent between October and December                     
 1991 under the Indian Traditional Theatre & Puppet Series. The closing phase of the                       
 Festival of India in Germany in February and March 1992 include a joint theatre                           
 production where Girish Karnad's 'Nagamandala', translated into German, is being                          
 presented by the Leipzig Theatre Company directed by Vijaya Mehta. The premier will be                    
 followed by a Seminar on theatre with the participants of Indian and German theatre                       
 experts, directors and critics.                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 There will be a major presentation of Indian classical music both Carnatic and                            
 Hindustani and of classical dance. Even before the Festival was formally inaugurated,                     
 the Council participated in several curtain raising events in Berlin including the                        
 Indian Music Village Project, special events on Independence Day (August 1991) and the                    
 Popular Music Festival.                                                                                   
                                                                                                           
 Taken as whole, the performing arts events of the Festival of India in Germany have                       
 generated tremendous goodwill and interest, and will now be followed up with new series                   
 of collaborated projects through ICCR's Cultural Centre in Berlin.                                        
                                                                                                           
 Apart from the Festival of India groups, the Council sponsored over 85 performing arts                    
 groups during the year for participation in important international festivals and to                      
 give performances at the invitation of foreign Governments and private institutions.                      
 The Council participated in the Limasol Festival in Cyprus, the Manila International                      
 Festival of Dance Academics, the Cerventino Festival in Mexico, the International                         
 Ramayana Festival in Thailand, the April Spring Friendship Art Festival in Pyongyang                      
 (DPRK), the Alma-Ata Festival in Kazakhstan, the Festival of Experimental Theatre in                      
 Cairo, the Autumn Festival of the University of Witwatersand in Johannesburg, the                         
 International Puppet Festival in Bilbao (Spain), the Carthage Festival in Tunisia and                     
 others.                                                                                                   
                                                                                                           
 At the request of the Mauritian Government, the Council sent a delegation of eminent                      
 scholars, led by Mohd. Shafi Qureshi, Governor of Bihar, to participate in the World                      
 Urdu Conference in Mauritius in December 1991. Urdu books, dictionaries and typewriters                   
 from India were presented during the Conference. An exhibition on Urdu calligraphy                        
 together with a calligrapher to conduct master classes was also sent on the occasion of                   
 the Conference. Renowned ghazal singer, Talat Aziz, participated in the cultural events                   
 held during the Conference.                                                                               
                                                                                                           
 The ICCR in collaboration with the Government of Egypt and the Embassy of India in                        
 Cairo organized a major Seminar in Cairo on "Historical and Cultural Relations between                    
 Egypt and India through the Ages", A high-level delegation of scholars, academicians                      
 and writers, led by Dr Najma Heptulla, Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, participated                   
 in this event.                                                                                            
                                                                                                           
 Similarly, in Ankara (Turkey) a Symposium on "Cross-Cultural Influences on Indo-Turkish                   
 Relations" was organized by the Council in collaboration with the Government of Turkey                    
 and the Embassy of India in Ankara to commemorate the 40th Anniversary of the                             
 Indo-Turkish Cultural Agreement signed during the visit of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad to                     
 that country in 1951.                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 These events in Cairo and Ankara were the first of their kind ever to be held. The                        
 resultant interaction between the intellectuals of India and these countries have had a                   
 positive resonance and has created the environment for establishing institutional                         
 linkages and continuing the exchanges further. Alre ady with Egypt, it has been decided                   
 to bring out a joint publication on the result s of the Seminar.                                          
                                                                                                           
 As in the past, the Council under its Distinguished Visitors Programme se nt out and                      
 received scholars, writers, intellectuals, academicians and creative individuals from                     
 different walks of life during 1991-92. Under the Outgoing Visitors Programme, the ICCR                   
 sent out 77 persons. Out of this, 20 were sent to Asia, 18 to Africa, 3 to Australia, 1                   
 to Latin America, 3 to USA and 32 to European countries. Eight Scholars were sent to                      
 Mauritius to participate in th e Second World Marathi Conference and a 3-Member                           
 Delegation of the Association of Writers & Illustrators for Children was sent to Italy                    
 to partici pate in the Children's Book Fair at Bologna.                                                   
                                                                                                           
 Under its Incoming Visitors Programme, the Council received a total number of 100                         
 visitors. Out of this, 53 persons were from Asia, 15 from Africa , 1 from Australia, 3                    
 from USA, 9 from Latin America and 19 from European countries. This include the visits                    
 of Dr Raymond Ranjeva, Judge of the International Court of Justice, and Mrs Ranjeva                       
 from Madagascar, Dr Haris Silajdzic, Minister for International Cooperation of the                        
 Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and his wife from Yugoslavia, Princess Wizdan Ali                      
 from Jordan, Mr Mir Hussain Musavi, the former Prime Minister of Iran, Dr Daisaku Ikada                   
 of Japan, Dr Jose V Abveva, President of the University of Phillippines, Mr Justice                       
 Ismail Mahomed, Judge of the Supreme Court of South Africa, Fatima Meer (biographer of                    
 Dr Nelson Mandela) from South Africa and Dr Jairam Reddy, Vice Chancellor, University                     
 of Durban, West Ville.                                                                                    
                                                                                                           
 During the year, the Council sent abroad 12 exhibitions of contem- porary arts and                        
 traditional Arts and crafts and provided travel grants for 16 artistes/commissioners.                     
 During the year 5 exhibitions of contemporary art/crafts were received from abroad for                    
 display in India and two foreign commissioners were accorded local hospitality.                           
                                                                                                           
 Some of the important exhibitions sent abroad were on small sculpture (curated by Nagji                   
 Patel) to Namibia and Zimbabwe, graphics by Bimal Das to Egypt, cartoons by Sudhir Dar                    
 and Abu Abraham to Bulgaria, Yugoslavia and Turkey, an exhibition on the life and works                   
 of Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore to China and Egypt, separate exhibitions on contemporary                   
 Indian art and Indian handicrafts to Cuba, contemporary paintings to Sri Lanka, and a                     
 major exhibition of contemporary art, curated by Jogen Choudhry, to Bangladesh.                           
                                                                                                           
 An exhibition of 29 original works by Rabindranath Tagore, together with a photographic                   
 exhibition on the life of Tagore, prepared in collaboration with Rabindra Bharati                         
 University, Calcutta was sent to Beijing and Cairo. The Vice Chancellor of Rabindra                       
 Bharati University visited the two places on the occasio n of the exhibition and gave                     
 talks on Gurudev Tagore. In China, the exhibition was also accompanied by a specialty                     
 choreographed production of Tagore's dance drama "Tasher Desh", done by Manjushree                        
 Chaki Sircar of Dancers' Guild, Calcutta. Both in Egypt and China, this exhibition has                    
 created a specia l impact and been enthusiastically received.                                             
                                                                                                           
 Equally well-received was the exhibition of contemporary arts sent to Dac ca in January                   
 1992. Some of the incoming exhibitions organised were the exhibitions of Portuguese                       
 tiles and paintings, handicrafts/photographs from Cyprus, contemporary clay works from                    
 Japan, etc.                                                                                               
                                                                                                           
 The Council is now the nodal agency for administering all the major scholarship schemes                   
 for foreign students offered by the Government of India. During 1991-92, the Council,                     
 for the first time, administered these schemes ful ly including seeking nominations                       
 from foreign Governments, corresponding with over 75 Universities and arranging                           
 admissions of the foreign students in the courses requested. Over 1000 scholarships are                   
 offered each year by the Government of India to students from over 84 countries. This                     
 year, for the fir st time, the utilisation rate of the scholarships crossed the 50%                       
 mark and went as high as 60%. Payment of scholarships at a substantially enhanced rates                   
 has bee n fully implemented during the year. In order to strengthen the office of the                     
 Foreign Students Advisers in different Universities, the Sumptuary Allowances at                          
 enhanced rates has also been paid to the Advisers. The details of each scho lar have                      
 been computerised by the Computer Wing of the Council in order to further streamline                      
 payments and other requirements of foreign scholars.                                                      
                                                                                                           
 For the welfare of foreign students, the Council organized two Summer Camps during the                    
 year. One Summer Camp was held in North India covering Simla, Kulu and Manali and the                     
 second covering Mysore, Ooty and Bangalore in South India. About 75 foreign students                      
 from different countries participate d in these two camps. Foreign Student's Day, as in                   
 the past, was celebrated by t he Council on 11 November 1991 at the Headquarters and at                   
 the Regional Offices and various Indian Universities. Functions were also organized in                    
 a large number of Indian Missions abroad. The Council, financially and otherwise,                         
 assisted different foreign students organizations and individual foreign schola rs in                     
 distress. Regional Offices also organized orientation courses and other get -                             
 to-gethers for the benefit of the foreign student.                                                        
                                                                                                           
 The Publications Wing of the Council continued to remain active during the period.                        
 Important publications released (luring this period were- "Discovery of India" (3rd                       
 Abridged Edition), "Vision of India" (Arabic Edition) with the assistance of the                          
 Embassy of India in Damascus, and "The Rubiyat of Sarmad".                                                
                                                                                                           
 Two other publication entitled "Science - A Supranational Activity" (Azad Memorial                        
 Lecture by Sir Andrew Huxley) and "Jawaharlal Nehru : An Anthology" (Arabic Edition)                      
 are under print. The Council participated in the International Book Fairs in Moscow and                   
 Frankfurt through the National Book Trust. The council continued to publish six                           
 quarterly journals: `Indian Horizons' and `Africa Quarterly' in English, `Gagananchal'                    
 in Hindi, `Taqafat-ul-Hind' in Arabic, `Rencontre avec l Inde' in French and `Papeles                     
 de la India' in Spanish. During the year, the Audio Visual Reference Unit of the                          
 Council was further strengthened by adding recordings of 10 Indian performances and 22                    
 performances by foreign groups in U-matic tapes. During the International Seminar on                      
 Sufism two short films, namely, `Sufism and the Composite Culture of India' by Saeed                      
 Naqvi and `Lamp in the Niche' by Girish Karnad were brought out in a special edition                      
 for distribution to all participants.                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 In collaboration with Doordarshan, a Panel discussion and a special programme on the                      
 International Seminar on Sufism as well as interviews by some distinguished visitors                      
 were arranged for telecast. With extracts from the Audio Visual material of the                           
 Council, requisite media publicity was given to the Nehru Award Ceremony, the Sufism                      
 Seminar and World Urdu Conference held in Mauritius to ensure widespread dissemination                    
 of these events.                                                                                          
                                                                                                           
 The Library of the Council continued to be used by the scholars interested in all                         
 aspects of India's cultural heritage, in the original works of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad                    
 and on African Studies. The Library added about 1,000 titles to its existing 75,000                       
 volumes during the year. More than 2,000 readers including leading scholars and                           
 researchers utilised the library services and ha ve acknowledged the library's                            
 contribution in their specialised publications. The Azad Collection which has been                        
 given special importance by establishing the Gosh-e-Azad, is now being utilised by                        
 large number of scholars. During the year, 60 documents (57 manuscripts and 3 books)                      
 from the Azad Collection were laminated and bound as part of a special drive to                           
 preserve these rare documents, which include his hand-written manuscripts.                                
                                                                                                           
 The Council which provides the Secretariat for the Indo-US Sub- Commission continued to                   
 coordinate its activities with a wide cross section of Departments/Organizations. The                     
 Joint meeting of the Indo-US Sub-Commission on Education & Culture was held on 9 and 10                   
 April 1991 in the USA and from 3 to 5 February 1992 in India.                                             
                                                                                                           
 Meetings of the Indian Panel of the Sub-Commission on Education & Culture were held                       
 under the Chairmanship of Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha on 8 July 1991 and 8 January 1992 to                      
 deliberate and evolve joint postures on the items under the Joint Media Committee and                     
 the Joint Committee on Cultural Heritage and Endeavour.                                                   
                                                                                                           
 The Meeting of the Joint Committee on Culture was held on 18 and 19 November 1991 and                     
 the meeting of the Joint Media Committee was held of 21 and 22 November 1991 both in                      
 New York.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                           
 The Council continued to supervise the work of Foreign Cultural Centres in India                          
 especially the operation of British Libraries at Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Bhopal, Lucknow,                   
 Patna, Thiruvananthapuram, Hyderabad and Pune. The Council supervised and gave                            
 clearance for the activities of Alliance Francaise, Max Muller Bhawan, Japan Cultural                     
 Centre and Portugal Cultural Centre. The Council provides administrative support to                       
 these foreign centres and also collaborated with them whenever possible in organizing                     
 Cultural programmes. The Council was actively involved in completing the administrative                   
 work relatin g to closure of House of Soviet Culture in Trivandrum.                                       
                                                                                                           
 The Presentation Unit of the Council arranged to send books on various aspects of                         
 Indian culture and handicrafts, musical instruments and art objects totalling                             
 approximately Rs 15 lakhs to Indian Missions abroad for presentation to institutions                      
 and universities. Reproduction of paintings, art objects, stat ionery items and music                     
 cassettes were also sent for various essay competitions organized by Indian Missions                      
 abroad. Twenty sets of Indian Musical Instruments were sent to Mauritius for                              
 presentation to different organizations for Promotio n of Indian music and dance in                       
 Mauritius.                                                                                                
                                                                                                           
 For promoting greater awareness and appreciation of Indian cultural heritage abroad,                      
 the Council has established Indian Cultural Centres in Georgetown (Guyana), Jakarta                       
 (Indonesia), Moscow (Russia), Port Louis (Mauritius) and Paramaribo (Suriname). During                    
 1991-92, two new Cultural Centres were opened, respectively in Berlin (Germany) and                       
 Cairo (Arab Republic of Egypt). The Cairo Centre, named after Maulana Abul Kalam                          
 Azad,was augurated by Shri Madhavsinh Solanki, Minister for External Affairs, on 14                       
 January 1992.                                                                                             
                                                                                                           
 The Centres are expected to develop and maintain contacts with a wide cross-sections of                   
 local citizens including students, teachers, scholars and cul tural personalities,                        
 Universities and allied Institutions. Books, cassettes, video tapes and musical                           
 instruments have been sent to these cultural centres separately under various schemes.                    
                                                                                                           
 The Council also deputes to Universities and other interested institutions abroad                         
 visiting Professors for teaching Indology, Indian languages and allied subjects. During                   
 the year under review, over 22 academicians were in position in Belgium, France,                          
 Finland, Turkey, Bulgaria, Czech & Slovak Federal Republic, Poland, Russia, China,                        
 South Korea, Indonesia, Guyana, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago.                                         
                                                                                                           
 During the year, three advisory panels, viz, that of Africa, Latin America and the                        
 Caribbean, and South and South-East Asia have been reconstituted. In addition, the                        
 Advisory Panel for Overseas Indians to look after the interests of the Indians abroad                     
 as well as to foster better relationship with them has been constituted. Shri Eduardo                     
 Faleiro, Minister of State for External Affairs, is the Chairman of all the four                          
 panels. There have been two meetings of the Advisory Panel for South and South-East                       
 Asia on 23 October and 4 December 1991.                                                                   
                                                                                                           
 Under the Chairmanship of Shri H Y Sharada Prasad, Vice President of ICCR, the major                      
 Advisory Panels of the Council on the performing arts side met during the year. The                       
 meeting of the Advisory Panel for Theatre was hold on 3 May 1991 and the meeting of the                   
 Advisory Panel for Folk Art and Puppetry was held on 27 June 1991. The Advisory Panel                     
 on Music met on 28 February 1992 and the Advisory Panel on Dance met on 3 March 1992.                     
                                                                                                           
 The Joint Meetings of the ICCR Advisory Panel on Contemporary Arts and Traditional Arts                   
 & Crafts were held on 8 August 1991 and 29 January 1992 at Azad Bhawan. These two                         
 meetings were charred by Smt. Pupul Jayakar, Vice President of ICCR.                                      
                                                                                                           
 During the year, the General Assembly of the Council met on 24 October 1991 and the                       
 Governing Body met twice on 25 April and 24 October 1991. The other statutory body                        
 known its Finance Committee had its meeting of] 24 February 1991.                                         
                                                                                                           
 Within India, the Regional Offices of the Council are located at Bangalore, Bombay,                       
 Calcutta, Chandigarh, Lucknow, Thiruvananthapuram and Madras. During the year, a new                      
 Regional Office of the Council was opened in Hyderabad. The Hyderabad Regional Office                     
 was inaugurated by the Vice President of India, Dr Shanker Dayal Sharma, in the                           
 presence of the Governor and Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh. The Ground Breaking                        
 Ceremony of the Calcutta Cultural Complex-cum-Regional Office Project as designed by                      
 Shri Charles Correa was performed in August 1991 by the Vice President of India Dr                        
 Shanker Dayal Sharma in the presence of the Governor and the Chief Minister of West                       
 Bengal. The Regional Offices continued to remain active in promoting the Council's work                   
 in their respective areas in India.                                                                       
                                                                                                           
 1991                                                                                                      
 Appendix I Division-wise List of Countries                                                                
                                                                                     Top                   
 Jan 01, 1991 APPENDIX I Ministry of External Affairs-Division-wise List of Countries                      
                                                                                                           
    AFRICA DIVISION                                                                                        
 1  Angola                                                   38 Tanzania                                   
 2  Benin                                                    39 Togo                                       
 3  Botswana                                                 40 Uganda                                     
 4  Burkina Faso                                             41 Zaire                                      
 5  Burundi                                                  42 Zambia                                     
 6  Cameroon                                                 43 Zimbabwe                                   
 7  Cape Verde Islands                                                                                     
 8  Central African Republic                                    AMS DIVISION                               
 9  Chad                                                                                                   
 10 Comoros                                                  1  Canada                                     
 11 Congo                                                    2  United States of America                   
    Equatorial Guinea                                           (including Bahamas)                        
 13 Ethiopia                                                                                               
 14 Gabon                                                       BM DIVISION                                
 15 Gambia                                                                                                 
 16 Ghana                                                    1  Bangladesh                                 
 17 Guinea                                                   2  Myanmar                                    
 18 Guinea Bissau                                                                                          
 19 Cote d' Ivoire                                              EAST ASIA DIVISION                         
 20 Kenya                                                                                                  
 21 Lesotho                                                  1  People's Republic                          
    of China                                                                                               
 22 Liberia                                                  2  Hongkong                                   
 23 Madagascar                                               3  Japan                                      
 24 Malawi                                                   4  Democratic People's                        
    Republic of Korea                                                                                      
 25 Mali                                                     5  Republic of Korea                          
 26 Mauritius                                                6  People's Republic                          
    of Mongolia                                                                                            
 27 Mozambique                                                                                             
 28 Namibia                                                     EE DIVISION                                
 29 Niger                                                                                                  
 30 Nigeria                                                  1  Albania                                    
 31 Rwanda                                                   2  Armenia                                    
 32 Sao Tome & Principe                                      3  Azerbaijan                                 
 33 Senegal                                                  4  Belarus                                    
 34 Seychelles                                               5  Bulgaria                                   
 35 Sierra Leone                                             6  Czech and Slovak                           
    Federal Republic                                                                                       
 36 South Africa                                             7  Estonia                                    
 37 Swaziland                                                8  Georgia                                    
                                                                A-3                                        
    EE DIVISION-Contd.                                       26 United Kingdom of Great                    
    Britain                                                     and Northern Ireland                       
 9  Hungary                                                     GULF DIVISION                              
 10 Kazakhstan                                                                                             
 11 Kirghizstan                                                                                            
 12 Latvia                                                   1  Bahrain                                    
 13 Lithuania                                                2  Iraq                                       
 14 Moldova                                                  3  Kuwait                                     
 15 Poland                                                   4  Oman                                       
 16 Romania                                                  5  Qatar                                      
 17 Russia                                                   6  Saudi Arabia                               
 18 Tadjikistan                                              7  Republic of Yemen                          
 19 Turkmenistan                                             8  United Arab Emirates                       
 20 Ukraine                                                     IPA DIVISION                               
 21 Uzbekistan                                               1  Afghanistan                                
 22 Yugoslavia                                               2  Iran                                       
    EW DIVISION                                              3  Pakistan                                   
                                                                LAC DIVISION                               
 1  Austria                                                  1  Antigua & Barbuda                          
 2  Belgium                                                  2  Argentina                                  
 3  Cyprus                                                   3  Barbados                                   
 4  Denmark                                                  4  Belize                                     
 5  Finland                                                  5  Bolivia                                    
 6  France                                                   6  Brazil                                     
 7  Germany, Federal Republic of                             7  Chile                                      
 8  Gibraltar                                                8  Colombia                                   
 9  Greece                                                   9  Costa Rica                                 
 10 Holy See, The                                            10 Cuba                                       
 11 Iceland                                                  11 Commonwealth of Dominica                   
 12 Ireland                                                  12 Dominican Republic                         
 13 Italy                                                    13 Ecuador                                    
 14 Liechtenstein                                            14 El Salvador                                
 15 Luxembourg                                               15 Grenada                                    
 16 Malta                                                    16 Guatemala                                  
 17 Monaco                                                   17 Guyana                                     
 18 Netherlands                                              18 Haiti                                      
 19 Norway                                                   19 Honduras                                   
 20 Portugal                                                 20 Jamaica                                    
 21 San Marino                                               21 Mexico                                     
 22 Spain                                                    22 Nicaragua                                  
 23 Sweden                                                   23 Panama                                     
 24 Switzerland                                              24 Paraguay                                   
 25 Turkey                                                   25 Peru                                       
    LAC DIVISION-Contd.                                                                                    
                                                                A-4                                        
                                                             18 Thailand                                   
 26 St Christopher and Nevis                                 19 Tonga                                      
 27 St Lucia                                                 20 Tuvalu                                     
 28 St Vincent and the Grenadines                            21 UN Trust Territories                       
    Territories in South Pacific                                                                           
 29 Suriname                                                 22 Vanuatu                                    
 30 Trinidad & Tobago                                        23 Vietnam                                    
 31 Uruguay                                                                                                
 32 Venezuela                                                   SM DIVISION                                
    NORTHERN DIVISION                                        1  Sri Lanka                                  
 1  Bhutan                                                   2  Maldives                                   
 2  Nepal                                                    3  Indian Ocean                               
    SOUTHERN DIVISION                                           WANA DIVISION                              
 1  Austraila                                                1  Algeria                                    
 2  Brunei                                                   2  Djibouti                                   
 3  Cambodia                                                 3  Egypt                                      
 4  Fiji                                                     4  Israel                                     
 5  Indonesia                                                5  Jordan                                     
 6  Kiribati                                                 6  League of Arab States                      
 7  Laos                                                     7  Lebanon                                    
 8  Malaysia                                                 8  Libya                                      
 9  Nauru                                                    9  Mauritania                                 
 10 New Caledonia                                            10 Morocco                                    
 11 New Zealand                                              11 Palestine                                  
 12 Papua New Guinea                                         12 SADR (Sahrawi Arab                         
 13 Philippines                                                 Democratic Republic)                       
 14 Western Samoa                                            13 Somalia                                    
 15 Singapore                                                14 Sudan                                      
 16 Society Islands                                          15 Syria                                      
 17 Solomon Islands                                          16 Tunisia                                    
                                                                A-5                                        
                                                                                                           
 1991                                                                                                      
 Appendix II Treaties/Conventions/Agreements                                                               
                                                                                                           
  APPENDIX II                                                                                              
    Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or renewed by India with                                     
 other countries in 1991.                                                                                  
                                                                                                           
 Sl  Title of Convention/                Date of       Date of                                             
      Date on                                                                                              
 No  Treaty/Agreement etc                Signature    Ratification                                         
        which                                                                                              
                                          Accession                                                        
    entered                                                                                                
    or  into                                                                                               
                                                          Acceptance                                       
        force                                                                                              
 (1)        (2)                     (3)            (4)       (5)                                           
                                                                                                           
 MULTILATERAL Ozone Layer                                                                                  
 1    Vienna Convention for the Protection of         Mar 18, 1991                                         
   18.6.1991                                                                                               
 Ozone Layer                                                                                               
                                                                                                           
     International Labour Organization                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 2    Convention concerning Protection against 2.6.1991        8.5.1991                                    
      Hazards of poisoning arising from Benzene                                                            
     (Convention No. 136)                                                                                  
                                                                                                           
     INMARSAT AGREEMENT                                                                                    
                                                                                                           
 3    International Agreement on the Use of  10.5.1991  21.6.1991                                          
 INMARSAT Ship Earth Stations within the                                                                   
 Territorial Sea and Ports                                                                                 
                                                                                                           
      International Sugar Agreement                                                                        
                                                                                                           
 4    Extension of the International Sugar   30.7.1991   1.1.1991                                          
                                                                                                           
 Agreement 1987                                                                                            
                                                                                                           
     United Nations Development Programme                                                                  
                                                                                                           
 5    Agreement between India and the United 13.2.1991   25.7.1991                                         
                                                                                                           
 Nations Development Programme regarding                                                                   
 Project No. IND/91/002-Modernization of the                                                               
 Patent Information System (PIS), Nagpur                                                                   
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 6    Agreement between India and the United 25.2.1991   25.2.1991                                         
                                                                                                           
 Nations Development Programme regarding                                                                   
 Project No. IND/91/005-Strengthening of                                                                   
 Fluid Control Research Institute, Palghat                                                                 
                                                                                                           
 7    Agreement between India and the United 12.4.1991    12.4.1991                                        
                                                                                                           
 Nations Development Programme regarding                                                                   
 Project No. IND/91/010/A/01/11-Improve-                                                                   
 ment of Working Conditions and Productivity                                                               
 in Small Scale Enterprises                                                                                
                                                                                                           
         *This list is not exhaustive.                                                                     
                 A-6                                                                                       
 (1)          (2)         (3)            (4)     (5)                                                       
                                                                                                           
 8   Agreement between India and the United 14.4.91   14.4.1991                                            
                                                                                                           
 Nations Development Programme regarding                                                                   
 Project No. IND/90/042-Transfer of Know-                                                                  
 ledge through Expatriate nationals (TOKEN-                                                                
 India) Pb.  II                                                                                            
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 9   Agreement between India and the United 19.4.1991  19.4.1991                                           
                                                                                                           
 Nations Development Programme regarding                                                                   
 Project No. IND/91/008/-Developrnent and                                                                  
 use of Hybrid Rice Technology (old number                                                                 
 IND/89/106)                                                                                               
                                                                                                           
 10   Agreement between India and the United  24.7.1991  24.7.1991                                         
                                                                                                           
 Nations Development Programme regarding                                                                   
 Project No. IND/91/025/A/101/99-Computer                                                                  
 Integrated Manufacturing                                                                                  
                                                                                                           
 11   Agreement between India and United Nations 29.8.1991   29.8.1991                                     
                                                                                                           
 Development Programme regarding Project                                                                   
 No. IND/91/026-Metals and Plastics Industries                                                             
 Services and Training Centre, Goa                                                                         
                                                                                                           
 12   Agreement between India and the United  8.10.1991   8.10.1991                                        
                                                                                                           
 Nations Development Programme regarding                                                                   
 Project No. IND/91/007-Upgradation of AIR                                                                 
 Archives with Refurbishing and Optical Disc                                                               
 Storage Facilities                                                                                        
                                                                                                           
 13   Agreement between India and the United  29.11.1991   29.11.1991                                      
                                                                                                           
 Nations Development Programme regarding                                                                   
 Project No. IND/91/040-Leather Sector                                                                     
 Programme                                                                                                 
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 14   Agreement between India and the United  13.12.1991  13.12.1991                                       
                                                                                                           
 Nations Development Programme regarding                                                                   
 Project No. IND/91/058-Microprocessor                                                                     
 Application Engineering Programme (Phase                                                                  
 II)                                                                                                       
                                                                                                           
 15   Agreement between India and the United  13.12.1991   13.12.1991                                      
                                                                                                           
 Nations Development Programme regarding                                                                   
 Project No. IND/91/093-Establishment of an                                                                
 Experimental/Demonstration  Unit for                                                                      
 manufacturing Super-purity Aluminium and                                                                  
 Condensor Foils from it--Feasibility Study                                                                
                                                                                                           
      A-7                                                                                                  
                                                                                                           
 (1)            (2)      (3)            (4)                 (5)                                            
 BILATERAL                                                                                                 
 Austria                                                                                                   
                                                                                                           
 16 Agreement between the Government of India 20.12.1991 20.12.1991                                        
                                                                                                           
 and the Austrian Federal Government on                                                                    
 Financial Assistance to India                                                                             
                                                                                                           
 Bangladesh                                                                                                
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 17Protocol on Inland Water Transit and Trade 8.10.1991  8.10.1991                                         
                                                    4.10.1991                                              
 between Government of India  and                                                                          
 Government of Bangladesh                                                                                  
                                                                                                           
 18     Convention between the Government of the  27.8.1991                                                
 Republic of India and the Government of the                                                               
 People's Republic of Bangladesh for the                                                                   
 Avoidance of Double Taxation and  the                                                                     
 Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to                                                              
 Taxes on Income                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 19     Credit Agreement between the Government of 27.8.1991 27.8.1991                                     
                                                                                                           
 the Republic of Idnia and the Government of                                                               
 the People's Republic of Bangladesh                                                                       
                                                                                                           
 China                                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 20     Memorandum of Understanding between the 13.12.1991 13.12.1991                                      
                                                                                                           
 Department of Space (DOS) of the Republic                                                                 
 of India and the Ministry of Aero-Space India                                                             
 (MAS) of the People's Republic of China on                                                                
 Cooperation in the Peaceful Application of                                                                
 Outer Space Science and Technology                                                                        
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 21     Consular Convention between the Republic of 13.12.1991                                             
 India and the People's Republic of China                                                                  
                                                                                                           
             Czech and Slovak Federal Republic                                                             
                                                                                                           
 22     Trade and Payments Agreement between the  17.1.1991    1.1.1991                                    
                                                                                                           
 Republic of India and Czech and Slovak                                                                    
 Federal Republic                                                                                          
                                                                                                           
 Iran                                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 23     Memorandum of Understanding on Consular 11.11.1991 11.11.1991                                      
                                                                                                           
 Matters between the Government of Islamic                                                                 
 Republic of Iran and the Republic of India                                                                
                                                                                                           
              A-8                                                                                          
 (1)             (2)          (3)           (4)      (5)                                                   
                                                                                                           
 24 Memorandum of Understanding between the   11.11.1991   11.11.1991                                      
     Government of the Republic of India, Ministry                                                         
 of Agricultural Research and Education, and                                                               
 the Government of Islamic Republic of Iran                                                                
 for Cooperation in the field of Agricultural                                                              
 Research and Education                                                                                    
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 25 Memorandum of Understanding of the Fifth  11.11.1991  11.11.1991                                       
                                                                                                           
 Session of Joint Ministerial Commission                                                                   
 between the Islamic Republic of Iran and the                                                              
 Republic of India                                                                                         
                                                                                                           
 26 Agreed Minutes of the Committee on   11.11.1991   11.11.1991                                           
                                                                                                           
 Cultural, Consular, Information, Scientific and                                                           
 Technical Cooperation                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 Japan                                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 27 Exchange of Notes between the Government  22.1.1991       22.1.1991                                    
                                                                                                           
 of India and the Government of Japan for                                                                  
 extension of grant of 981 million Yen for the                                                             
 project for provision of programme production                                                             
 Equipment for Mass Communication Research                                                                 
 Centre in Jamia Millia  Islamia Central                                                                   
 University                                                                                                
                                                                                                           
 28 Exchange of Notes between the Government  22.1.1991        22.1.1991                                   
                                                                                                           
 of India and the Government of Japan for                                                                  
 Extension of 375 million Yen for Expansion of                                                             
 Fish-Net making Machine Project                                                                           
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 29 Loan Agreement between the Government of  23.1.1991   23.1.1991                                        
       India and the Government of Japan for                                                               
 Afforestation and Pasture Development                                                                     
 Project along Indira Gandhi Canal Area                                                                    
                                                                                                           
 30  Loan Agreement between the Overseas    23.1.1991      23.1.1991                                       
                                                                                                           
 Economic Cooperation Fund, Japan and India                                                                
 for Teesta Canal Hydroelectric Project (II)                                                               
                                                                                                           
 31  Loan Agreement between the Overseas    23.1.1991       23.1.1991                                      
                                                                                                           
 Economic Cooperation Fund, Japan and India                                                                
 for Anpara `B' Thermal Power Station                                                                      
 Construction Project (III)                                                                                
                                                                                                           
 32  Loan Agreement between the Overseas   23.1.1991        23.1.1991                                      
 Economic Cooperation Fund, Japan and India                                                                
 for Power System Improvement and Small                                                                    
 Hydro Electric Project                                                                                    
                                                                                                           
                  A-9                                                                                      
 (1)          (2)         (3)             (4)     (5)                                                      
                                                                                                           
 33     Loan Agreement between the Overseas  23.1.1991    23.1.1991                                        
                                                                                                           
 Economic Cooperation Fund, Japan and India                                                                
 for Housing Programme for Low and Medium                                                                  
 Income Households                                                                                         
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 34 Loan Agreement between the Overseas   23.1.1991       23.1.1991                                        
                                                                                                           
 Economic Cooperation Fund, Japan and India                                                                
 for Small Scale Industries Development                                                                    
 Programme (II)                                                                                            
                                                                                                           
 35 Loan Agreement between the Overseas    23.1.1991       23.1.1991                                       
                                                                                                           
 Economic Cooperation Fund, Japan and India                                                                
 for Quality Control of Health Technologies                                                                
 Project                                                                                                   
                                                                                                           
 36 Exchange of Notes between the Government 8.5.1991       8.5.1991                                       
                                                                                                           
 of India and the Government of Japan for                                                                  
 Extension of the grant of 39,000,000 Yen to                                                               
 the National Museum for Import of Photo-                                                                  
 Documentation Equipment for the year 1991                                                                 
                                                                                                           
 37 Exchange of Notes between the Government  29.5.1991   29.5.1991                                        
                                                                                                           
 of India and Overseas Economic Cooperation                                                                
 Fund, Japan for Commodity Loan Assistance                                                                 
 of 20,256 million Yen for the year 1991-92                                                                
                                                                                                           
 38 Loan Agreement between the Overseas   31.5.1991      31.5.1991                                         
                                                                                                           
 Economic Cooperation Fund, Japan and India                                                                
 for Emergency Commodity Loan                                                                              
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 39 Notes of exchange between the Government 11.6.1991  1.10.1990 to                                       
                                                        31.3.1991                                          
     11.6.1991                                                                                             
 of India and the Government of Japan for                                                                  
 Extension of the Debt Relief Grant Aid of                                                                 
 Yen 373,050,000 for the period                                                                            
                                                                                                           
 40 Exchange of Notes and Loan Agreement  13.6.1991       13.6.1991                                        
                                                                                                           
 between the Government of India and the                                                                   
 Government of Japan for the Assistance of the                                                             
 Indian Project: Small Scale Industries                                                                    
 Development Programme (III)                                                                               
                                                                                                           
 41 Loan Agreement between the Overseas   13.6.1991      13.6.1991                                         
                                                                                                           
 Economic Cooperation Fund, Japan and India                                                                
 for Anpara Power Transmission System                                                                      
 Project (I)                                                                                               
                                                                                                           
 42 Exchange of Notes between the Government  2.7.1991      2.7.1991                                       
                                                                                                           
 of India and the Government of Japan for                                                                  
 Extension of the Japanese Giant of Assistance                                                             
 of 600 million Yen for increasing food                                                                    
 production for the year 1991-92                                                                           
                                                                                                           
                             A-10                                                                          
 (1)       (2)                (3)            (4)        (5)                                                
                                                                                                           
 Democratic People's Republic of                                                                           
 Korea                                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 43 Agreement between the Government of the   8.5.1991      8.5.1991                                       
                                                                                                           
 Republic of India and the Government of                                                                   
 Democratic People's Republic of Korea on                                                                  
 Co-operation in the fields of Science and                                                                 
 Technology                                                                                                
                                                                                                           
 Mauritius                                                                                                 
                                                                                                           
 44 Protocol  for Educational and Cultural Co- 24.1.1991    24.1.1991                                      
                                                                                                           
 operation between the Government of the                                                                   
 Republic  of India and the Government of                                                                  
 Mauritius  for the years 1990-92                                                                          
                                                                                                           
 Nepal                                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 45 Treaty of Trade between the Government of 6.12.1991    6.12.1991                                       
                                                                                                           
 India and His Majesty's Government of Nepal                                                               
                                                                                                           
 46 Treaty of Transit between the Government of    6,12.1991  6.12.1991                                    
                                                                                                           
 India and His Majesty's Government of Nepal                                                               
                                                                                                           
 47  Protocol of the Treaty of Transit between the  6.12.1991  6.12.1991                                   
                                                                                                           
 Government of India and His Majesty's                                                                     
 Government of Nepal                                                                                       
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 48     Agreement of Cooperation between the    6.12.1991   6.12.1991                                      
                                                                                                           
 Government of India and His Majesty's                                                                     
 Government of Nepal to control Unauthorised                                                               
 Trade                                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 Pakistan                                                                                                  
                                                                                                           
 49     Agreement on Prohibition on Attack Against  31.12.1991 27.1.1991                                   
                                                                                                           
 Nuclear Installations and Facilities between the                                                          
 Republic of India and the Islamic Republic of                                                             
 Pakistan                                                                                                  
                                                                                                           
 Philippines                                                                                               
                                                                                                           
 50     Agreement between the Government of tire 29.4.1991  29.4.1991                                      
                                                                                                           
 Republic of India and the Government of the                                                               
 Republic of Philippines for Cooperation on                                                                
 Utilization of Atomic Energy for Peaceful                                                                 
 Purposes                                                                                                  
                                                                                                           
              A-11                                                                                         
 (1)             (2)         (3)            (4)     (5)                                                    
                                                                                                           
 51      Memorandum of Understanding on      8.4.1991         8.4.1991                                     
       Cooperation in the fields of Agriculture,                                                           
 Science  and  Technology  between  the                                                                    
 Government of the Republic of India and the                                                               
 Government of the Republic of Philippines                                                                 
                                                                                                           
 Portugal                                                                                                  
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 52 Agreement on Cooperation in Tourism 29.7.1991        29.7.1991                                         
                                                                                                           
 between India and Portugal                                                                                
                                                                                                           
 Saudi Arabia                                                                                              
                                                                                                           
 53      Agreement between the Republic of India and   14.11.1991                                          
 the Kingdom  of Saudi Arabia for Avoidance                                                                
 of Double Taxation by Reciprocal Exemption                                                                
 of Taxes on Income on the Activities of Air                                                               
 Transport Enterprises of the two countries                                                                
                                                                                                           
 54  Agreed Minutes of the third Session of the 14.11.1991  14.11.1991                                     
                                                                                                           
 Indo-Saudi Joint Commission of Economic and                                                               
 Technical Cooperation                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 United Arab Emirates                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 55      Agreement Concerning International Money 1.4.1991  1.4.1991                                       
                                                                                                           
 Order Services from the United Arab Emirates                                                              
 to India                                                                                                  
   A-12                                                                                                    
                                                                                                           
 1991 Appendix III Major International Conferences/Meeting/Seminars                                        
                                                                                                           
    APPENDIX III                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 Major International Conferences/Meeting/Seminars etc Organized by Inter-                                  
 Governmental Organizations at which Government of India was  Represented                                  
 in 1991-92.                                                                                               
                                                                                                           
 Sl No Title of Conference               Venue              Date                                           
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 (1)        (2)                         (3)                 (4)                                            
                                                                                                           
 1  Seminar on the use of multiround Surveys Bangkok    20 to                                              
 , ********19910524 e ,                                                                                    
 e of multiround Surveys      Bangkok               20 to @@for                                            
 Estimating Vital                                                                                          
  Statistics organisated                                                                                   
 by UNESCAF                                                                                                
                                                                                                           
 2  First Research Coordination Meeting of Kuala Lumpur 9 to 13                                            
 International Atomic Energy Agency              September 1991                                            
 (IAEA)                                                                                                    
                                                                                                           
 3  TCDC Programming Exercise in  New Delhi 7 to 11 October 1991                                           
 Agricultural Sector                                                                                       
                                                                                                           
 4  Workshop on Asian Sugar Cane                                                                           
 Industry                        Islamabad 5 to 9 May 1991                                                 
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 5  FAO/AFMA/AMIS/BULOG Regional Jakarta 20 to 24 August 1991                                              
  Seminar                                                                                                  
                                                                                                           
 6  Social Meeting of SAARC Food Security Paro 1 to 2 October 1991                                         
                                                                                                           
    Reserve Board                                                                                          
                                                                                                           
 7  Third Session of the SAARC  Colombo 2 to 6 November 1991                                               
                                                                                                           
    Food Security Board                                                                                    
                                                                                                           
 8  Tenth Session of the Colombo 2 to 6 November 1991                                                      
 Council of Ministers                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 9  66th Session of the London   10 to 14June 1991                                                         
   International Maritime Organisation Council                                                             
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 10  16th Extraordinatary Session London 25 October 1991                                                   
  of the IMO Council                                                                                       
                                                                                                           
 11 17th Session of the London 28 October to 8 November 1991                                               
  IMO Assembly                                                                                             
                                                                                                           
 12  67th Session of the IMO Council London 8 November 1991                                                
                                                                                                           
 13  Seminar-cum-Study Tour in the    7 to 12 April 1991                                                   
 Development of Inland Waterways under                                                                     
 the aegis of ESCAP                                                                                        
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 14  Third IWT Training of Trainers Bangkok 12 to 28 June 1991                                             
 Programme under the aegis of ESCAP.                                                                       
                                                                                                           
 15  Regional Seminar on Dredging  Bangkok 11 to 15 November                                               
 relatedSediment Transport and                1991                                                         
 Siltation Problem under the aegis of ESCAP                                                                
                                                                                                           
 16  Thirty Eighth Session of the New York 3 to 28 June 1991                                               
   Governing Council of UNDP                                                                               
 A-13                                                                                                      
 (1)                  (2)       (3)      (4)                                                               
                                                                                                           
 17 Inter-sessional Meeting of New York 6 to 10 May 1991                                                   
 the Governing Council of UNDP                                                                             
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 18 Fifth TOKTEN Committee  Manila 14 to 18 November 1991                                                  
   Meeting                                                                                                 
 19 Fifth Meeting of Aid-   Manila  20 to 23 January 1992                                                  
                                                                                                           
      Coordinators (MAC-V)                                                                                 
                                                                                                           
 20Symposium on Economic Growth, Bombay  3 to 6January 1992                                                
  Sustainable Human Development of                                                                         
  Poverty Alleviation in India                                                                             
                                                                                                           
 21 Senior Postal  Ghaziabad 18 November to 14 December 1991                                               
 Management Course                                                                                         
 22 SAARC Study Tour "New Mail and            23 April to 7 May 1991                                       
 Financial Services" organised by Pakistan                                                                 
 Postal Administration                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 23Seminar on "Postal Operations  Colombo 9 June to 21 June 1991                                           
  and Future Challenges" of SAARC Countries                                                                
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 24    Tenth Meeting of Technical  Kathmandu  11 to 12 June 1991                                           
 Committee on Postal Service                                                                               
                                                                                                           
 25    Annual Session of CCPS Berne 13 to 26 October 1991                                                  
                                                                                                           
 26ICTP Workshop on Long Range Weather  Trieste  8 to 12 April 1991                                        
 Forecasting                                                                                               
                                                                                                           
 27 Ninth Meeting of SAARC Technical Karachi 24 to 25 April 1991                                           
 Committee on Meteorology                                                                                  
                                                                                                           
 28 Meeting of Ad-hoc Group of Experts Pasadena  23 to 26 April 1991                                       
  on TOGA Data management and TOGA                                                                         
 CDROM Project                                                                                             
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 29 Agroclimate & Climate Impact Melbourne 22 April to 3 May 1991                                          
  Assessment Programme                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 30    Eleventh WMO Congress Geneva  1 to25 May 1991                                                       
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 31    Forty Third Session of E C Geneva   27 May to1 June 1991                                            
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 32    Symposium on Trupospheric Colorada  3 to 6 June 1991                                                
  Chemistry of Antarctic Region                                                                            
                                                                                                           
 33    WMO Ozonesonde Intercomparison Saskatoon  13 to 24 May 1991                                         
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 34    WMO Training Workshop   Wageningen  29 July to 9 August 1991                                        
                                                                                                           
 35    International Symposium on  Perugia   4 to 9 August 1991                                            
   Geophysical Hazards in Developing Countries                                                             
                                                                                                           
 36    XXth General Assembly on IUGG. Vienna  11 to 13 August 1991                                         
                                                                                                           
 37Symposium on Methods of Meteorological Toronto 19 to 23 August 1991                                     
                                                                                                           
 Education & Training                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
                            A-14                                                                           
 (1)                (2)          (3)       (4)                                                             
                                                                                                           
 38  Meeting of Directors/     Toronto   24 August 1991                                                    
  Principals of RMTCs                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 39   Meeting of Experts to     Helsinki   26 to 30 August 1991                                            
  Prepare a Review of                                                                                      
  Global Climate System for 1989-91                                                                        
                                                                                                           
 40   WMO Technical Conference on  Shanghai   23 to 27 September 1991                                      
  Development of National Meteorological                                                                   
  Services in Response to users' needs                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 41   Workshop on Wind Extraction from Washington  17 to 19 September 1991                                 
  Operational Satellite Data                                                                               
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 42   First Session of RA-II Working Tokyo  30 September to 4 October 1991                                 
 Group on Planning & Implementation of WWW in                                                              
 Region-II                                                                                                 
                                                                                                           
 43   WMO/RA-I Training Seminar  Maputo   28 October to 1 November 1991                                    
  on Tropical Cyclone Forecasting                                                                          
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 44   First Session of Working Group Geneva  21 to 25 October 1991                                         
 on Climate Change Detection                                                                               
                                                                                                           
     A-15                                                                                                  
                                                                                                           
 1991 Appendix IV                                                                                          
 Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars                                                         
 APPENDIX IV                                                                                               
                                                                                                           
 Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars etc Organized by Non-                                   
 Governmental Organizations in which Indian experts participated in their                                  
 personal capacity with Government assistance in 1991-92.                                                  
                                                                                                           
 Sl No     Title of Conference etc          Venue           Date                                           
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 1    Regional Expert Consultation of Asian     Bangkok    23 to Jul 29,                                   
 Network for Food and Nutrition on the                      1991                                           
 Progress in Nutrition improvement in Asia                                                                 
 and Pacific Region                                                                                        
                                                                                                           
 2    6th Asian Congress of Nutrition organized  Kuala Lampur 16 to 19                                     
  by UNICEF                                                   September                                    
                                                              1991                                         
                                                                                                           
    A-16                                                                                                   
                                                                                                           
 1991 Appendix V Miscellaneous Major International Conferences                                             
 APPENDIX V                                                                                                
                                                                                                           
 Miscellaneous Major International Conferences etc in 1991-92, at which                                    
 Government of India was represented or in which Indian experts                                            
 participated with Government of India's assistance in their personal                                      
 capacity.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                           
 Sl No Title of Conference             Venue             Date                                              
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 1  International Congress on Oral Cancer  New Delhi   2 to @                                              
 @19911206 Co,                                                                                             
 ress on Oral Cancer            New Delhi               2 to @                                             
                                                                                                           
 2  International Symposium on Mechanical   Koto       7 to 10 May 1991                                    
 Alloying (ISMA)                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 3  Workshop on Solidstate Amorphisation    Kyoto     11 May 1991                                          
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 4  The Royal Society Meeting on Science, Cambridge  8 to  10 July 1991                                    
                                                                                                           
 Technology and International Security                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 5  International Conference on Radar  Beijing  22 to 24 October 1991                                      
  (CICR)                                                                                                   
                                                                                                           
 6  Meeting of the Royal Academy of                 11 November 1991                                       
  Engineering                                                                                              
                                                                                                           
 7  International Joint Conference  Singapore 18 to 21 November 1991                                       
    on Neural Networks (IJCNN)                                                                             
                                                                                                           
 8  Singapore Robotics Festival            Singapore  22 November 1991                                     
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 9  17th Ministerial Session of the  Helsingor  5 to 8 June 1991                                           
    World Food Council                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 10  Council Session of the International  London 24 to 29 November 1991                                   
     Sugar Organization                                                                                    
                                                                                                           
 11  116th Session of the International    London 3 to 4 December 1991                                     
     Wheat Council                                                                                         
                                                                                                           
 12  Bilateral Meeting for Renewal of   Dhaka 26 to 29 August 1991                                         
     Protocol on IWT and Trade between                                                                     
     India and Bangladesh                                                                                  
                                                                                                           
 13  International Symposium on the     Kobe  17 to 21 June 1991                                           
 Mathematical Theory of Networks and                                                                       
 Systems (MTNS-91)                                                                                         
          A-17                                                                                             
                                                                                                           
 1991                                                                                                      
 Appendix V-A Major Commonwealth Conferences in 1991-92                                                    
 APPENDIX V-A                                                                                              
 Major Commonwealth Conferences in 1991-92 in which Government of India was represented.                   
                                                                                                           
 1 Special Meeting of the Commonwealth Committee of Foreign Ministers on South A frica,                    
 London--Feb 16, 1991                                                                                      
 2 Meeting of the Commonwealth High Level Appraisal Group, London--10 to 12 June 1991                      
 3 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, Harare--16 to 22 October 1991 A-18                            
                                                                                                           
 1991                                                                                                      
 Appendix VI Meetings/Conferences held under the aegis of NAM                                              
 Jan 01, 1991 APPENDIX VI                                                                                  
                                                                                                           
 Meetings/Conferences held under the aegis of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) during                        
 1991-92.                                                                                                  
 1 15th Meeting of the Health Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries-May 1991                                  
 2 Meeting of the Committee of 9 Non-Aligned Countries on Palestine-September 1 991                        
 3 Ministerial Meeting on the eve of 46th General Assembly-September 1991                                  
 4 10th Meeting of the Non-Aligned Foreign Ministers in Accra--September 1991                              
 5 NAM News Pool Agency Meeting in Havana-last quarter 1991                                                
 A-19                                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 1991                                                                                                      
 Appendix VII Statement showing the number of Fresh and Mis. Appl.                                         
 Jan 01, 1991                                                                                              
                                                                                                           
 APPENDIX VII                                                                                              
 Statement showing the number of Fresh and Miscellaneous applications received and                         
 services granted in each passport office during the year 1991.                                            
                    Fresh Applications           Miscellaneous Services                                    
 Sl No Station      Received           Granted   Received                      Granted                     
 1     Ahmedabad    1,31,529           1,10,233  77,476                        76,954                      
 2     Bangalore    95,660             56,657    45,869                        43,607                      
 3     Bareilly     73,476             63,697    30,900                        26,942                      
 4     Bhopal       23,417             20,997    11,145                        11,341                      
 5     Bhubaneshwar 10,001             9,345     2,503                         2,495                       
 6     Bombay       2,95,450           2,46,051  2,22,710                      2,16,073                    
 7     Calcutta     58,070             46,927    32,465                        31,622                      
 8     Chandigarh   1,15,624           79,354    39,207                        36,749                      
 9     Cochin       2,72,232           1,45,562  86,046                        82,868                      
 10    Delhi        1,25,500           1,07,017  77,852                        79,234                      
 11    Guwahati     7,327              4,899     2,002                         1,736                       
 12    Hyderabad    2,32,161           1,47,614  98,432                        98,894                      
 13    Jaipur       1,23,566           71,912    46,767                        45,619                      
 14    Jalandhar    1,28,479           1,10,185  51,061                        49,754                      
 15    Kozhikode    2,05,867           1,02,687  77,017                        76,579                      
 16    Lucknow      1,05,167           44,915    23,781                        22,222                      
 17    Madras       1,28,130           79,932    57,567                        62,020                      
 18    Nagpur       8,125              7,552     2,794                         2,784                       
 19    Panaji       18,487             16,258    13,994                        14,009                      
 20    Patna        41,423             18,896    9,061                         8,733                       
 21    Trichy       2,03,805           1,24,329  48,107                        42,473                      
 22    Trivandrum   42,721             42,676                                                              
       Grand Total  24,03,496          16,15,019 10,99,477                     10,75,384                   
                                                                               A-20                        
                                                                                                           
 1991                                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 Appendix VIII Statement showing the Revenue earned                                                        
 and Expenditure                                                                                           
 Jan 01, 1991                                                                                              
                                                                                                           
 APPENDIX VIII                                                                                             
                                                                                                           
 Statement showing the Revenue earned and Expenditure incurred by each                                     
 passport office (faring the year 1991.                                                                    
 Sl No               Station              Revenue                   Expenditure                            
 1                   Ahmedabad            1,18,07,984               34,12,138                              
 2                   Bangalore            70,42,621                 35,49,778                              
 3 vBareilly         55,06,299            6,74,089                                                         
 4                   Bhopal               21,50,007                 8,14,458                               
 5                   Bhubaneshwa          8,64,773                  7,12,482                               
 6                   Bombay               2,80,82,116               95,70,779                              
 7                   Calcutta             58,28,457                 13,67,170                              
 8                   Chandigarh           97,37,295                 39,64,437                              
 9                   Cochin               2,06,92,645               90,28,403                              
 10                  Delhi                1,46,74,980               70,29,978                              
 11                  Guwahati             6,20,602                  7,73,787                               
 12                  Hyderabad            1,98,95,298               45,06,039                              
 13                  Jaipur               94,41,351                 23,35,164                              
 14                  Jalandhar            1,07,19,681               43,90,556                              
 15                  Kozhikode            1,55,90,464               31,59,118                              
 16                  Lucknow              86,10,729                 28,47,601                              
 17                  Madras               1,01,31,087,95            41,68,877                              
 18                  Nagpur               6,87,160                  6,52,054                               
 19                  Panaji               16,40,011,20              9,88,004                               
 20                  Patna                31,74,891                 10,02,241                              
 21                  Trichy               1,52,26,932               25,98,303                              
 22                  Trivandrum           19,64,630                 6,15,856                               
                     Total                20,40,90,013              6,80,71,318                            
                                                                    A-21                                   
                                                                                                           
 1991                                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 Appendix IX Cadre Strength at Headquarters                                                                
 Jan 01, 1991                                                                                              
                                                                                                           
 APPENDIX IX                                                                                               
                                                                                                           
 Cadre Strength at Headquarters and 139 Missions/Posts abroad during 1991-92                               
 (including posts budgeted by Ministry of Commerce and ending posts held in                                
 abeyance/ex-cadered).                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 Sl No  Cadre/Post     Posts at           Posts at     Total                                               
                                         Headquarters    Missions abroad                                   
                                                                                                           
 IFS                                                                                                       
                                                                                                           
 1     Grade I        3                 18                21                                               
                                                                                                           
 2     Grade II        3                 25               28                                               
                                                                                                           
 3     Grage III      31                 86               117                                              
                                                                                                           
 4     Grade IV      31                 78                109                                              
                                                                                                           
 5     Jr Administrative                                                                                   
       Grade/Sr Scale   47                187              234                                             
                                                                                                           
 6     Jr Scale        5                 28                 33                                             
                                                                                                           
 7     Training Reserve                                                                                    
       (Prob) Jr Scale                    27              27                                               
                                                                                                           
 8     Training  Reserve for all Grades   10              10                                               
                                                                                                           
 9     Leave Reserve                      19              19                                               
 10    Deputation Reserve                 20              20                                               
                                                                                                           
 IFS(B)                                                                                                    
                                                                                                           
 1     Grade I         62                  63            125                                               
                                                                                                           
 2     Grade II/III   171                 153            324                                               
                                                                                                           
 3     Grade IV      367                 355             722                                               
                                                                                                           
 4     Grade V/VI    459                 134            593                                                
                                                                                                           
 5     Grade 11 of                                                                                         
        Cypher Sub Cadre  81             123            204                                                
                                                                                                           
 6     Principal Private Secretary                                                                         
       Grade of Stenographers Cadre  3       18            21                                              
                                                                                                           
 7     Grade I of Stenographers Cadre 32        176     208                                                
      (including the erstwhile Selection Grade)                                                            
                                                                                                           
 8     Grade 11 of Stenographers Cadre    212           177      389                                       
                                                                                                           
 9     Grade III of Stenographers Cadre   42            77      119                                        
                                                                                                           
        Combined Research Cadre          22               2     24                                         
                                                                                                           
        Interpreters' Cadre              14             21       35                                        
                                                                                                           
        L & T Cadre                                     17      17                                         
                                                                                                           
        Ex-Cadre HOMs                                    10      10                                        
                                                                                                           
                 Total                1678                1731     3409                                    
                                                                                                           
               A-22                                                                                        
                                                                                                           
 1991                                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 Appendix X Foreign Language Chart                                                                         
 Jan 01, 1991                                                                                              
                                                                                                           
 APPENDIX X                                                                                                
                                                                                                           
 Foreign Language Chart                                                                                    
 Sl No Compulsory Foreign Language                                      No. of Officers                    
 1     Arabic                                                           80                                 
 2     Bahasa Indonesia                                                 9                                  
 3     Bulgarian                                                        1                                  
 4     Burmese                                                          1                                  
 5     Chinese                                                          44                                 
 6     Dutch                                                            1                                  
 7     French                                                           82                                 
 8     German                                                           41                                 
 9     Gorkhali/Nepali                                                  5                                  
 10    Hungarian                                                        1                                  
 11    Italian                                                          5                                  
 12    Japanese                                                         26                                 
 13    Kishwahili                                                       10                                 
 14    Laotian                                                          -                                  
 15    Malay                                                            1                                  
 16    Persian                                                          18                                 
 17    Polish                                                           1                                  
 18    Portuguese                                                       14                                 
 19    Russian                                                          68                                 
 20    Serbo-Croatian                                                   3                                  
 21    Sinhalese                                                        3                                  
 22    Spanish                                                          49                                 
 23    Swedish                                                          1                                  
 24    Thai                                                             2                                  
 25    Tibetan                                                          3                                  
 26    Turkish                                                          2                                  
 27    Vietnamese                                                       2                                  
       Total                                                            473                                
                                                                        A-23                               
                                                                                                           
 1991                                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 Appendix XI Statement showing the number of appointments                                                  
 Jan 01, 1991                                                                                              
                                                                                                           
 APPENDIX XI                                                                                               
                                                                                                           
 Statement showing the number of appointments (both by direct recruitment                                  
 and promotion) made in various groups in the Ministry of External Affairs                                 
 and reserved vacancies filled by scheduled castes/scheduled tribes                                        
 during the year 1991.                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 Number of                                                                                                 
 Vacancies de-reserved due to Number of Number of reserved                                                 
 non-availability of            Total No.     vacancies     candidates                                     
 reserved candidates                                                                                       
              of vacan-     reserved for         appointed                                                 
                          cies                                                                             
  Group         filled      SC       ST        SC         ST     SC                                        
      ST                                                                                                   
                                                                                                           
  Group  'A'       152       7        6        25         9                                                
                                                                                                           
  Group  'B'       167      40       38        31         12     2                                         
       5                                                                                                   
                                                                                                           
  Group  'C'       135      29       26        19          6     3                                         
      13                                                                                                   
                                                                                                           
  Group  'D'        23       5        5         5         4                                                
                                                                                                           
  (excluding  Sweepers                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
   A-24                                                                                                    
                                                                                                           
 1991                                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 Appendix XII Revenue Expenditure of the MEA                                                               
 Jan 01, 1991                                                                                              
                                                                                                           
    APPENDIX XII                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
  Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry of External Affairs during the                                       
 Financial Year 1991-92.                                                                                   
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
                                        Revised Estimate 1991-92                                           
                                          (In Crores of Rupees)                                            
                                                                                                           
  Headquarters                               31.43                                                         
                                                                                                           
  Missions/Posts abroad                     209.25                                                         
                                                                                                           
  OTHER ITEMS                                                                                              
                                                                                                           
  Contribution to international Organizations   13.21                                                      
                 (Including UN)                                                                            
                                                                                                           
  Central Passport Organization                 15.85                                                      
                                                                                                           
  Special Diplomatic Expenditure                93.80                                                      
                                                                                                           
  Grant-in-Aid to ICCR                          13.50                                                      
                                                                                                           
  Other Miscellaneous items                     12.67                                                      
                                                                                                           
  AID TO OTHER COUNTRIES                                                                                   
                                                                                                           
  Aid to Bangladesh                             2.88                                                       
                                                                                                           
  Aid to Bhutan                                 63.02                                                      
                                                                                                           
  Aid to Nepal                                  14.13                                                      
                                                                                                           
  Aid  to  Sri Lanka                            8.25                                                       
                                                                                                           
  Aid to Maldives                               16.55                                                      
                                                                                                           
  Aid to Cambodia                                1.50                                                      
                                                                                                           
  Aid to other Developing Countries            20.50                                                       
                                                                                                           
  ITEC Programmes                                 13.41                                                    
                                                                                                           
  Aid under AFRICA Fund                          10.30                                                     
                                                                                                           
 Total Revenue Expenditure                       540.25                                                    
                                                                                                           
  A-25                                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 1991                                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 Appendix XIII Expenditure on Indian Missions/Posts abroad                                                 
 Jan 01, 1991                                                                                              
 APPENDIX XIII                                                                                             
                                                                                                           
 Expenditure on Indian Missions/Posts abroad and Headquarters of the Ministry of                           
 External Affairs in 1991-92.                                                                              
                                                                                                           
 The estimated expenditure on the Headquarters Organization of the Ministry during the                     
 Current Financial Year (1991-92) is expected to be Rs 31.43 Crs. which is 5.82% of the                    
 total estimated revenue expenditure of this Ministry. Out of this, Rs 9.62 Crs. will be                   
 on Sal aries and Wages, Rs 4.11 Crs. on Travel Expenses, Rs 11,53 Crs. on Office                          
 Expenses, Rs 3.77 Crs. on Publicity, and Rs 2.00 Crs, on Rent and Maintenance.                            
                                                                                                           
 The total estimated expenditure on Indian Missions/Posts abroad including India Supply                    
 Wings, London and Washington, is expected to be Rs 209.25 Crs. during the Current Fina                    
 ncial Year which works out to 38.73% of the total estimated Revenue Expenditure of this                   
 Ministry . Out of this, an amount of Rs 76,57 Crs. is for Salaries (including Foreign                     
 Allowance) and Wages , Rs 28.10 Crs. for Travel Expenses (Transfer Passages/Home Leave                    
 Passages and Local Tours), Rs 45. 61 Crs. for Office Expenses and Rs 57.67 Crs. for                       
 Rent, Rates and Taxes as well as for Repa irs and Maintenance of Government                               
 owned/rented accommodation in Missions abroad. Avera ge expenditure per Mission abroad                    
 (including Publicity) works out to Rs 1.49 Crs.                                                           
                                                                                                           
 The remaining 55.45% of the Estimated Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry is be ing                       
 incurred on various Aid Programmes for neighbouring and other developing countries                        
 includin g ITEC Programmes, Aid under AFRICA Fund, SAARC and SCAAP Programmes,                            
 contribution to United Nations Organisation and other international bodies, Passport                      
 organization, Hos pitality, Grant-in-Aid to Indian Council of Cultural Relations and on                   
 other miscellaneous items.                                                                                
                                                                                                           
 A-26                                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 1991                                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 Appendix XIV International Conferences/Meetings and Functions arranged                                    
 APPENDIX XIV                                                                                              
                                                                                                           
 International Conferences/Meetings and Functions arranged during the year 1991-92 with                    
 the assistance of the Conference Cell, Ministry of External Affair s.                                     
                                                                                                           
 1 SAARC Meeting of Panel of Experts to prepare Plan of Action for Children in the                         
 context of South Asian Countries--10 and Apr 11, 1991                                                     
                                                                                                           
 2 Indira Gandhi Memorial Lecture-11 April 1991                                                            
                                                                                                           
 3 SAARC Meeting of National Coordinators for finalising the Regional Study on Trade                       
 Manufacturers and Service-3 to 5 June 1991                                                                
                                                                                                           
 4 Meeting of the Commonwealth Committee of Foreign Ministers on Southern Afric a-13 and                   
 14 September 1991                                                                                         
                                                                                                           
 5 Meeting of Experts of G-15 Countries on Science & Technology Projects-Gene B ank &                      
 Solar Energy-23 to 25 September 1991                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 6 UN Conference on Environment Development, convened by Department of Bio-                                
 Technology-23 to 26 October 1991                                                                          
                                                                                                           
 7 Indo-EEC Joint Commission Meeting, convened by Ministry of Commerce-13 and 1 4                          
 November 1991                                                                                             
                                                                                                           
 8 Indo-German Joint Commission Meeting, convened by Ministry of Finance-15 Nov ember                      
 1991                                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 A-27                                                                                                      
 1991                                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 Appendix XV VVIPs Visits to India                                                                         
     APPENDIX XV                                                                                           
  VVIPs Visits to India during 1991.                                                                       
                                                                                                           
 Sl   Heads of State, Heads of Government          Date                                                    
 No                                                                                                        
                                                                                                           
 (1)       (2)                                     (3)                                                     
                                                                                                           
 1     H.E. Mr Ion Iliescu,                    Jan 16, 1991                                                
       President  of Romania                                                                               
                                                                                                           
 2     H.E. Mr Maumoon Abdul Gayoom,          25 to  27 January 1991                                       
       President  of the Republic of Maldives                                                              
       and Mrs Nasreena M A Gayoom                                                                         
                                                                                                           
 3     H.E. Dr Richard von Weizsaecker,      28 February to 6 March 1991                                   
       President of the  Federal Republic                                                                  
       of Germany and                                                                                      
       Mrs Weizsaecker                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
 4     H.E. Mr Arpad Goncz,                  10 to 15 April 1991                                           
       President of the  Republic                                                                          
       of Hungary and                                                                                      
       Madame Arpadne Goncz                                                                                
                                                                                                           
 5     H.E. Mr Maumoon Abdul Gayoom,          15 and 16 June 1991                                          
       President of the Republic of Maldives                                                               
       and Mrs Nasreena M A Gayoom                                                                         
                                                                                                           
 6     H.E. My Anerood Jugnauth,             23 to 26 July 1991                                            
       Prime Minister of Mauritius                                                                         
       and Mrs Sarojini Jugnauth                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 7     H.E. Mr Islam A Karimov               17  to 19 August 1991                                         
       President of the Uzbek SSR and                                                                      
       Mrs Tatyana A Karimova                                                                              
                                                                                                           
 8     H.E. Mr Maumoon Abdul Gayoom,         18  to 20 August 1991                                         
       President of the Republic of Maldives                                                               
       and Mrs Nasreena M A Gayoom                                                                         
                                                                                                           
 9     H.M. Jigme Singye Wangchuck,          9 to  12 September 1991                                       
       King of Bhutan                                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 10    H.E. Mr Hun Sen,                      3  to 5 October 1991                                          
       Prime Minister of Cambodia and                                                                      
       Mrs Bun Sam Hieng                                                                                   
                                                                                                           
 11    H.E. Mr Robert G Mugabe,              14 to 16 November 1991                                        
       President of the Republic                                                                           
       of Zimbabwe                                                                                         
                                                                                                           
                A-28                                                                                       
                                                                                                           
 12     H.E. Mr G P Koirala,                5 to 10 December 1991                                          
                                                                                                           
        Prime Minister of Nepal                                                                            
                                                                                                           
 13     H.E. Mr Li Peng,                   11 to 16 December 1991                                          
                                                                                                           
        Premier of the State Council of                                                                    
        the People's Republic of China                                                                     
        and Madame Zhu Lin                                                                                 
                                                                                                           
        Deputy Prime Ministers, Foreign Ministers                                                          
        and others                                                                                         
                                                                                                           
 1    Prince Claus and Crown Prince        11 to 21 January 1991                                           
                                                                                                           
      Willem Alexander of the                                                                              
      Netherlands                                                                                          
                                                                                                           
 2    H.E. Mr Pertti Paasio,               12 to 14 January 1991                                           
                                                                                                           
      Minister of Foreign Affairs of                                                                       
      Finland and Mrs Passio                                                                               
                                                                                                           
 3    H.E. Mr Abdul Wakil,                7 to 9 February 1991                                             
                                                                                                           
      Foreign Minister of Afghanistan                                                                      
                                                                                                           
 4    H.E. Mr Gerard Collins, TD          20 to 25 February 1991                                           
      Foreign Minister of Ireland                                                                          
      and Mrs Hilary Collins                                                                               
                                                                                                           
 5    H.E. Mr Shahryar Khan,              4 to 7 April 1991                                                
                                                                                                           
      Foreign Secretary of Islamic                                                                         
      Republic of Pakistan                                                                                 
                                                                                                           
 6    H.E. Mr Li Jong Ok,                   7 to 11 May 1991                                               
                                                                                                           
      Vice-President of the Democratic                                                                     
      People's Republic of Korea                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 7    H.E. Dr Reinaldo Figueredo Planchart,   10 June 1991                                                 
                                                                                                           
      Special Envoy of the President                                                                       
      of Venezuela                                                                                         
                                                                                                           
 8    H.E. Dr Nathan M Shamuyarira,          5 to 7 July 1991                                              
                                                                                                           
      Minister of Foreign Affairs of                                                                       
      Republic of Zimbabwe                                                                                 
                                                                                                           
 9    H.E. Mwalimu Julius K Nyerere,       14 to 16 July 1991                                              
                                                                                                           
      Former President of United Republic                                                                  
      of Tanzania                                                                                          
                                                                                                           
 10   H.E Mr Harold Herat,                 27 to 31 July 1991                                              
                                                                                                           
      Minister of Foreign Affairs of                                                                       
      Sri Lanka                                                                                            
                                                                                                           
 11   H.E. Dr Boutros Boutros Ghali,      11 to 17 August 1991                                             
                                                                                                           
      Deputy Prime Minister for Foreign                                                                    
      Relations of Arab Republic of                                                                        
      Egypt                                                                                                
                                                                                                           
          A-29                                                                                             
                                                                                                           
 (1)               (2)                        (3)                                                          
                                                                                                           
 12    H.E. Mr Shahryar Khan,             18 to 21 August  1991                                            
       Foreign Secretary of Pakistan                                                                       
       as Special Envoy                                                                                    
                                                                                                           
 13     H.E. Mr A S M Mostafizur Rahman,   26 to 29 August 1991                                            
        Minister for Foreign Affairs of                                                                    
        People's Republic of Bangladesh                                                                    
        and Begum Sufia Rahman                                                                             
                                                                                                           
 14     H.E. Mr Rene Felber,               4 to 13 October 1991                                            
        Minister of Foreign Affairs and                                                                    
        Vice-President of Switzerland                                                                      
        and Mrs Luce Felber                                                                                
                                                                                                           
 15     H.E. Mr Adrian Nastase,            29 October to 1 November 1991                                   
        Minister of Foreign Affairs                                                                        
        of Romania                                                                                         
                                                                                                           
 16     H.E. Mr Fathulla Jameel,          19 to 22 November  1991                                          
        Minister of Foreign Affairs of                                                                     
        the Republic of Maldives                                                                           
                                                                                                           
 17     H.E. Mr Wong Kan Seng,             5 to 8 December 1991                                            
        Minister of Foreign Affairs of                                                                     
        Singapore and Mrs Seng                                                                             
                                                                                                           
 18     H.E. Mr Isodoro P Malmierca,      16 to 27 December 1991                                           
        Minister of Foreign Affairs of                                                                     
        Cuba                                                                                               
                                                                                                           
                                                                  A-30                                     
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
External website that    External website that External website    External website    External website    
opens in a new window    opens in a new window that opens in a new that opens in a new that opens in a new 
                                               window              window              window              

    Address : Patiala House, Annexe - BNew Delhi                              
   -110001                                           Page last updated on: 09 
    Telephone: 23389073, 23382694, 23073685;                  December, 2013  
   Fax: 23386340, 23387700;Feedback :            Site designed and maintained 
   dirlibmea.gov.in                                  by: National Informatics 
    Officer In-charge:-                                         Centre (NIC), 
    (c)Content Owned by MEA Library Ministry of   DeitY, MoCIT, Government of 
   External Affairs, Government of India                               India. 
   Terms & Conditions | Privacy Policy |         Visitors:                    
   Copyright Policy | Hyperlinking Policy |      
   Accessibility Statement | Help                

   java script is required for this page
   MEAs App twitter Facebook Google plus YouTube flickr
   loading
