1966-67

Contents
REPORT
1966-67
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
NEW DELHI
CONTENTS
CHAPTER
I.

PAGES

India's Policy of Non-alignment

II.

1-3

India's Neighbours

4-19

III. States in Special Treaty Relations
India
IV.
V.

with

South-East Asia

20-21
22-25

East Asia

26-30

VI.

West Asia and North Africa

31-35

VII.

Africa, south of the Sahara

36-39

VIII.

Eastern and Western Europe

40-53

IX.

The Americas

X. United Nations and International
ferences

54-56
Con-

57-62

XI.

External Publicity

63-67

XII.

Technical and Economic Cooperation

68-71

XIII.

Passport and Consular Services

72-81

XIV.

Organisation and Administration

82-87
APPENDICES

NUMBER
I. joint Communique of the Tripartite Meeting of India, Yugoslavia and the U.A.R.,
21 to 24 October, 1966

PAGES

88-93

II.
Joint Communique of the Tripartite
Meeting of Ministers of the U.A.R.,
Yugoslavia and India on Economic Cooperation, 14 December, 1966

94-99

III. International
Conferences, Congresses,
etc., in which India participated

100-107

IV.

International Organisations of which India
is a Member

108-112

V.

Foreign Diplomatic Missions

113-114

VI.
VII.

in India

Foreign Consular Offices in India

115-118

Distinguished Visitors from abroad

119-122

VIII.
Items of work allotted to the Ministry
of External Affairs

123-125

IX. Visits of Indian Dignitaries to foreign
countries and other Deputations/Delegations sponsored by the Ministry

126-129

X.

130-I38

Indian Missions/Posts abroad

XI. Statement showing statistical data regarding consular activities of Missions/Posts
abroad.

139
<ii)

INDIA
YUGOSLAVIA
Jan 01, 1965

India's Policy of Non-Allignment
CHAPTER I
INDIA'S POLICY OF NON-ALIGNMENT
The Tripartite Summit, 1966
I N D I A, Yugoslavia and the United Arab Republic have
a long tradition of cooperation in the international sphere.
It was in furtherance of this cooperation that meetings
between the heads of Government of the three countries

were held at Brioni, Yugoslavia, in 1956 and at Cairo, the
U.A.R., in 1961. The international environment since the
1961 meeting having changed considerably, it was felt that
it would be useful for the three countries to get together
once again for an exchange of views. The idea gained
ground during the Indian Prime Minister's visit to the
U.A.R. and Yugoslavia in July, 1966 when the leaders discussed, inter alia, the need for strengthening the forces of
non-alignment, peace and solidarity among developing
countries.
The summit meeting was held in New Delhi from Oct 21, 1966 to
24 October, 1966. The three leaders reviewed the international situation and expressed their belief that the concept
of non-alignment continued to be valid. They reaffirmed
that the policy of non-alignment stands against every form
of imperialism, hegemony or monopoly of power and military alliances. The aim of non-alignment is to strengthen
international peace, not through division of the world but
through the expansion of areas of freedom, independence
and cooperation on the basis of equality and mutual
benefit.
The three leaders deprecated all forms of domination
of one country by another, and the use of force in the
settlement of international disputes. They noted the
threats to peace by the persistence of colonialism in certain
parts of the world, the intensification of the arms race, the
spread of nuclear arms and disregard of the principle of
<pg1>
<pg2>
co-existence. The communique made special reference to
the war in Vietnam but did not propose any specific solution to the problem. The leaders, however, called for
stopping the bombing of North Vietnam because of the
enormous human suffering involved, and expressed their
firm belief that the implementation of the Geneva Agreements of 1954 and the withdrawal of all foreign forces
would lead to peace and enable the Vietnamese people to
decide their future themselves, free from all external
interference. The text of the joint communique is given
at Appendix I.
Perhaps the most important contribution of the Summit
meeting was in the economic sphere. The three leaders
noted with concern "the use of economic and financial
assistance as an instrument of pressure" against the developing countries to curb their freedom of action and "distorting their national goals". In this context, they recognised that "the responsibility for development rests primarily with the developing countries themselves". The

three leaders considered that it was necessary for developing countries "to initiate new measures and to coordinate
their individual efforts to face the challenge posed by the
slackening in their rate of growth". They expressed their
resolve to take practical steps in this direction and trusted
that all developing countries would join in the effort to
expand the area of mutual cooperation, increase trade exchanges amongst themselves, pool technical and scientific
experience and undertake joint endeavours to develop
mutually beneficial patterns of trade and development.
It was in pursuance of this decision that the Economic
Ministers of the three countries met in New Delhi in
December, 1966. The discussions covered a wide range of
fields where cooperation can be beneficial to the three
countries and the Meeting succeeded in identifying them.
The broad conclusions reached at the Conference and the
steps taken in implementation of them are described in
detail in Chapter XII on Technical and Economic Cooperation. The emphasis during the conference was on
<pg3>
ways of improving tripartite cooperation and on strengthening their contacts with other developing countries in the
international forums, especially the second U.N. Conference
on Trade and Development.
INDIA
YUGOSLAVIA EGYPT USA VIETNAM SWITZERLAND
Oct 21, 1966

India's Neighbours
CHAPTER II
INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS
I N the year 1966 efforts to further strengthen, India's
friendly and cooperative relations with all her neighbours
met with gratifying response except in the case of China
and Pakistan. While an Agreement was signed with
Burma on the traditional boundary between - India and
Burma, India's traditional cooperation with Afghanistan
and Nepal was further strengthened.
AFGHANISTAN

In the continuing tradition of friendly exchange of
visits between the two countries, His Majesty the King
of Afghanistan accompanied by Her Majesty the Queen,
their Royal Highnesses Princess Mariam Naim and Prince
Mohammad Daoud Pashtunyar and Their Excellencies
Mr. Ali Mohammad, Minister of Royal Court and Mr. Nour
Ahmad Etemadi, Minister for Foreign Affairs, paid a state
visit to India from 28 January to 1 February. On completion of the state visit and as a measure of the friendly
relations and cordial sentiments between the two countries
Their Majesties undertook an unofficial tour of places of
historical, cultural and scenic interest.
A joint communique issued at the conclusion of the
state visit commended the understandings reached in the
past year between the two Governments for expanding the
area of mutual economic and technical cooperation and reaffirmed the desire to further develop such relations. Both
sides also discussed the concept of regional economic cooperation while they attached great importance to the need
for promoting mutual trade and economic cooperation
among developing countries as a means of strengthening
their national independence and self-reliance. The two
Heads of State also agreed that the Tashkent Declaration
<pg4>
<pg5>
was an outstanding example of positive steps towards finding peaceful solutions to differences between States. The
hope was expressed that the implementation of the
Agreement would lead to peace in the region and also be
in the larger interest of peace in the world.
Earlier in the year, the Vice-President Dr. Zakir Husain
paid visit to Afghanistan from Jul 10, 1966 to 15 July, 1966. During his stay, the Vice-President laid the foundation-stone
for a hundred-bed children's hospital in Kabul. India's
cooperation in the construction of this hospital as well as
in certain industrial and agricultural projects had been
offered by a high-level delegation which visited Afghanistan in May, 1966. Later a technical team visited Kabul to
prepare design and construction estimates for the hospital
and an Afghan technical team was in India to finalise the
plans. The prompt inauguration of the hospital project
demonstrates the tempo of Indo-Afghan cooperation.
Trade between Afghanistan and India suffered as a
result of the closure of the over-land route through Pakistan during and since the Indo-Pakistan conflict of autumn,
1965. Following the Tashkent Agreement, India sought in

vain to have this over-land route restored. Despite the
obvious hardship for Afghanistan, the Government of Pakistan turned down India's proposal to reopen the AttariWagah border to allow trade movement between India
and Pakistan. The Government of Pakistan only allowed
the export of fresh fruit from Afghanistan to India and that
too only via Husseiniwala while no movement of goods
could take place from India to Afghanistan by the land
route.
BURMA
The Chairman of the Revolutionary Council of Burma
paid a private visit to India in March, 1966. The Government of Burma extended friendly cooperation in preventing
Indian Naga and Mizo rebels from using Burmese territory
as a sanctuary and passage for movement across the Indian
borders. The Burmese Government also generously made
<pg6>
80,000 tonnes of rice available for sale to India when weneeded it urgently.
In March, 1967, the Governments of India and Burma
signed an agreement about the formal delineation and
demarcation of the traditional boundary between the two
countries. The Agreement, already ratified by India is due
to be ratified by Burma soon and a Boundary Commission
will be set up to undertake demarcation on ground and the
drafting of a boundary treaty.
CEYLON
Further progress was made in the implementation of
the Indo-Ceylon Agreement of 1964, with A joint committee
meeting at regular intervals in Colombo. Ceylon Government have introduced a bill enabling granting of Ceylon
citizenship to stateless persons of Indian origin. Meanwhile Indian citizenship has been granted to 6,639 persons
up to 30 September, 1966, of whom about 1,500 have arrived
in India. Schemes for their re-settlement and the nature
of concessions to be extended to them are being processed
by the Ministry of Rehabilitation.
The sea link between India and Ceylon which was disrupted in December, 1964 due to cyclonic havoc was reopened with the commencement in April, 1966 of a new
service operated by the Shipping Corporation of India between Talaimannar and Rameshwaram.
The Chief Justice of India paid a visit to Ceylon from
17 to 22 December, 1966, at the invitation of the Secretary
of the Ceylon Judicial Service Association. Shrimati Jai-

pal Singh, then Deputy Minister of Transport and Aviation
and Shri Ambika Saran Singh, then Finance Minister of
Bihar, visited Ceylon at the invitation of the Maha Bodhi
Society of Ceylon. At the invitation of the Government
of Ceylon, a three-member press delegation from India
also visited Ceylon in October, 1966.
On a joint invitation from the Speaker of the Lok Sabha
and the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, a parliamentary
<pg7>
delegation from Ceylon visited India from 26 November to
12 December, 1966.
The Government of Ceylon have accepted the Government of India's offer of a short-term credit of Rs. 20 million
for purchase of consumer goods from India.
NEPAL
The redesignation of the Indian Aid Mission to Nepal
as the Indian Cooperation Mission during the Indian Prime
Minister's visit to Nepal marks the new phase in IndoNepalese cooperation. Two major projects in Nepal and,
several other important projects are to be undertaken by
the two countries. Significant progress has been made in
the projects already undertaken, of which the most important was the completion of the first phase of the Trisuli
Hydel Project.
His Excellency Shri Surya Bahadur Thapa, Chairman
of the Council of Ministers, Government of Nepal, accompanied by Shrimati Thapa, paid an official visit to India
from 11 to 28 April, 1966. The talks between the Chairman and the Prime Minister of India and her colleagues,
which were marked by a spirit of perfect cordiality, understanding and identity of views, covered many matters of
mutual interest. The Chairman
conveyed, to the Prime
Minister, Nepal's appreciation of India's cooperation in the,
task of Nepal's economic and social development and expressed satisfaction at the progress achieved in the implementation of India-aided projects in Nepal.
In July, 1966 the Government of Nepal requested the
Government of India for facilities of transport and airdropping of food supplies to the victims of earthquake in
Western Nepal. In addition to detailing IAF planes for
this operation, the Government of India supplied 50 tonnes
of black corrugated sheets, while the Indian Red Cross
Society gave medical supplies.
On the invitation of His Majesty the King of Nepal, the
Prime Minister of India, accompanied by the then Minister

<pg8>
of State for External Affairs, Shri Dinesh Singh and a team
of high officials, paid a good-will visit to Nepal from 4 to
7 October, 1966. During the visit, the Prime Minister par.
ticipated in the inauguration of the Sundarijal Water Supply Project. She also redesignated the Indian Aid Mission
to Nepal as the Indian Cooperation Mission, to mark its
appropriate level.
On an invitation from the Defence Ministry of India,
Shri Giri Prasad Barathoki, Defence Minister of Nepal, came
to India on a fortnight's visit, from 3 to 16 November,
1966, and visited centres of defence training and production establishments. As in previous years, facilities for the
training of Nepalese military personnel in various defence
establishments continue to be provided.
The Accountant General, Shri Loke Bahadur Bista and
the Controller of Defence Accounts, Shri Bodh Nath
Chalise, of His Majesty's Government of Nepal made a
study tour of India from 11 January to 23 February, 1967.
The problems relating to trade and transit between the
two countries and the implications of the Treaty on Trade
and Transit, 1960 were discussed when a Nepalese trade
delegation came to India in August and during the Prime
Minister's visit. Later, a trade delegation from India
visited Nepal in December. The talks yielded solutions
for some of the difficulties experienced on both sides in
implementing the provisions of the Trade and Transit
Treaty. Agreement was also reached on the setting up of
several committees, including a joint industrial cooperation council, a border committee, a joint committee of the
railway officials.
In keeping with the decision taken at the talks held in
Kathmandu in December, 1966, in pursuance of the provisions of Article XIII of the Treaty of Trade and Transit
that an Inter-Governmental Joint Committee meet every
quarter to review and resolve such difficulties as may arise
in practice, a five-member delegation from Nepal led by
Shri K. B. Adhikari, Additional Secretary, Ministry of
<pg9>
Finance, visited New Delhi from 27 to 31 March,.
1967 and held talks on matters arising out of the Memorandum of Understanding of 27 December, 1966.
In pursuance of the earlier discussions land understanding expressed in the joint communique issued at the endof the Prime Minister's visit to Nepal, two major project
agreements were signed on 19 December, 1966. Of these,

the Revised Kosi Agreement concerns work on the western
Kosi canal and other parts of this project. The second
agreement covers projects on the east-west highway of
Nepal. On the eastern sector of this highway preliminary
work has already been taken on hand. Under the new
Agreement, the Government of India have also agreed to:
provide financial and technical assistance to the Government
of Nepal for the construction of a barrage over the RiverKamala, and to make a start on the construction of the,
Central Sector (Butwal to Nepalganj) by 31 March, 1971.
They have also reiterated their interest in the construction
of the western sector (Nepalganj to Nepal's Western Border) of the highway. The construction of the barrage overthe Kamala and the other portions of the highway will be
governed by separate agreements to be entered into later.
In addition, the Government of India have also undertaken to assist in completing the construction of a bridgeover Kosi near Chattra, north of the present alignment of
the eastern sector of the highway, within 12 years of the
date of completion of the eastern sector.
In the Kosi area, the Government of India have agreed,
under an agreement entered into on 18 May, 1966, to construct at a cost of Rs. 90.15 lakhs, transmission lines from
the Kosi Power House to Biratnagar and Rajbiraj, a road
from Hanumangar to Rajbiraj and a road from Fatehpur
to Kanauli Bazaar. Work on these projects is proceeding
satisfactorily.
Steady progress has been maintained in other projects
undertaken in Nepal with India's cooperation. An important occasion was the commissioning of three generators,
<pg10>
with a total capacity of 9,000 Kws. at the Trisuli Hydel
Project by His Majesty the King of Nepal on 24 February,
1967. This marked the completion of the first phase of
this major project which is expected to encourage the
growth of industries in and around Kathmandu. Most of
the civil works of the Trisuli Project have been completed.
The remaining civil works and the installation of 4 more
generators are now being taken up. The cost of the project when completed is estimated at Rs. 14 crores.
Other important projects completed , and inaugurated
include the Sunderijal Water Supply Scheme, inaugurated
in October, 1966, the General Post Office, Kathmandu and
the Veterinary Laboratory, Kathmandu in January, 1967
and the Bhairawa drinking water scheme and Lumbini Airport in March, 1967. The 128-mile long Sonauli-Pokhara
Road in Central Nepal has been made jeepable and further
work is proceeding satisfactorily.

PAKISTAN
The hope for a new era of friendly and cooperative relations between India and Pakistan, enshrined in the Tashkent Declaration and enlivened by the prompt
implementation of some of its provisions, has not so far
been realised. Withdrawal of troops having been completed by the end of February, 1966, Pakistan seemed
rapidly to lose any further interest in the Tashkent
accord. The tone was set at the first Minister-level meeting in Rawalpindi in March, 1966, when representatives
from Pakistan made further progress under Tashkent
Declaration conditional upon progress towards a settlement
of the Kashmir issue. It was pointed out to the Government of Pakistan that their attitude was inconsistent with
both the letter and spirit of the Tashkent Declaration. The
Tashkent Declaration did not anywhere stipulate that its
implementation was contingent on the progress in the
settlement of the Kashmir issue; on the contrary, the Declaration's sole purpose was that, despite disagreement over
Kashmir, the two countries should establish an atmosphere
<pg11>
of peace and cooperation in which difficult problems such
as Kashmir could be resolved. Besides, Pakistan herself
had not allowed the Kashmir problem to stand in the way
of securing selective implementation of the provisions of
the Tashkent Declaration where it suited her interest-the
withdrawal of forces and regulated resumption of air
Rights across each other's territory. In the face of Pakistan's attitude, however, no further meeting at this level
could be held despite repeated requests from India, both
at the government level and through diplomatic channels.
Pakistan refused to be associated with the Government
of India in having the Tashkent Declaration registered with
the United Nations under Article 102 of the Charter. AntiIndian propaganda by Pakistani officials and un-official
agencies was resumed from about the end of February,
1966 in violation of Article 4 of the Declaration, and was in
fact highly provocative during the Chinese President's
visit to Pakistan in March-April, 1966. Pakistan continued
her efforts to raise the Kashmir issue at various international gatherings-at the CENTO ministerial council meeting in April, 1966, at the Commonwealth Prime Ministers'
Conference in September, 1966 and during the general
debate in the UN General Assembly in September, 1966.
These efforts were effectively countered and it was demonstrated that Pakistan's demand for pre-conditions stood in
the way of the implementation of the Tashkent
Declaration.

In these circumstances, apart from the initial implementation of the Tashkent Declaration relating to the withdrawal of forces, resumption of the respective diplomatic
missions, repatriation of prisoners of war and of other
Indian and Pakistani nationals in the custody of either
country, progress in respect of other matters has been
tediously slow and practically negligible. The Government of India made specific proposals on certain individual matters covered by the Declaration. For example,
Pakistan was requested to open all the 50 land border
check-posts agreed upon in 1952 to facilitate travel between
<pg12>
the two countries, as against the opening of only two posts,
one each on the western and eastern borders opened on
16 March, 1966. This proposal was not accepted by the
Government of Pakistan. Further, the Government of
India proposed that the telecommunication services between the two countries should be fully normalised. The
Government of Pakistan did not show much interest in the
matter. Again, India's proposal to settle the question of
small sailing craft detained by the Government of Pakistan
has not been accepted. Similar has been the fate of India's
proposals for resumption of trade between the two countries. The Government of India unilaterally withdrew
with effect from 26 May, 1966 the embargo on trade with
Pakistan, but Pakistan has continued to prohibit trade
with India. There has been, further, only nominal progress on the restoration of seized properties.
However, the Government of India have been continuously exploring through diplomatic channels ways and
means of restoring normalcy in all aspects of Indo-Pakistan
relations. While the general attitude of the Government
of Pakistan remained unchanged, some prospects of a
limited dialogue became apparent early in 1967. Recently,
the Government of Pakistan indicated a willingness to discuss full restoration of telecommunication and air services
between the two countries. The Government of India are
exploring the possibilities of widening the scope of these,
discussions so as to include the restoration of all communications, particularly by road, river and railways.
Demaication work on the East Pakistan-West Bengal
border was resumed, and meetings have been held between
the Directors of Land Records and Survey of East Pakistan and of Assam and West Bengal, though survey work
in the Berubari and hilly areas had to be suspended.
With the object of reducing tension along the IndoPakistan border in the Eastern region, the GOC-in-C, Eastern Command, India and the GOC, 14th Infantry Division,
Pakistan met in February, 1966. Later a meeting between

<pg13>
the COAS, India and C-in-C, Pakistan Army was held at
India's initiative in September. Several arrangements
were agreed upon to avoid misunderstandings and for reducing tension on the borders, one of these being the
setting up of a direct telephone link between the two.
However, peace on the eastern borders continued to be
disturbed by Pakistanis and there were attempts at organized infiltration by Pakistani nationals.
Similar meetings were held between the Chiefs of the
Air Forces of India and Pakistan and agreement was
reached regarding the procedures for overflights and the
measures to prevent tensions. On 2 February, 1967, a Pakistani aircraft (Cessna) intruded about 48 km. inside
Indian air-space near Ferozepur in a suspicious manner,
repeatedly disregarding signals to land and tried to escape
when challenged. It was, therefore, shot down by an IAF
aircraft. A protest was lodged with the Government of
Pakistan who made a counter-protest and asked for a joint
enquiry and compensation. Both demands of the Pakistan
Government were rejected.
The Government of Pakistan did not react favourably
to India's request to hand over to Indian authorities the
Mizo rebels harbouring in East Pakistan. In FebruaryMarch, 1966, a number of military and civil personnel kidnapped by the Mizo rebels had been taken to East Pakistan
and detained there. Though the Government of Pakistan
denied any knowledge of the kidnapped Indians, the majority of persons who either escaped or were released con
firmed that they were held in East Pakistan.
Indus Waters Treaty: The Permanent Indus Commission submitted its Annual Report for the year 1965-66 in
May, 1966. Four meetings of the Indus Commissioners
were held during the period 1 April, 1966 to 31 March, 1967.
The seventh annual instalment of pound 6,206,000 was paid by
the Government of India to the World Bank on 1 November, 1966 towards the Indus Basin Development Fund.
India's Commissioner for Indus Waters also participated
<pg14>
in the special inspection tour of the Hudiara drainage system in Pakistan, from 23 to 28 February, 1967.
The Kutch Tribunal: Pursuant to the Indo-Pakistan
Agreement of 30 June, 1965, a Tribunal consisting of the
following members was appointed:

1. Mr. Gunnar Lagergren, Chairman.
(Nominee of the U.N. Secretary-General);
2. Mr. Ales Bebler, Member.
(Nominee of the Government of India); and
3. Mr. Entezam Nasrollah, Member.
(Nominee of the Government of Pakistan).
The case for India is being presented by a team headed
by the Attorney General of India Shri C. K. Dapthary,
assisted by the Law Secretary and officials of Historical
and Legal and Treaties Divisions of the Ministry. The Tribunal held its first session at Geneva in February, 1966 and
received Memorials and counter-Memorials from the two
Governments in June and September, 1966. The Tribunal
began the oral hearings on 15 September, 1966, which are
continuing.
THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
Developments in 1966 confirmed, if confirmation were
needed, not only the Chinese Government's intense and
all-round hostility against India but also their persistence,
undeterred by Tashkent Declaration, in playing Pakistan
against India and keeping the two countries of the subcontinent in a state of conflict. That China had extended
material assistance besides verbal sympathy to Pakistan
during the Indo-Pak conflict of 1965 was confirmed when
Chinese military, equipment including tanks and aircraft
were displayed. on Pakistan's National Day on 23 March,
1966. The Chinese leaders strained every nerve to destroy
the Tashkent spirit during the visit of President Liu Shaochi and Foreign Minister Chen Yi to Pakistan in MarchApril, 1966 by repeating the theme of Indian "aggression".
<pg15>
The Chinese utilised every opportunity to register their
special interest in Kashmir, projecting the image of
Kashmir as an independent entity separate from Pakistan
as well as from India. Chinese campaign to woo Pakistan
was intensified after the exit of Foreign Minister Bhutto.
Premier Chou En-lai visited Western Pakistan in June on
return from Rumania. Pakistan's Commerce Minister Mr.
Ghulam Faruque and the new Foreign Minister of Pakistan Pirzada went to China in July and October respectively. During the latter's visit Marshal Chen Yi made a
significant admission that Chinese friendship for Pakistan
stemmed from the elementary principle that one should
be friendly with the enemies of one's enemies.
Throughout the year the Chinese Government kept up its
military, economic and political pressure on the border.

The territorial claims in the western and eastern sector
were repeated and dark hints that "accounts will be
settled" were given. The Chinese troops also indulged in
a series of intrusions along the entire length of the border
and across the "line of actual control" in Ladakh. While
no major armed clashes took place on the border, it was
clear from the pattern of intrusions that this continuous
aggressive activity was designed to keep tension simmering on the border.
The Chinese note of 4 May, 1966 was indicative of
China's motives. In reply to India's note of 8 February,
which exposed China's hostile and intransigent attitude
and charged China with violation of not only the Colombo
proposals but also its own unilateral declaration and assurances, the Chinese note put forward the extraordinary argument that as "the Colombo proposals were mere
proposals, the question of violation or non-violation simply
does not arise". In the same breath, however, the note
accused India of "casting the Colombo proposals to the
winds". More significantly, the Chinese note asserted, in
so many words, that the commitments and assurances
about observation of "the line of actual control" and the
demilitarised zones and non-entry into "the disputed areas"
<pg16>

of Thagla Ridge, Longju, etc., contained in the unilateral
declaration of cease-fire did not hold good any longer.
The pretext for this somersault was that India had indulged in intrusions and that China had "the right to strike
back in self-defence". The double-facedness of China's
attitude to the Colombo proposals and the hypocritical and
dark side of China's unilateral declaration, of cease-fire
and withdrawal were exposed in a note dated 2 February,
1967. This note also dealt with the crude and mischievous.
attempts of China to spoil the special and close relationship between India and Sikkim. The note pointed out that.
it was "really the present rulers of China who have donned
the imperial mantle of the Manchus and have conjured up
dreams of hegemony in Asia".
Chinese hostile activities on the border extended to the
border of Bhutan from early April. When India, at the
request of and on behalf of the Government of Bhutan,
protested against the Chinese intrusions into Doklam pasture area, the Hsinhua carried an authorised statement on
28 October which claimed that the area had always been.
under Chinese jurisdiction and that the boundary question
between China and Bhutan had nothing to do with the
Indian Government.

The Chinese Government did not refrain from seeking
to interfere in the internal affairs of India by exploiting
the economic problems of the country and lending
encouragement to fissiparous tendencies. While the Chinese
Government saw signs of "a revolutionary situation" in
India in the students' strikes and mass demonstrations.
which are normal features in a democratic country, the
Chinese news agency described the Mizos and the Nagas
as fighting against India's neocolonialism and for selfdetermination. An innovation in Chinese disruptive tactics
was a loudspeaker campaign, which began in early July,
across Nathu La directed against the Indian defence forces
in Sikkim calling upon them to revolt against the Government and to set up a People's Government in India. In
reply to the strong protest of the Government of India, the
<pg17>
Chinese Government not only admitted that such broadcasts were being made but also claimed it "entirely within China's sovereign rights" to set forth the truth about
the Sino-Indian boundary question. The Government of
India was compelled to undertake counter-broadcasts across
Nathu La.
The completion of the general elections and the peaceful
formation of new Governments both in the Centre and in
the States seem to have infuriated the Chinese who
launched a virulent propaganda offensive alleging that
the new Government both in its policies and personnel was
more reactionary than the previous one. Recalling in
ominous tones the Telengana episode, the Chinese propaganda media called for the early and successful conclusion
of the mythical revolutionary armed struggle by the
people against the Government, in the existence of which,
by constant repetition, they have themselves begun to
believe.
Intemperate criticism and denunciation of India's
foreign policy have also become a regular feature of
Chinese propaganda. The Prime Minister's visit to the
United States in March was described as following "the
Nehru line of fraternising with the United States, allying
with the Soviet Union and abusing China". The 7-point
proposal on Vietnam put forward by the Prime Minister of
India on the eve of her departure for the UAR, Yugoslavia
and the USSR was condemned as serving the continued
US occupation of South Vietnam and the lasting partition
of Vietnam. The Chinese also frowned upon the developing good relations between India and Japan and criticised
the consultative meetings of officials of India and Japan as
"anti-Chinese". Though the official policy of the Government of India on the recognition of the People's Republic

is well-known, the Chinese Government thought it fit to
lodge protest against visits of non-official Indians to Formosa and to accuse India of following the so-called policy
of "two Chinas".
<pg18>
The question of China's representation in the United
Nations came up before the General Assembly as in previous years. Consistent with her basic policy, India voted
in favour of the Resolution calling for the restoration of "all
its rights to the People's Republic of China" and recognising "the representatives of its Government as the only
lawful representatives of China to the United Nations".
This Resolution was however rejected by 57 votes to 46 with
17 abstensions.
Tibetan Refugees
Refugees from Tibet continued to arrive in India in
small numbers during 1966-67. The total number of Tibetan
refugees in India, including those in Sikkim and Bhutan,
is about 50,500. This number includes 10,000 children, 2,500
old and infirm people and 2,000 Lamas. About 12,000 refugees have been settled in six land settlements at Bylakuppe in Mysore, Chandragiri in Orissa, Mainpat in Madhya
Pradesh, in the Tirap and Lohit districts of NEFA and at
Clementown in the Dehra Dun district of Uttar Pradesh.
In addition, 2,000 Lamas are being maintained at Buxa
(West Bengal) and at Dalhousie. While 800 Tibetans have
already been settled in Bhutan, a scheme has been formulated for settling another 1,000 Tibetans there. Another
500 Tibetans have like-wise been settled in Sikkim on small
schemes, while about 2,500 Tibetans are likely to be
absorbed in the tea estate being set up by the Sikkim
Government with the Government of India's assistance.
Work has started on a scheme for the settlement of
about 5,000 refugees at Mundgod in the Belgaum division
of Mysore State. The Central Relief Committee (India), a
voluntary body entrusted with the co-ordination, clearance
and distribution of relief assistance received from foreign
agencies, have arranged for a foreign contribution worth
Rs. 1,10,00,000 for the implementation of this scheme, estimated to cost Rs. 1,54,00,000.
The Tibetan Industrial Rehabilitation Society, set up
last year, has established a woollen mill and a tea estate
<pg19>
in the Kangra district which will provide employment and
rehabilitation for about 675 refugees. Vocational training

is imparted to the Tibetan refugees in various trades, social
welfare and music. Centres for handicrafts, mainly carpet
weaving, are functioning at Bylakuppe, Chandragiri, Mainpat and Dalhousie. The Tibet House, an organisation set
up for the preservation of Tibetan cultural heritage, is
looking after the training of artisans and craftsmen and
arranging for the sale of the handicraft products through
its Emporium at Delhi and exhibitions.
The Tibetan Schools Society, an autonomous body under
the chairmanship of the Union Minister for Education, has
been running seven Residential Schools functioning at
Darjeeling, Kalimpong, Simla, Mussoorie, Dalhousie, Mt.
Abu and Pachmarhi. The Tibetan Homes Foundation, a
charitable society, continues to manage the 24 homes for
children set up at Mussoorie. The Children's Nursery at
Dharamsala run by His Holiness the Dalai Lama with the
assistance of the Government of India and the Central Relief Committee (India) takes care of about 650 children,
most of whom are orphans or semi-orphans. Medical services have been made available at all settlements and other
camps, while special attention is paid to chest and other
diseases, T.B. patients being sent to sanatoria.
Grant-in-aid to the extent of Rs. 60,000 was given
during 1966-67 to the Central Relief Committee (India).
The Committee, while coordinating, clearing and distributing foreign relief assistance keeps the foreign agencies
informed about the requirements of the Tibetan refugees
in India through its"' monthly bulletin. The Committee
provided tents worth Rs. 2.50 lakhs to Tibetan refugees
and tractors worth Rs. 3.50 lakhs to the settlement at
Bylakuppe and subsidised small projects to the extent of
Rs. 3 lakhs.
INDIA
CHINA PAKISTAN BURMA AFGHANISTAN NEPAL USA UZBEKISTAN SRI LANKA MALI
SWITZERLAND BHUTAN CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC VIETNAM YUGOSLAVIA JAPAN
Jul 10, 1966

States in Special Treaty Relations with India
CHAPTER III
STATES IN SPECIAL TREATY RELATIONS WITH

INDIA
BHUTAN
I N February, 1966, the Foreign Minister of India, accompanied by Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs, paid a
courtesy visit to Bhutan. His Majesty the King of Bhutan
paid an official visit to Delhi from Apr 27, 1966 3 May, 1966.
His Majesty had discussions on matters of mutual interest
with the Indian Prime Minister, the Foreign Minister, and
the Defence Minister. At the end of his visit the King
issued a press statement appreciating the help and advice
furnished by the Government of India and the technical
and financial assistance given by India for the social and
economic progress of Bhutan. The Minister of State,
Shri Dinesh Singh, accompanied by the Secretary, Ministry
of External Affairs, visited Bhutan from 26 to 29 December,
1966 at the invitation of His Majesty the King of Bhutan.
Under Bhutan's First Five-Year Plan, against an outlay of Rs. 17.47 crores, about Rs. 10 crores were utilised.
A draft second plan has been prepared. Pending finalisation of the plan, funds continue to be released to the
Government of Bhutan for their development schemes.
Apart from financing the Bhutan development schemes,
the Government of India have been assisting Bhutan by
deputing technical personnel, training of Bhutanese
nationals in technical fields in India, granting of scholarship to Bhutanese students, supply of food grains and
other items in short supply in Bhutan and foreign exchange
assistance for essential imports.
A Bhutanese Government delegation participated in
the 17th meeting of the Consultative Committee of the
<pg20>
<pg21>
Colombo Plan held at Karachi from 14 November to 2 December, 1966. Bhutan has been a member of the Colombo
Plan since 1962 and has also received some assistance under
the plan from Australia and the U.K.
Between April and September, 1966, there were three
border intrusions by China into Bhutan in the Doklam
pasture area. At the request and on behalf of the Government of Bhutan, the Government of India protested to the
Chinese Government against these intrusions.
SIKKIM
Their Highnesses the Chogyal and Gyalmo of Sikkim

paid an official visit to Delhi in February, 1966. In August,
the Chogyal paid a private visit. In response to an invitation from the Chogyal, Secretary, Ministry of External
Affairs, paid a visit to Sikkim in December, 1966.
Elections to Panchayats were held in Sikkim in
February, 1966. Elections to the Sikkim State Council, an
advisory body, have been held in March, 1967.
The Five-Year Second Development Plan of Sikkim,
which was fully financed out of grants given by the Government of India, was successfully completed on 31 March,
1966. The draft of the Third Development Plan has been
examined in detail. India's assistance during this plan
period will be in the shape of grants and loans, the major
portion being grants.
INDIA
BHUTAN USA PAKISTAN SRI LANKA AUSTRALIA UNITED KINGDOM CHINA
Apr 27, 1966

South-East Asia
CHAPTER IV
SOUTH-EAST ASIA
T H E most significant development in the region was
the ending of confrontation between Indonesia and
Malaysia and the return of the former to the United
Nations. India welcomed this renewal of friendship
between her two great neighbours. There was a notable
relaxation of the unfortunate tension in the relations
between India and Indonesia.
During this period India strengthened her relations
with many South-East Asian countries. The VicePresident of India paid a goodwill visit to Thailand,
Cambodia, Singapore and Malaysia in October, 1966, while
the Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for External
Affairs also visited Thailand, Malaysia and Singapore,
earlier in July.
India continued to extend whatever technical and
economic assistance was possible within her means to her
neighbours in South-East Asia, under the Colombo Plan

as well as the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation
programme. During the 12 months ending June, 1966 about
140 trainees were received from Ceylon, Thailand, Malaysia,
Philippines, Burma, Singapore, Laos, Vietnam and the
Maldives. Ten experts from India were deputed to Ceylon, Laos, the Maldives and Cambodia. India made a gift
of 1,000 milch buffaloes to Ceylon and under the ITEC
programme, donated some cattle to the Philippines, seeds to
Burma and Laos, sewing machines to a women's association
in Laos, medicines to Indonesia and books and drugs to the
Maldives.
THAILAND
The Government of Thailand sponsored a religious
ceremony-Baddah-Sina-at Bodh Gaya in March, 1966
<pg22>
<pg23>
which was attended by a number of high-ranking ecclesiastical and lay delegates from Thailand. The Government
of India extended all facilities for the success of this
function.
An Agreement was signed with the Government of Thailand for the purchase of 150,000 tonnes of rice.
The Government of India donated cotton blankets and
medicines worth Rs. 15,000 for flood relief in Thailand.
His Royal Highness, Prince Vong Savang and Her
Royal Highness Princess Manilay Vong Savang paid a state
visit to India in November, 1966. Earlier in May and July,
Their Majesties the King and Queen of Laos, accompanied
by Prime Minister Souvanna Phouma, stopped over in
Delhi in transit. The Laotian Government paid special
tributes to the assistance rendered by the Indian medical
team in Laos during the unprecedented floods in the River
Mekong in September. The Government of India sent
medical supplies and textiles worth Rs. 25,000 for distribution to the victims of the floods.
CAMBODIA
Prince Sihanouk made a present of 100 tonnes of rice to,
India in March, 1966, as a token of the close and friendly
ties between India and Cambodia. A collection of books
on India was gifted by the Government of India to the
Buddhist University in Phnom Penh in June, 1966.
VIETNAM

Following the extension of aerial bombing of North
Vietnam to the outskirts of Hanoi and Haiphong, the Prime
Minister of India, in a broadcast on Jul 07, 1966 made some
useful suggestions which could form the basis for a peaceful solution of the Vietnam problem. The essence of these
suggestions was that aerial bombing of North Vietnam
should be stopped in order to create the necessary atmosphere in which cessation of hostilities and political negotiations could take place. A month later, aerial bombing
<pg24>
was extended to the Demilitarised Zone. India, as Chairman of the ICC made vigorous efforts to ensure, that the
buffer status of the DZ was respected by both sides.
MALAYSIA
The Malaysian Minister for Commerce and Industry
and the Chief Minister of Kelantan, visited India as guests
of the Government. A Malaysian Defence delegation also
paid a visit to India in March, 1966. The Chief Minister
of Madras was the guest of the Government of Malaysia
when he visited Kuala Lumpur in connection with the
International Conference on Tamil studies held in April,
1966.
There are about 2,000 Malaysian students in India.
Arrangements were made to secure admission in Indian
Universities for Malaysian students displaced from
Pakistan.
SINGAPORE
The Prime Minister of Singapore, accompanied by the
Foreign Minister, paid a state visit to India in September,
1966. India has been extending technical and economic
assistance to Singapore under the Colombo Plan as well
as bilaterally.
INDONESIA
There was marked improvement in the relations with
Indonesia. During the year, the Presidium Minister for
Political Affairs and Minister for Foreign Affairs Mr. Adam
Malik visited India in September, 1966. The Foreign Minister of Indonesia expressed the hope, in the joint communique issued in New Delhi on 6 September, 1966, that the
outstanding problems between India and Pakistan would
be solved through peaceful negotiations on the basis of
the Tashkent Declaration. This was followed by the visit

of a delegation led by the Presidium Minister for Economic
and Financial Affairs for further talks on economic cooperation. An Agreement was reached to facilitate purchases
<pg25>
from India of several commodities urgently required byIndonesia, utilising the credit of Rs. 100 million extended
by India earlier. The Government of India also presentedmedicines and textiles to the flood-affected people of JavaAt the invitation of the Presidium Minister for Political
Affairs/Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Indonesia, the Minister for External Affairs, Shri M. C.
Chagla, paid an official visit to Indonesia from 16 to 20
January, 1967. The two Foreign Ministers discussed the
bilateral relations between the two countries and exchanged views on international problems of common interest.
AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND
Relations with these two Commonwealth countries continued to be cordial and friendly. Both the Governments
showed interest in India's efforts towards economic development. The Deputy Prime Ministers of Australia and
New Zealand visited India as guests of the Government.
An Australian Parliamentary Delegation visited India during the year. Mr. C. R. Kelly, a prominent liberal politician from Australia was also in India in August, 1966 as a
government guest.
The Australian Government made an emergency food
gift to India valued at A$ 8 million in February, 1966 and
announced in December, 1966 a further gift of wheat and,
flour valued at A$ 9 million. From New Zealand, in addition to the Government's gift of 1,000 tonnes of skimmed
milk powder, announced in February, 1966, significant private contributions were received.
INDONESIA
MALAYSIA INDIA THAILAND CAMBODIA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE SRI LANKA BURMA LAOS
PHILIPPINES VIETNAM MALDIVES USA UNITED KINGDOM PAKISTAN MALI UZBEKISTAN
AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND
Jul 07, 1966

East Asia
CHAPTER V
EAST ASIA
JAPAN
D U R I N G 1966 relations between India and Japan continued to develop steadily and began to acquire greater
depth and significance. The two governments had agreed
in 1965 to hold regular consultative meetings between their
Foreign offices once a year alternately in New Delhi and
Tokyo. The first meeting, scheduled for September, 1965,
had on account of the Indo-Pak conflict, to be postponed
to March, 1966. The second meeting was held in Tokyo
from Oct 28, 1966 to 1 November, 1966. At both the meetings, the Japanese team was led by Mr. Nobuhiko Ushiba,
Deputy Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Indian
team by the Foreign Secretary, Shri C. S. Jha. The discussions related to subjects of regional and international
interest as well as of mutual interest. The purpose of these
consultative conferences is not to arrive at any agreed conclusions or to formulate a common policy but to have free
and frank exchange of views on matters of common interest. The decision to have such meetings between India
and Japan was a major development in the relations between the two countries. India is the first Asian country
with which Japan has begun such regular consultations;
arrangements for such consultations have existed between
Japan on the one hand and the U.S.A., Canada, West
Germany, the U.K. and France on the other hand.
Under an Agreement signed in Tokyo on 16 December,
1966, Japan will give India a credit of $45 million which
will be a part of the $ 60 million a year Yen credit promised
by Japan. On 24 February, 1967, Japan decided to give
India $ 7 million emergency food assistance. Japanese Red
(Cross Society made a gift of approximately 10,000 tonnes of
<pg26>
<pg27>

rice and 8,000 tonnes of chemical fertilizer to the Indian
Red Cross Society in March, 1966.
Following the visit of a Japanese businessmen's dele-

gation at the invitation of the Federation of Indian
Chambers of Commerce and Industry, a Business Cooperation Committee was set up in India and Japan.
Mr. Etsusaburo Shiina, Minister of Foreign Affairs in
Japan, passed through India on his way to the U.K., on
28 October, 1966. He was met at the airport by the then
Minister of External Affairs, Shri Swaran Singh. Earlier,
Mr. Masayoki Yokoyama, Special Envoy of the Japanese
Government, came to India in May and had talks with the
Foreign Minister and officials on the Vietnam question.
Japan was represented at the annual ECAFE Conference held in New Delhi in April, 1966 by a delegation
led by Mr. K. Asakai.
Other important visitors from Japan to India included
Mr. Y. Shimoro, Vice-Minister of Health and Welfare,
Mr. Teiichiro Morinaga, President of the Export-Import
Bank of Japan, Mr. Taizo Ishizaka and Ambassador Katsuzo
Okumura, President of the Organising Committee and
Commissioner-General respectively of the Japan World
Exposition, 1970 and Dr. Shiroshi Nasu, former Japanese
Ambassador to India. A Japanese Youth goodwill mission,
sponsored by the Youth Bureau of the Japanese Prime
Minister's office and a Japanese medical survey team also
visited India during the past year. At the invitation of
the Indian Council for Cultural Relations, a Japanese
dancing team was sent by the Japanese Society for International Cultural Relations under the sponsorship of the
Japanese Government.
Shri B. R. Bhagat, Minister of State in the Ministry of
Finance visited Tokyo in December, 1966 to attend the
proceedings of the Asian Development Bank. He also had
discussions with members of the Japanese Government
<pg28>
Shrimati Maragatham Chandrasekhar, then Union Deputy
Minister for Social Welfare and Shri R. Venkataraman,
then Minister for Industry in the Government of Madras
were among other visitors to Japan from India. The late
Dr. Radha Binod Pal, the eminent Jurist, also visited
Tokyo on the special invitation of the Japanese Government to receive the First-Class Order of the Sacred
Treasure conferred on him by His Majesty the Emperor
of Japan.
Five Japanese students came to India for studies underthe International Association for the exchange of students

for technical experience scheme. A number of other
Japanese students and scholars came to India under
schemes like the Colombo Plan and WHO Fellowships.
As in previous years, the Japanese Government gave six
scholarships to Indian students for study and research in
Japan.
The Japanese Leprosy Mission for Asia was inaugurated
in Agra on 30 January, 1967 by the Vice-President. Progress has been made in the construction of a hospital being
built by this Mission in Agra. The Government of India
had given permission to the transfer of the pre-war assets
of two Japanese nationals towards the expenses of the
project.
His Excellency Mr. Osamu Itagaki who was the,
Ambassador of Japan from March, 1965 left India in
August, 1966 and the present Ambassador, His Excellency,
Mr. Yujiro Iseki presented his credentials to the President
of India in October, 1966.
THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF MONGOLIA
India's friendly relations with Mongolia developed
further during the year. A new cultural exchange programme was chalked out and as a part of this programme
a photographic exhibition on economic development in
Mongolia was arranged in New Delhi, in July. TheDeputy Keeper of the National Museum of India visited
Mongolia in October under this programme. The
<pg29>
Mongolian Deputy Foreign Minister His Excellency Mr.
Degid Chimiddorj, who led his country's delegation to the
ECAFE Conference in New Delhi, also met, during his
stay, the Foreign Minister and the Minister of State in the
Ministry of External Affairs.
Shri Kewal Singh, our new Ambassador in Moscow
concurrently accredited to the Mongolian People's Republic,
presented his credentials at Ulan Bator on 11 October,
1966.
THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA
A trade delegation from the Republic of Korea led by
the Deputy Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs visited India
in April, 1966. An agreement was reached, at the talks
with the officials of the Government of India, that the
existing trade agreement between the two countries should
continue. As a sequel to these talks, a 13-man trade dele-

gation from the Republic of Korea visited India in June,
1966.
Under the UNESCO and WHO plans, the services of
some Indian experts were made available to the Republic
of Korea. Training facilities in India for Korean officials
have also been provided under the Technical Cooperation
Schemes of the Colombo Plans, while facilities for study,
research and training were provided to a number of Korean
nationals under fellowships from the WHO, UNICEF,
International Cooperative Alliance, UNTAP, etc. One
Indian student is at present in Seoul to study modern
Korean history under a scholarship granted by the Republic of Korea.
Shri P. Govinda Menon, then Minister of State in the
Ministry of Food and Agriculture visited Seoul to attend a
conference of the Food and Agricultural Organisation of
the U.N. Several Indians, including Members of Parliament, also visited the Republic of Korea to attend different
conferences.
<pg30>
An India-Korea friendship society was formed in Seoul
in February, 1967.
THE DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
It was agreed in October, 1966, that the trade agreement of 1961 between India and the People's Republic of
Korea should be revived. Accordingly letters were exchanged under which the trade agreement would remain
operative until 31 December, 1967.
JAPAN
INDIA USA CANADA FRANCE GERMANY UNITED KINGDOM VIETNAM SRI LANKA MONGOLIA
RUSSIA KOREA
Oct 28, 1966

West Asia and North Africa
CHAPTER VI
WEST ASIA AND NORTH AFRICA

I N D I A's relations with the countries of West Asia and
North Africa were generally satisfactory; the ties of
friendship and cooperation with the UAR, Iraq and
Kuwait, in particular were further strengthened during
the past year; the Government of India continued to make
efforts to improve its relations with Iran and Saudi
Arabia.
IRAN
The disclosure that a number of the 90 F-86 Sabre-jet
aircraft purchased by Iran from West Germany had been
sent to Pakistan for "servicing, repairs and modifications"
confirmed the reports which had reached the Government
of India as early as October, 1965 that such diversion was
taking place. As a result of representation made to the
Government of Iran, West Germany and Canada, most of
the aircraft were said to have been returned to Iran and
India was assured that only a small number will be kept
in Pakistan at a time for servicing and repairs. The F-86
episode, which undeniably strained Indo-Iranian relations
was, however, not allowed to interfere with the progress
of Indo-Iranian cooperation in economic and cultural
spheres.
The National Iranian Oil Company, together with
AMOCO, a subsidiary of the Standard Oil Company of the
United States, is collaborating with the Government of
India in the construction of an oil refinery in Madras.
The NIOC holds 13 per cent of the equity investments in
the Madras Refineries, the AMOCO another 13 per cent
with the remaining 74 per cent by the Government of
<pg31>
<pg32>
India. The refinery is likely to commence operations by
early 1969.
The Iranian Minister for Economy, Mr. Alikhani, came
to India in March-April, 1966 to attend the 22nd Session
of the ECAFE in New Delhi. During the visit, he also
held discussions with the Indian Minister of Commerce
regarding Indo-Iranian cooperation in technical and
economic fields. As a result of these discussions, it was
agreed to depute Indian technicians and engineers for
service in Iran, to train Iranian personnel in technical
institutions in India and to make available to the Government of Iran, consultancy services available in India. It
was also agreed that Joint Technical Committees should
be set up to examine fields of industry where joint

ventures could be taken up.
THE UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC
During 1966, a new dimension was added to the close
and cordial relations which exist between India and the
UAR. The Prime Minister of India visited the UAR in
July, 1966. The exchange of views between her and
President Nasser, especially on the need for strengthening
the forces of non-alignment and peace, led to the tripartite
meeting between the Heads of Government of the UAR,
Yugoslavia and India in October, 1966. After the Summit,
President Nasser stayed on for a state visit for two days,
from 25 to 27 October. In a joint statement, President
Nasser and Prime Minister Indira Gandhi agreed that
Ministers of the two countries should meet in December,
1966 to discuss economic and technical collaboration and
to explore the fields open for joint ventures. It was also
decided that, at least once a year, a ministerial or highlevel official meeting should be held between the Foreign
offices of the two countries to exchange views on subjects
of mutual interest. It was also agreed to draw up a twoyear cultural programme under the cultural Agreement
between the two countries.
<pg33>
SAUDI ARABIA
While the official attitude of the Saudi Arabian Government during the Indo-Pakistan conflict was one of noninvolvement, there were certain anti-Indian positions adopted and actions taken in other important Saudi Arabian
quarters which tended to strain Indo-Saudi relations. The
Saudi Arabian delegate in the UN General Assembly,
however, made a partisan statement in the general debate
in 1965. Again, on the eve of King Feisal's visit to
Pakistan in April, 1966, the Saudi Arabian Embassy
brought out a brochure in which it was said that Pakistan
was a victim of aggression. This matter was forcefully
taken up with the Saudi authorities, who expressed regret
and assured India that no unfriendly reference to India
will, in future, be made in any such statement. It is the
mutual desire of the two countries to seek normal and
friendly relations.
IRAQ
At the time of the tragic demise of the President of
Iraq, Field Marshal Abdul Salam Mohamad Aref, in an
air accident in April, 1966, Shri Manubhai Shah, then
Minister of Commerce, was deputed as the representative
of the Government of India to attend the funeral of the

late President.
The growing collaboration between India and Iraq was
evidenced in several ways. The Government of India
have been deputing Air Force instructors to train Iraqi
cadets and a special course is being run for Iraqi cadets
in India. Iraqi officers have also come to India for
training in the Staff College in Wellington.
Brigadier Saifuddin Siddiqui, Commander of the Iraqi
Navy, paid a ten-day goodwill visit to India in November,
1966, at the invitation of Vice-Admiral B. S. Soman, Chief
of Naval Staff, India.
The growing understanding between the two countries
was manifested in a press statement issued by the Iraqi
<pg34>
Foreign Minister, Dr. Adnan al-Pachachi welcoming the
joint communique issued after the Tripartite meeting of
the UAR, Yugoslavia and India held in New Delhi in
October, 1966. He supported the views expressed by the
three States on Vietnam, disarmament and economic development of developing States.
The Foreign Minister of Iraq, Dr. Adnan al-Pachachi,
accompanied by Mrs. Pachachi, paid an official visit to
India from Mar 03, 1967 to 8 March, 1967. In the joint communique issued at the end of the visit, both sides, inter
alia, expressed the hope that the implementation of the
Tashkent Declaration would create an atmosphere of
mutual trust, understanding and cooperation conducive to
the creation of good neighbourly relations between India
and Pakistan and the solution of all outstanding
differences in accordance with the U.N. Charter in the best
interests of both India and Pakistan and thus make a
significant contribution to peace in the region.
ALGERIA
Relations with Algeria continued to be cordial and
friendly. In July, 1966, a three-member delegation led by
Shrimati Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit visited Algeria to take part
in the Independence Day celebrations. In November, 1966,
the Law Minister, Shri G. S. Pathak, represented India
at the Celebrations of the 12th anniversary of the Algerian
Revolution. During both visits, the Algerians expressed
a keen desire to continue and to improve economic cooperation between the two countries. An economic delegation. from Algeria is expected to visit India in the near
future.

THE LEAGUE OF ARAB STATES
In keeping with India's policy of support for the legitimate aspirations of the Arab World, India has maintained
close contact with the League of Arab States both through
its Head Office in Cairo and its Mission in India. Dr.
Clovis Maksoud, Chief Representative of the League for
<pg35>
India and South-East Asia left New Delhi on completion
of his assignment in India. Dr. Maksoud rendered valuable service in the cause of Indo-Arab friendship and
understanding.
IRAQ
KUWAIT INDIA IRAN GERMANY PAKISTAN CANADA USA YUGOSLAVIA SAUDI ARABIA NEW
ZEALAND LATVIA OMAN VIETNAM UZBEKISTAN ALGERIA EGYPT
Mar 03, 1967

Africa, South of the Sahara
CHAPTER VII
AFRICA, SOUTH OF THE SAHARA
T H E past year was marked by important political
changes in some African countries. In Ghana, President
Nkrumah was over-thrown by a military coup in February,
1966 and his Government replaced by a National Liberation Council headed by Lt. General J. A. Ankrah. Nigeria
witnessed a second coup within 6 months of the first and
the Government was taken over by Lt. Col. Gowon. The
federal and the regional authorities have been meeting ever
since in an effort to tide over tensions between them on
the question of the future constitution of Nigeria. In
Sierra Leone, the Governor General, Sir Henry Lightfoot
Boston and the newly-appointed Prime Minister, Mr.
Stevens, were over-thrown by an army coup, following
disputed elections and a constitutional crisis. A National
Reformation Council has reportedly been installed. In the
Democratic Republic of Congo, President Mobutu relieved
General Mulamba of the Prime Ministership and himself
assumed charge of the Prime Minister's functions. In

pursuance of the aim of economic independence, the
Congolese Government took over the mining installations
of the Union Miniere and set up a Congolese Company to
run them. In Uganda the Prime Minister, Dr. Milton
Obote, assumed the office of the President in February,
1966, relieving the Kabaka of Buganda who fled to the
UK. A new Constitution was promulgated in April, 1966,
which abolished the Federal Government set up under the
Independence Constitution. In Kenya, which had been
a one-party State since 1964, a split occurred in the ruling
party (Kenya African National Union) in April, 1966, when
Vice-President Odinga and other dissidents broke away to
form an opposition party called Kenya People's Union.
<pg36>
<pg37>
With the opening of a new Resident Mission in Guinea,
India now has direct diplomatic representation in 14
countries of Africa, south of the Sahara. Her interests in
most other countries in this region are taken care of by
concurrent accreditation. India's programme of technical
cooperation with the developing countries of Africa continued. An Agreement on Trade and Technical Assistance
was concluded with Tanzania followed by the visit of an
Industrial team to Dar-es-Salaam. A bilateral Air Transport agreement was concluded between India and Ethiopia.
Some tension arose in India's relations with Kenya
following the deportation to India of a few persons of
Indian origin domiciled in Kenya, who were either UK
citizens or had taken up Kenyan citizenship. The Voice
of Kenya also made some broadcasts derogatory to Indians
and India. As a result of strong representations by the
Indian High Commissioner, the deportations ceased and
anti-Indian broadcasts were discontinued. In informal
talks, the Kenyan leaders gave an assurance that the
deportations did not represent any anti-Indian attitude on
the part of the Government of Kenya.
The Government of Tanzania also ordered expulsion of
some persons of Indian origin but subsequently the Government decided to reconsider their cases. The Government of Tanzania nationalised the country's commercial
banks on Feb 06, 1967. This was announced by President Nyerere as a step towards socialism. He held out an
assurance that due compensation would be paid whereever claim to this was duly established.
India regretted the decision of the International Court
of Justice which rejected, by the President's casting vote,
the case brought by Ethiopia and Liberia against the
Union of South Africa for violation of its mandate over

South West Africa. India's Foreign Minister declared in
the United Nations General Assembly that the only course
left for the world body was to revoke South Africa's mandate over South West Africa. In the event, the General
<pg38>
Assembly adopted a resolution on 27 October, 1966, which
terminated South Africa's mandate over South West
Africa. An Ad Hoc Committee of 14 nations is to report
to a special session of the General Assembly, beginning
on 21 April, 1967, the practical means by which the UN
could fulfil the obligation of that resolution regarding
direct administration of the territory.
The Government of India has always held that it is
Britain's responsibility to terminate the illegal racist regime
set up after UDI in Southern Rhodesia and to introduce
majority rule in that country. India enjoins the use of
force by Britain, if necessary, should economic sanctions
fail to bring down the rebel regime. This stand has been
reiterated at various international forums during the last
year including the Commonwealth Prime Minister's Conference at London in September, 1966 and the Security
Council meeting in December, 1966. The British Government's series of informal talks with the rebel regime which
sought to find a basis for formal negotiations culminated
in deadlock in December, 1966, obliging the British
Government to approach the Security Council to approve
selective mandatory economic sanctions against Rhodesia.
The Afro-Asian countries pressed strongly for a total ban
on trade with Rhodesia. The eventual Security Council
resolution of 16 December, 1966, approving selective mandatory sanctions
including a ban on export of oil
and oil products to Rhodesia, remains short of the wishes
of the African and Asian countries but nevertheless
represents a purposeful beginning by the United Nations
in tackling the Rhodesian problem. In a review of the
effectiveness of the sanctions, required to be submitted by
1 March, 1967, the UN Secretary-General indicated that
while some member-countries which traditionally depended on Rhodesia experienced difficulty in implementing the
resolution, certain other States which had significant trade
with Rhodesia had not reported at all to the UN on what
measures, if any, they had taken in pursuance of the
resoltuion. The Government of India having themselves
<pg39>
severed all trade and economic relations with Rhodesia
recognises and stresses the paramount importance of strict
adherence by all countries to the mandatory sanctions for
these to be effective.

The voluntary sanctions imposed earlier, while ineffective against Rhodesia, had an adverse effect on
Zambia's economy. The operation of mandatory sanctions
may create greater hardship for Zambia. Recognising the
necessity of supporting Zambia's contingency planning,
India suggested at the Security Council meeting in
December, 1966 the adoption of a concerted programme of
aid to Zambia. India is a member of the Commonwealth
Sanctions Committee one of whose objectives is to protect
the interests of Zambia. India has offered technical assistance to Zambia by way of personnel and material.
Facilities have also been offered for training Zambian
personnel in India. To help in the air-lifting of vital
petroleum supplies to Zambia, India supplied a large number of steel barrels and also contributed the services of a
rehabilitation expert and staff to assist the rehabilitation
of Zambian nationals returning from Rhodesia. Zambia,
was assisted in recruiting 95 Railway personnel with a
reserve of 25 from India.
GHANA
NIGER NIGERIA SIERRA LEONE CONGO UGANDA UNITED KINGDOM KENYA GUINEA INDIA
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC TANZANIA USA ETHIOPIA LIBERIA SOUTH AFRICA ZAMBIA
Feb 06, 1967

Eastern and Western Europe
CHAPTER VIII
EASTERN AND WESTERN EUROPE
Eastern Europe
U.S.S.R.
D U R I N G the year there was a steady development and
further strengthening of the traditional close and friendly
relations between India and the USSR in the cultural,
economic and political fields. The tradition of mutual
consultation between India and the USSR on matters
of common interest and on important international problems continued. The Prime Minister of India, Shrimati
Indira Gandhi, stopped for a day in Moscow in April, 1966
on her way back from the USA. She later paid a visit
to the USSR from Jul 12, 1966 to 16 July, 1966. The Deputy
Foreign Minister of the USSR, Mr. N. P. Firyubin, visited

India in March and in September, 1966 and had useful
exchange of views with our government.
The spirit of Tashkent remained keenly alive in India.
The Soviet Union's contribution to the triumph of peace
at Tashkent and her understanding of the many steps that
India has taken in implementation of the Declaration have
been deeply appreciated in this country. The first anniversary of the Declaration was suitably observed on 10
January, 1967, both in New Delhi and in Moscow. Our
Ambassador in Moscow held a reception, publicity brochures were issued, speeches stressing the importance
of this accord were made and messages were exchanged
between leaders of India and the Soviet Union. The
Minister of External Affairs, Shri M. C. Chagla's message
to the Indo-Soviet Cultural Society brings out the significance of the occasion thus: "The only true way to
celebrate the first anniversary of the Declaration is for
<pg40>
<pg41>
both India and Pakistan to renew their faith in the
Principles on which the Declaration was based
and to
make a genuine effort to remove all obstacles in the way
of its implementation and to bring about an atmosphere
in which they can live together as good friends
and
neighbours."
Economic cooperation between India and the Soviet
Union continued to expand and the Soviet Union continued to render outstanding assistance in the industrial
development of India. The Planning Minister, Shri
Ashoka Mehta paid a visit to the Soviet Union in JuneJuly, 1966 to discuss Indo-Soviet cooperation during the
Fourth Five-Year Plan period. A high-power Soviet
Economic delegation led by Mr. S. A. Skachkov, Chairman
of the USSR Committee for Foreign Economic Relations
visited India in November/December, 1966. An agreement
was signed on 10 December, 1966 providing for a Soviet
loan of Rs. 250 crores to India during the Fourth FiveYear Plan. The Agreement provides for Soviet technical
and economic assistance for certain industrial enterprisesand projects in the public sector during the Plan period.
The Indian Minister of Food and Agriculture, Shri
C. Subramaniam also paid a visit to the Soviet Union in
July, 1966 to explore possibilities of cooperation in
increasing India's farm production. An agreement
between the Government of India and the USSR was
signed on 25 November, 1966, under which the Soviet

Government would make a gift by 1968 of farm machinery
and equipment for five State agricultural seed farms on the
model of the Suratgarh farm.
During the food emergency, the Soviet Union made a
gift of sunflower oil, milk powder, baby foods, biscuits and
vitamins. They also announced a gift of 2 lakh tons of
wheat to be transported to India at their own cost.
Trade between India and the Soviet Union has been
growing rapidly. A five-year Trade Agreement between
<pg42>
India and the USSR was signed in New Delhi on 7
January, 1966 envisaging the doubling of trade to the level
of Rs, 300 crores both ways by 1970. The then Commerce
Minister, Shri Manubhai Shah, paid a visit to the Soviet
Union in July, 1966 to discuss the problems arising out of
devaluation of the Indian rupee. With mutual goodwill
and understanding the difficulties in implementing the
trade plan were overcome. A trade plan for 1967 involving a turnover of Rs. 170 crores was signed in Moscow on
3 December, 1966. An important feature of the rapidly
growing trade between the two countries is the increasing
volume of India's manufactured and semi-manufactured
goods imported by the Soviet Union.
The annual cultural exchange plan for 1966-67 between
India and the USSR was signed in New Delhi on 12 May,
1966. The new plan consisting of 93 items of exchanges
covers a wide range of fields including science, education,
health, sports, cinema, radio and TV, art and culture.
At the invitation of the Allahabad High Court Centenary Celebration Committee, a delegation of Soviet judges
visited India during November/December, 1966.
YUGOSLAVIA
Indo-Yugoslav relations made marked progress during
the past year. High-level exchange of visits included the
visit of the Chairman of the Yugoslav Federal Executive
Council, Mr. Peter Stambolic, to India in March, 1966, and
the visit of the Indian Prime Minister to Yugoslavia in
July, 1966. The President of Yugoslavia, Marshal Tito
was in New Delhi in October, 1966 to attend the Tripartite
meeting of Yugoslavia, the UAR and India. The then
Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Shri Hukum Singh was on an
official visit to Yugoslavia from 10 to 14 June, 1966. The
then Minister of State in the Ministry of External Affairs,
Shri Dinesh Singh, also visited Yugoslavia in June, 1966.
Economic cooperation between India and Yugoslavia
has been expanding rapidly and the Indo-Yugoslav Trade

<pg43>
and Economic Commission is making continuous efforts to
find avenues for joint ventures and for industrial collaboration both within the two countries and in third countries. A
further fillip was given to these efforts as a result of the
decisions of the tripartite summit in October and the tripartite economic meet in December, 1966. The Yugoslav
Minister, Mr. Aleksander Grlickov, who came to India for
the tripartite economic meeting stayed on in New Delhi
for bilateral talks.
An agreement for collaboration in the field of science
was signed on 1 March, 1966, between the Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research in India and the Federal
Council for Coordination of Scientific Activities in
Yugoslavia.
A protocol for a Yugoslav credit of Rs. 600 million was
signed on 18 June, 1966 to finance supply of equipment for
the projects to be undertaken in India during the coming
years.
A Trade plan for 1967 was signed during the visit of
Mr. Grlickov in December, 1966 envisaging an exchange
of goods worth Rs. 75 crores both ways. Earlier, a protocol
covering consequential trade arrangements following devaluation of the Rupee was signed in July 1966 after talks
with a Yugoslav delegation.
To meet India's food emergency, the Government
of Yugoslavia made a gift of 1,700 tons of beans and 750
tons of milk powder. The Yugoslav Red Cross sent to the
Indian Red Cross a consignment of milk powder, medicines
and textiles fabrics.
Other East European Countries
Marked progress was also made in India's economic
and trade relations with many East European countries.
Bulgaria offered a credit worth $ 15 million for the Fourth
Plan projects and trade delegations exchanged visits to
finalise goods lists. With Czechoslovakia, two agreements,
<pg44>
for scientific collaboration and for cooperation in peaceful
uses of atomic energy, were concluded. An Inter-Governmental Committee for Economic, Trade and Technical
Cooperation has been established. The Government of
Hungary has offered a credit of Rs. 25 crores for-the 4th
plan. A new long-term trade agreement and an agreement on scientific and technical cooperation were signed

during the visit to India of the Hungarian Prime Minister.
A Polish trade delegation visited India in February-March,
1966 while an Indian trade delegation visited Rumania in.
September-October, 1966.
Western Europe
India's relations with the countries of Europe, with the
exception of Portugal, continued to be friendly and expanded in several directions, with growing cooperation in
the economic, cultural, technical and scientific fields. In
the context of the food crisis in India, the sympathy and
fellow-feeling of people of many European countries for
the Indian people was demonstrated in the assistance extended by private organisations and individuals, as well as
by governments.
Apart from governmental assistance, spontaneous public,
contributions were raised in many countries of Europe,
notably the Netherlands, Belgium, Sweden and Spain to
assist India to meet the shortage. caused by the unprecedented drought. The Governments of Austria, Denmark,
Finland and Norway rendered prompt and timely assistance
through credits, loans and outright supplies of food-stuffs
and fertilisers.
FRANCE
India's relations with France continued to be friendly
and cordial. The Prime Minister of India made a brief
stop-over at Paris on 25 and 26 March, on her way to,
Washington. Representatives of the Indian and French.
governments, led by their Foreign Ministers, met for
periodical consultations, in Paris on 1 and 2 June.
<pg45>
Mr. Jean Saintney, who visited Peking and Hanoi as a
special representative of President de Gaulle visited Delhi
from 10 to 12 July, 1966.
An agreement concerning cultural, scientific and
technical cooperation was signed between India and
France at Paris on 7 June, 1966. It is expected that with
the signing of this agreement, exchanges between the two
countries, in the field of education, culture and technical
cooperation, which have been steadily growing over the
past years, will be placed on a firm basis for further
growth
The Government of France offered several scholarships
to Indian nationals for studies/training in France, includ-

ing 52 scholarships for higher studies and specialised training, 14 for higher studies in technical subjects and 2 for
specialised training in Theatre, Art and Music. The Government of India also offered six scholarships to French
nationals for study/training in India.
In January, 1966, the Government of France offered a
gift of Rs. 18 million in milk powder and pesticides
to India to help relieve food shortage. An additional gift
of about 2300 tons of milk powder was subsequently
offered The French Committee for the World Campaign
against Hunger also despatched sizeable quantities of
multivitamin and Iron Compound tablets.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY
Though the year witnessed some periods of stress in
Indo-German relations, the FRG continued to take a keen
interest in India's development programmes. While a
credit of DM 240 million (Rs. 45.3 crores) for the first year
of the Fourth Five-Year Plan was offered, special interest
was shown in projects for improvement of agriculture in
the context of India's food crisis. A credit of DM 12
million repayable in 25 years at an interest of 1 per cent
was offered for purchase of fertilisers and the FRG agreed
to assist in the expansion of joint programmes like the
<pg46>
package scheme in Himachal Pradesh. Two more such
projects one in Himachal Pradesh and another in Madras
are to be taken up. The FRG also offered to supply fertilisers worth DM 500,000 for the joint agricultural programme
of India and FAO. Gift of powdered milk valued at DM
500,000 was also announced.
An agreement was signed on 7 June, 1966 between India
and the FRG providing for further collaboration in the
development of Indian Institute of Technology at Madras.
Besides providing for services of professors, senior scientific assistants, foremen and visiting prefessors and for training in Germany of teachers of the Institute the Agreement
provides for equipment of five new laboratories.
During the year India received several distinguished
visitors from the Federal Republic of Germany, including
three members of the Bundestag, the FRG's observer at
the United Nations, a delegation of the sub-committee on
Cultural Relations of the Parliament, a member of the
Foreign Affairs Committee of the Bundestag and the former Ambassador of FRG, Mr. Duckwitz, on a private visit.
The Government of the Federal Republic offered 68
to 73 scholarships to the Government of India for practical

training in Germany during 1966.
The past year, however, witnessed some periods of
stress in India's relations with the FRG. India represented to the FRG against the sale of Sabre Jet aircrafts to
Iran which were diverted to Pakistan. Concern was also
expressed over the Federal Government's guarantee to a
consortium of European firms proposing to set up a steel
plant in China. The FRG also expressed some misgivings
over the reference to the German question in the Indo-Soviet
Communique of 16 July 1966. However, mutually satisfactory assurance were exchanged on these issues.
THE NETHERLANDS
The Government of the Netherlands sent milk powder
and baby food worth 1,00,000 Dutch guilders to help relieve
<pg47>
food shortage in India. A gift of one million guilders was
also allocated for a project to improve agriculture in India.
Besides, the Dutch Government announced assistance of
one million dollars to help India to fight the threat of
famine.
Apart from Government assistance, the Netherlands
Organisation for International Assistance (NOVILE) organised a fund collection campaign to which the people of
the Netherlands, especially students, responded generously
and over 22 million guilders were raised. Several consignments of food purchased out of these funds have arrived in
India. As a gesture of friendship the Government of India
is sending a baby elephant to the Amsterdam Zoo.
The Government of the Netherlands offered 38 fellowships to Indian nationals for 1967.
His Excellency Jonkheer Hubert Theodore Anguste
Marie van Rijekevorsel presented his letter of credence on
9 March, 1966. The new Ambassador of India to the
Netherlands, Shri S. N. Haksar, presented his credentials
on 20 July, 1966.
BELGIUM
The cause of Indo-Belgian friendship suffered a
grievous loss when all the members of the delegation of
the Belgo-Indian Association lost their lives in an air crash
while returning from India.
The difficult food situation caused by drought in India
evoked widespread public sympathy in Belgium. 1 June,
1966 was observed as the "National Day of Solidarity

with India" throughout Belgium and contributions amounting to 11 million Belgian Francs (approx. Rs. 15 lakhs)
were raised to finance projects meant to increase the output of agriculture in India.
Father Dominique G. Pire, Belgian Nobel Peace Prize
winner for 1958 and the founder of the "World of the
Heart Movement" visited India in October-November, 1966
to select a site for launching a self-help community develop<pg48>
ment project called "Island of Peace" for which the Movement of Father Pire would contribute one million US
dollars. Kalakkadu block in Trunelveli district of
Madras State, with a population of 63,500 spread over 190
villages, was selected. During his visit, Father Pire stayed
in Delhi as the guest of the Government of India.
Shri G. Ramachandran, M.P. and an official of the
Gandhi Peace Foundation had a very successful lecture
tour in Belgium.
The Government of Belgium offered five fellowships to
Indian nationals for higher studies/research at postgraduate level.
Shri T. Swaminathan has been appointed as India's new
Ambassador to Belgium.
DENMARK
The Government of Denmark has given India an interest-free loan of 30 million Krones as an assistance in
the food situation. They have also given 2.1 million Krones
for a leprosy relief programme in Orissa.
Mr. Christen Haekkerup, the former Foreign Minister
of Denmark, accompanied by a large party of members of
Parliament, officials and journalists visited India in AugustSeptember, 1966, as guest of the Government of India.
They visited the Danish-aided Cattle Project in Mysore.
Shri Avtar Singh took over as Indian's Ambassador on
18 March, 1966.
NORWAY
The Government of Norway gifted an amount of
Rs. 1.7 million as aid to India to help ease the food situation.
Norway has been helping India in a number of ways.

The Indo-Norwegian Fishery Project in Kerala, after
successfully accomplishing the task of coastal fishing, is
to be extended to deep sea fishing. The Government of
Norway have decided to present to India three trawlers
<pg49>
with full modern equipment and one of these was presented in June, 1966. A scheme for developing bilateral relations between towns in India and Norway has been initiated with the linking of the city of Poona and city of
Tromso.
Shri R. S. Mani took over as Ambassador to Norway on
29 July, 1966.
SWEDEN
The Government of Sweden allocated a sum of S. Krones 7 million for assistance to India in the food crisis. The
amount was utilised for purchase of powder milk from
Sweden.
Sweden has also announced a credit of S. Krones 24
million for construction of silos for grain storage at Indian
ports and other projects during 1966-67. They have also
offered as gift 14,000 tonnes of calcium ammonia nitrate
for fertilisers.
Sweden has offered to send to India a team of young
Swedish volunteers to work in the field of agriculture,
forestry, animal husbandry, rural economy and social
services.
Shri B. K. Kapur took over as Ambassador on 9 July,
1965.
FINLAND
The Government of Finland gifted 200 tons of milk
powder as aid to India in the food crisis.
Finland has offered scholarships to Indian students
in the fields of metallurgy, paper technology and architecture.
Shri B. K. Kapur, concurrently accredited to Finland,
presented his credentials on 23 October, 1966.
ITALY
As a member of the Aid-India Consortium, Italy has
continued to play a part in India's development plans.

<pg50>
The two countries are also collaborating in several industrial schemes in the public and private sectors. The Italian
Government also offers several scholarships for studies
in Italy.
In response to an appeal made by the Pope and President Saragat, the Italian public contributed nearly 13
million US dollars to help India in the food crisis besides
a very generous donation from the Government of Italy.
As a gesture of goodwill, the Government of India
donated tea and bed-sheets worth Rs. 15,000 to the victims
of floods in Italy during October/November, 1966.
Shri I. J. Bahadur Singh presented his credentials in
Rome, as Ambassador of India, on 21 March, 1967.
GREECE
Her Majesty Queen Frederica of Greece, the Queen
Mother, accompanied by Princess Irene came on a fiveweek visit to India as guests of the Government of India.
King Constantine of Greece announced, on Indian
Prime Minister's birthday, a contribution of $ 10,000 to the
Prime Minister's Relief Fund for the drought victims in
Bihar.
The Government of India, as a gesture of goodwill,
donated tea and textiles worth Rs. 15,000 to the victims of
a severe earthquake in central Greece.
SPAIN
Action Catolica, a religious organisation in Spain,
raised contributions amounting to 52 million Pesetas (Rs. 4
million) for drought relief work in India. With this money,
the organisation purchased 70 trucks and one thousand
tons each of wheat flour and rice. One half of each of
these items was sent as gift to the Government of India
and the other half to the "Catholic Charities of India".
The new Ambassador of Spain to India, H. E. Mr. Don
Miguel Teus Y. Lopez presented his credentials on 8 June,
1966.
<pg51>
H.R.H. Prince Juan Carlos and his wife Princess Sofia
paid a brief private visit to India in January, 1966.

PORTUGAL
Portugal's inhuman treatment of two Indian nationals,
Shri Mohan Lakshman Ranade and Dr. Telo Mascarenhas,
detained in that country for their patriotic activities in Goa,
Daman and Diu, evoked widespread resentment in India.
The Portuguese Government have denied them even the
normal facilities of visits by relatives and have not relented even after an appeal by Shri Ranade's old mother.
Efforts for the release of these Indian patriots are continuing through friendly countries to whom the Government
of India are grateful for their endeavours in this cause.
The Government of India are also grateful to the Government of Mexico for the useful role played by their diplomats while looking after India's interests in Lisbon.
AUSTRIA
Within three days of learning of India's food emergency,
the Government of Austria had announced last year gift
of skimmed milk powder and fertilisers of the value of
$ one million. This gift was utilised during the year
under report.
A new agreement for a credit of Rs. 4.7 million was
signed with Austria on 5 December, 1966.
TURKEY
Relations between India and Turkey, which had become strained following the latter's partisan attitude
during the Indo-Pak conflict, showed some signs of improvement.
The Maharashtra Minister for Housing Shri Homi J
Taleyarkhan paid a goodwill visit to Turkey in June, 1966
and was warmly received.
A 3-member Turkish Parliamentary delegation visited
India in August 1966 as guests of the Government of India,
primarily to study family planning programmes in
India.
<pg52>
Parts of eastern Turkey were hit by a severe earthquake
in August 1966. The Government of India donated tea,
textiles worth Rs. 15,000 to the victims.
CYPRUS
The Postal Administration of Cyprus release a stamp
on 6 June 1966 to commemorate the services of late Gene-

ral K. S. Thimmayya as Commander of the UNFICYP.
IRELAND
The Irish Government has gifted pound30,000 to India
through the FAO.
THE VATICAN
Contributions from all over the world continued to
pour in response to an appeal made earlier by the Pope
to help India. The Holy Father also made a personal
donation of 100,000 dollars for the relief of scarcity-hit
areas in the country. This token of his affection and love
for the people of India was deeply appreciated all over
the country.
THE UNITED KINGDOM
Relations with UK showed some improvement during
the year, especially after talks between the Prime Ministers
of India and the United Kingdom in April, 1966 and
between the Indian Foreign Minister and the British
leaders in June, 1966. The visits of Members of Parliament, noted political commentators and other leaders of
opinion from UK to India and similar visits from Indian
leaders to UK have helped to bring about a better apreciation in UK of Indian point of view on various questions of current importance.
British economic aid to India continued and four agreements providing interest-free loans totalling pound30.5 million
from Britain to India were signed during the period under
review. These loans would be spread over a period of 25
years with repayments beginning after the seventh year.
<pg53>
These were made available, in the form of general purpose loans to help India service payments due under previous loans, to liberalise her imports and to make good
the current food shortage. They will also be used to purchase spares and components for various industries and
goods essential to maintain her industrial production.
India also received technical assistance. The major
item under this head was the aid given to the Indian Institute of Technology in Delhi. A number of experts from
UK were also procured in various fields like engineering,
management and electronics as also training facilities for
a number of Indians in UK. Some institutions also received gifts of equipment and books on scientific and technical
subjects.

USA
INDIA RUSSIA UZBEKISTAN PAKISTAN YUGOSLAVIA UNITED KINGDOM BULGARIA NORWAY
SLOVAKIA HUNGARY PORTUGAL BELGIUM THE NETHERLANDS SPAIN SWEDEN AUSTRIA
DENMARK FINLAND FRANCE VIETNAM GERMANY IRAN CHINA ITALY GREECE CENTRAL
AFRICAN REPUBLIC MEXICO TURKEY CYPRUS IRELAND
Jul 12, 1966

The Americas
CHAPTER IX
THE AMERICAS
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
C L O S E friendship remains the firm basis of Indo-US relations despite the differences between the two sides which
sometimes obscure it. The Indian Prime Minister's visit
to the US (from Mar 28, 1966 to 1 April, 1966) symbolised
and emphasised the cordiality in the relationship between
the two countries. The Prime Minister received an impressive and touching welcome from the US Government
and people; her discussions with the US President in particular helped fulfil what she had characterised as the
primary purpose of the visit "to establish a close rapport
and understanding". In the words of the joint communique, the visit "reaffirmed the strong bonds of friendship
between the United States and India, based upon a shared
commitment to constitutional democracy and a common
revolutionary heritage", while the "highly informative,
frank and friendly discussions" between the two leaders
"contributed to a valuable personal understanding between
their two countries and two peoples".
An element in Indo-US relations which has come to
acquire a special importance over the years, namely US
economic assistance, also provided much encouragement
to bringing the two sides closer together. The US undertook another large contribution for the year to assist in
the implementation of India's development plan. Following a special Presidential message to the Congress, the
US also generously filled the gap in Indian food supplies resulting from last year's severe drought. At the
same time, the problems and difficulties inherent in the
aid position also became evident. They were highlighted

<pg54>
<pg55>
by the acute crisis created by a second successive year of
drought, which obliged India to find a further 10 million
tons of grain, at least, for the year 1967. The U.S. response
was again sympathetic and vitally helpful, though for
various reasons it was of a more limited nature than
before.
The renewed search by India for food aid, and the US
reaction, occasioned a great deal of public speculation
about the true state of Indo-US relations, with many political differences being emphasised to suggest that heavy
stresses and strains had developed. These speculations
showed once again how rapidly the atmosphere surrounding Indo-US relations could fluctuate between hot and
cold.
CANADA
The continuing close and cordial relations between
Canada and India were a matter of great satisfaction to the
Government and people of India. As a mark of this friendship, it was announced in January 1967 that the President
of India would be visiting Canada during the course of the
Canadian Centennial Celebrations.
Canada continued to extend economic assistance to
India in various ways. In response to India's request for
emergency food supplies to meet the current scarcity in
some parts of the country, the Canadian Prime Minister
announced on 29 November, that Canada would supply 21
million dollars worth of food on a grant basis. The shipment of this consignment would start immediately. At the
same time he also announced 75 million dollars worth of
food aid to India for the year 1967-68.
An Indian delegation attended the Annual Conference
of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association which
was held in Montreal from 25 September to 4 October,
1966.
THE CARIBBEAN AND LATIN AMERICA
India's friendly ties with the countries of these regions
were strengthened.
<pg56>
His Excellency Dr. Miguel Zavala Ortiz, Minister of

Foreign Affairs and Worship of the Republic of Argentina,
accompanied by Mrs. Ortiz, paid an official visit to India
from 25 to 28 March, 1966. During his stay in India he
signed a Trade Agreement between India and Argentina
for promotion of trade between the two countries.
His Excellency Mr. Mauro Thibau, Minister of Mines
and Energy, Brazil, paid an official visit to India from 7
October to 15 October, 1966. During his stay in India. he
had useful discussions regarding promotion of trade between India and Brazil with the Minister of Commerce.
He had discussions with the then Minister of Mines and
Metals Shri S. K. Dey and called on the President and the
Foreign Minister.
Guyana (formerly British Guiana) attained Independence from Britain on 26 May, 1966. India was represented
at the Independence Celebrations in Georgetown by Shri
Dinesh Singh, the then Minister of State in the Ministry of
External Affairs.
Barbados attained independence on 30 November, 1966
from Britain. India was represented at the Independence
Celebrations in Bridgetown by its Ambassador in Mexico
and High Commissioner in Port of Spain, Trinidad.
The Government of Trinidad and Tobago offered
$ 25,000 in cash and $ 25,000 for purchase of Fertilizers for
the drought-affected States in India. The offer was
accepted with gratitude by the Government of India.
His Excellency Mr. Harry S. Radhakishun, Minister of
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries of the
Government of Surinam visited India to participate in the
International Rice Commission Conference sponsored by
the FAO. At the conclusion of the Conference he was
guest of the Government of India from 9 to 16 October,
1966.
USA
INDIA CANADA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC ARGENTINA BRAZIL GUYANA BARBADOS
MEXICO SPAIN TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
Mar 28, 1966

United Nations and International Conferences

CHAPTER X
UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL
CONFERENCES
T H E 21st Session of the United Nations General Assembly commenced on Sep 20, 1966 and adjourned on 21
December, 1966. Mr. Abdul Rahman Pazhwak of Afghanistan was elected President of the session. Four newly independent countries-Guyana, Botswana, Lesotho and Barbados were admitted and Indonesia resumed fun participation in the United Nations, thus bringing the total
membership to 122.
A major achievement of this session was persuading U
Thant to accept a second five-year term as Secretary-General of the United Nations. For India, the session was
eventful. India was elected as a non-permanent member of
the Security Council for a two-year term from 1 January,
1967, along with Canada, Denmark, Ethiopia and Brazil.
Dr. Nagendra Singh of India was elected to the 25-member
International Law Commission. He was also appointed a
member of the International Court of Arbitration. India
was also elected at the 40th Session of ECOSOC to the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme for three years from 1 January, 1967. Shri
K. C. Pant, M.P. was elected the First Vice-Chairman of the
Commission on Human Rights.
In the general debate, the then Foreign Minister of
India, Shri Swaran Singh, renewed India's call for a cessation of bombing of North Vietnam and pleaded for a political, rather than military, solution to the problem of Vietnam. On disarmament, he warned that proliferation of
nuclear weapons, vertical or horizontal, was equally
serious. Turning to Africa, Shri Swaran Singh urged
that immediate and effective action should be taken to end
the illegal and racist regime in Rhodesia. He condemned
<pg57>
<pg58>
the policy of apartheid and expressed abhorrence of the
policies of those countries which aid, assist and comfort
South Africa in the name of commerce and trade, and for
other financial benefits. He also reiterated India's support
to the cause of liberation of the peoples of South West
Africa and of Mozambique and Angola.
As in previous years, India voted in favour of a resolution calling upon the General Assembly "to restore all its
rights to the People's Republic of China and to recognize

the representatives of its Government as the only lawful
representatives of China to the UN". This resolution was
however rejected by 57 to 46 with 17 abstentions.
On South West Africa, the General Assembly took a
momentous step when, on 27 October, 1966, it terminated
South Africa's mandate and declared that the territory
"henceforth comes under the direct responsibility of the
United Nations". The practical steps to this end are to be
examined by a 14-member ad hoc committee which. is
required to report on 1 April 1967.
On Portuguese Colonies, the Assembly urged the Security Council to make it obligatory for members of the
UN to break off all relations with Portugal and boycott all
trade with her.
On Rhodesia, the Security Council adopted a resolution on 16 December, 1966, declaring the situation there a
threat to international peace and security and imposing
selective mandatory economic sanctions, including an
embargo on oil and oil products, against the illegal regime.
On the question of violation of human rights and fundamental freedoms, including policies of racial discrimination and segregation and of apartheid, the General Assembly once again condemned the policies of apartheid in
the Republic of South Africa and the territory of South
West Africa and racial discrimination in the colonies of
Southern Rhodesia, Angola, Mozambique, Portuguese
Guinea, etc. The Assembly also adopted the convention on
<pg59>
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination.
India has signed this convention.
As in previous years, India actively took part in the
deliberation of the Special Committee of 24 (the UN
Special Committee on the situation with regard to implementation of the Declaration on the granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples). The Committee
held a series of meetings in several African capitals-Dares-Salaam, Mogadiscio, Addis Ababa, Cairo and Algiers
from 23 May to 22 June, 1966. India was fully represented
at the meetings.
The Ad hoc Committee of 14, established in 1965 by
the General Assembly, and of which India is a member, to
make a detailed assessment of the financial situation of the
UN and to make recommendations on more effective utilisation of available funds, submitted two reports. One of
these was an assessment of the deficit with which the
UN was faced. The other dealing with the budgetary pro-

cedures of the specialised agencies made far-reaching recommendations for greater economy, efficiency and better
functioning. The General Assembly has approved the
report of the Ad hoc Committee and called for urgent
action to implement its recommendations.
The United Nations Emergency Force is at present
under the command of Major-General Inderjit Rikhy of
India who took charge of the post in February, 1966. In
November 1965, a Survey Team, appointed by the Secretary-General, recommended a reduction of military personnel from 3959 to 3400 in order to keep the expenditure
of UNEF within the budgetary ceiling fixed by the General Assembly. India accordingly reduced its contingent
by 238 persons and it now totals 910.
At the Economic and Social Council, India played an
important role in the framing of a resolution which urged
the developed countries to reach and, if possible, surpass
<pg60>
the target of 1 per cent of their national income to be provided to the developing countries on easy terms, as recommended by the UN Conference on Trade and Development.
DISARMAMENT
At the 18-Nation Disarmament Committee India presented, along with other non-aligned delegates, a joint
memorandum urging negotiations for a treaty on nonproliferation of nuclear weapons based on the principles
contained in the General Assembly resolution 2028 (XX)
of 1965. India also emphasised the two-fold partial nature
of the Moscow test ban treaty which has not yet been
universally agreed to and which is yet to cover underground tests. On this subject also a joint memorandum
was submitted by India and other non-aligned States urging nuclear weapon Powers to explore the possibility of a
comprehensive test ban treaty and to discontinue nuclear
weapons test in the meanwhile.
The 21st Session of the United Nations General Assembly adopted a resolution appealing for steps towards
early conclusion of a non-proliferation treaty and for
refraining from actions conducive to proliferation or
hampering non-proliferation, The General Assembly also
adopted a resolution, co-sponsored by India, UAR and
Yugoslavia on the elimination of foreign military bases
in the countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America. The
resolution requested the 18-Nation Disarmament Committee to consider the question and to report to the Gen-

eral Assembly.
On 3 March, 1967, India signed the "Treaty on Principles
governing the Activities of States in Exploration and Use
of Outer Space, including and use of Moon and other Celestial Bodies". The draft of the treaty was approved by the
XXI Session of the General Assembly under resolution
2222 (XXI) and was opened for signatures simultaneously
in Washington, Moscow and London on 27 January 1967.
The "Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear weapons in
<pg61>
Latin America" was approved by all the twenty-one Latin
American and Caribbean countries (except Cuba) and
opened for signature in Mexico City on 14 February 1967.
It marks the culmination of attempts to create a nuclearfree zone in an inhabited area.
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES
During the past year, India participated in several international conferences, symposia etc., a list of which is
given at Appendix III. Notable among the International
Conferences held in India were the 22nd session of the
Economic Commission for Asia and Far East (ECAFE)
and an International Round Table on Jawaharlal Nehru
organised by the UNESCO.
A list of international organisations of which India is a
member is at Appendix IV.
Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference, January,
1966: A Commonwealth Prime Ministers' meeting was
held in Lagos from 11 to 12 January, 1966 with 19 Commonwealth Governments participating. India was represented by the then Law Minister, Mr. Ashoke Sen. This
meeting of the Commonwealth held outside London and
organised and serviced by the new Commonwealth Secretariat was also the first ever meeting to discuss a single
political subject-Rhodesia. In the face of the unanimous
Afro-Asian demand for an immediate end to the illegal
regime in Rhodesia and speedy progress towards majority
rule, the British Prime Minister explained the scheme of
voluntary sanctions initiated by the British Government
and held out the promise that the collapse of the illegal
regime was a matter of weeks if not of months.
Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference September,
1966: The Commonwealth Prime Ministers met again in
London from 6 to 15 September in their periodical conference. India was represented by the Foreign Minister.
Rhodesia again discussed at great length, though the

<pg62>
situation in Vietnam, disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation, the problems in Southern Africa, Cyprus, the future
of dependent territories and the world economic situation
were also discussed. Despite persistent efforts by Pakistan to allude to Indo-Pakistan differences on Kashmir and
to include a reference to this in the official communique,
the conference maintained its convention of not including
bilateral differences in the communique.
Seminar on Apartheid: India participated in an International Seminar on Apartheid, which was held in Brasilia in the autumn of 1966. The Seminar, in its report, recommended mandatory economic sanctions under Chapter
VII of the United Nations Charter and full implementation
of the Security Council's arms embargo against South
Africa. It appealed to all States to act with a view to stopping all economic and financial relations with South Africa,
particularly investment and trade.
BOTSWANA
GUYANA LESOTHO INDONESIA USA INDIA BRAZIL CANADA DENMARK ETHIOPIA VIETNAM
SOUTH AFRICA ANGOLA MOZAMBIQUE CHINA PORTUGAL GUINEA ALGERIA EGYPT RUSSIA
YUGOSLAVIA UNITED KINGDOM CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC CUBA MEXICO CYPRUS
PAKISTAN
Sep 20, 1966

External Publicity
CHAPTER XI
EXTERNAL PUBLICITY
T H E Public Accounts Committee examined the functioning of the External Publicity Division during the year
under review and suggestions made by them are under
consideration. The Committee on Indian Foreign Service
too examined the working of the External Publicity
machinery and made important recommendations for its
further improvement.
The External Publicity Division and Indian Missions
abroad continued their efforts to project India's image as
a progressive secular democracy and to counter the ex-

aggerated and biased reports of India's difficulties, especially in the economic sphere, by foreign press, particularly
of Pakistan and China. During the year, the External
Publicity Division was mainly responsible for all press
and public relations activities in connection with the tripartite meeting of India, the UAR and Yugoslavia at
New Delhi. Special facilities were provided to the press
parties accompanying the Presidents of the UAR and
Yugoslavia as well as for the foreign press parties detailed
to cover the meeting.
In addition to regular briefing and supply of background information and publicity material to accredited
correspondents, foreign and Indian, facilities were provided
to 59 foreign journalists to interview important Indian
leaders and 200 foreign journalists, photographers and
members of television and film teams were given logistic
facilities. Press delegations from Afghanistan, Indonesia,
the Philippines, Kenya and Europe were invited to visit
India, while local hospitality was extended to journalists
and television units from Germany, Norway, Poland,
Canada, Brazil, Japan, Malaysia, Australia, the Lebanon,
<pg63>
<pg64>
Tunisia, the Sudan and Iran. Foreign travel facilities
were provided to 82 Indian correspondents.
Production: 178,000 copies of 36 pamphlets on various
subjects were produced. Of these, nine were translated
into Arabic, French and Spanish. In addition, a number
of pamphlets and feature articles were translated by
Indian missions in local languages. Two pamphlets on the
Tripartite Meeting were produced for distribution.
About 5,600 copies of 54 publications of different titles
produced by other Government departments were purchased and distributed abroad through our missions.
About 14,000 copies of the fortnightly Indian and Foreign
Review, in English and French and over 31,000 copies of
the monthly Foreign Affairs Record, published by this
Ministry, were also distributed in India and abroad. The
illustrated quarterly, India, produced by our Embassy in
Moscow, has become increasingly popular not only in the
USSR but also in some other countries of East Europe.
Print order of this journal increased from 10,000 in 1964
to 40,000 in 1966. A great majority of our missions
regularly brought out daily, weekly, fortnightly and annual
bulletins in English and local languages.
3,000 copies of 90 books on different subjects were
added to the libraries of Indian Missions abroad. In addi-

tion, a regular flow of newspapers, periodicals and other
journals for the libraries as well as for free distribution
abroad was maintained.
Over 900 copies of books on India were presented to
leading individuals, libraries and institutions.
About 75,400 clippings from Indian newspapers were
classified while over 48,500 clippings from foreign newspapers were scrutinised for inclusion in the World Press
Review and later classified and recorded,
Audio Visual Publicity: The medium of films for the
projection of India's image and to counter anti-Indian propaganda was continued. 1681 prints of various document<pg65>
ary films and Indian News Reviews, considered suitable
for this purpose, were supplied to missions abroad. Many
of these films were loaned to foreign television organisations also. With a view to encouraging the screening of
Indian documentaries and News Reviews on foreign television networks, exemption was obtained from the payment of royalty on these films in respect of 40 television
organisations. A few feature films and children's films
were also purchased for non-commercial exhibition abroad.
One important development during the year was the
successful processing of colour films in India. Hitherto,
colour films used to be sent to the UK for processing and
printing. It is now possible to obtain larger supplies of
colour documentaries for which there is an increasing demand abroad.
India participated in 55 film festivals all over the
world. Two of our entries, The Story of Energy and Call
of the Khedda, were given awards at the XIII International Electronic, Nuclear, Teleradio and Cinematographic film festival held in Rome and the VI World
Forestry Congress held in Madrid.
It was decided to supply film projectors to another seven
of our missions abroad. Nearly 55,000 photographs were
supplied to our missions in addition to meeting specific
demand for colour transparencies.
Demands from broadcasting organisations in various
countries for Indian gramophone records continued to be
received. Over 850 records and 143 tapes were supplied to
our missions for publicity and for presentation.
Cultural work: An important item of photographic ex-

hibition during the year was the organisation of the Nehru
and New India exhibition in Nairobi, Kampala, Dar-esSalaam, Port Louis, Cairo, and Beirut. Apart from projecting the many-sided personality of the late Prime
Minister the exhibition also depicted the evolution of
<pg66>
India's foreign and economic policies and democratic institutions. The Ministry also arranged for India's participation in 14 other exhibitions in different centres covering
subjects like photography, painting, books, philately and
posters.
The Paranjyoti Chorus of Bombay visited the UK and
Europe and the Kalakshetra Dance Troupe of Madras
visited Australia and Fiji for performances in those countries.
Extension of our teleprinter network to 20 more missions is expected to materialise shortly.
Changes in the Cadre: Consequent upon the re-organisation of the Information Service of India and its gradual
integration into the Indian Foreign Service one post of
Information Officer in Kuala Lumpur was converted into
the Senior Scale of IFS(A) and transferred to Singapore.
Organisation and Staff: The External Publicity Division at headquarters and the information posts abroad
employed 556 personnel consisting of 11 Public Relations
Officers, 1 Deputy Director, 38 Information Officers, 39
Assistant Information Officers/Attaches/Registrars/Research Officers/Editors, 145 other India-based personnel
and 322 locally-recruited persons. All posts of Morse Operators in the Missions abroad were abolished following the
installation of teleprinters.
A new publicity unit was set up in Khartoum. Other
steps taken to strengthen publicity posts included the creation of the posts of an Editor at Moscow, an Arabic Translator at Jeddah, a Personal Assistant at Kabul and a
Cinema Operator at Port Louis.
Budget: The total budget grant of the External Publicity Division for 1966-67 including the ISI posts abroad
is Rs. 1,20,23,000.00. Of this, the sum of Rs. 49,98,000 represents pay and allowances of officers and establishment,
<pg67>
the remainder being the expenditure on publicity activities. This budget figure does not take into account
Missions which have no separate ISI posts but which
are, nevertheless, expected to do publicity work.

INDIA
CHINA PAKISTAN YUGOSLAVIA AFGHANISTAN INDONESIA KENYA PHILIPPINES GERMANY
NORWAY POLAND AUSTRALIA BRAZIL CANADA JAPAN LEBANON MALAYSIA USA IRAN
SUDAN TUNISIA RUSSIA UNITED KINGDOM ITALY SPAIN UGANDA EGYPT MAURITIUS FIJI
REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE SAUDI ARABIA
Sep 20, 1966

Technical and Economic Cooperation
CHAPTER XII
TECHNICAL AND ECONOMIC COOPERATION
I N keeping with the trend in recent years for increasing
mutual economic and technical cooperation and closer economic relations among the developing countries, India
had initiated a programme of technical assistance and economic cooperation (ITEC) in September 1964. During
1965-66, various administrative arrangements were made
to streamline the procedure for efficient and coordinated
implementation of the programme, which is being vigorously implemented now. Some delegations have visited
the Afro-Asian countries to assess possibilities of technical
and economic cooperation with them. For the same
purpose, representatives of the Government of India were
also deputed to attend regional economic conferences such
as those organised, by the Economic Commission for Africa.
Possibilities for cooperation and demand for assistance have
exceeded the financial provisions made for the programme
in the past year's budget.
During the year bilateral economic assistance was
arranged with several countries. As a result of the visit of
a high-level delegation to Afghanistan in May, 1966 it was
decided to provide a 100-bed hospital in Kabul including
equipment and training of doctors, and also to provide
agricultural equipment and assistance in the development
of industry and agriculture. In July, the Vice-President
laid the foundation stone for the hospital. Since then an
expert team has visited Afghanistan to prepare design
and construction estimates for the hospital. In February,
1967, an Afghan technical team came to India to finalise
construction plans.

A joint meeting of the Indo-Kuwait Commission on economic cooperation was held in New Delhi in June, 1966.
<pg68>
<pg69>
Comprehensive agreements on technical, economic
and scientific cooperation were signed with the Governments of Tunisia, Uganda and Tanzania during 1965-66.
These agreements provide for the exchange of personnel
for training, exchange of experts as well as technical
documentation and equipment, cooperation in scientific
research, setting up of joint industrial ventures, etc.
Similar agreements with a number of other countries in
Africa and Asia are under negotiation.
During the year, a credit of Rs. 100 million was offered
to Indonesia to assist that country in rehabilitating its
economy.
Under the ITEC Programme, 26 Indian technical and
professional experts in such varied fields, as river valley
projects, industries, health, education, engineering and
administration were deputed to various countries including the UAR, Zambia, Somalia and Afghanistan and to
the Economic Commission for Africa. Forty places for
training in the cooperative movement, town and country
planning, agricultural research and nursing etc., were
provided to trainees from various countries including
Somalia, Ethiopia, Angola, Iraq and Syria. Over Rs. 1.33
lakhs worth of instruments, equipment, technical literature, seeds for experimental farms, sewing machines, etc.,
was presented. Visits to Indian institutions by high level
officials of foreign governments were arranged. A recruiting team from the Zambian Railways was assisted in recruiting 85 Railway personnel with 25 kept in reserve.
Facilities were also provided for recruitment of Indian
professional and technical experts, including doctors,
engineers, teachers, accountants and librarians. For this
purpose an Indian Selection Committee keeps a panel of
experts prepared on the basis of interviews.
During the year, general technical assistance agreements were signed with the Government of Switzerland
and Federal Republic of Germany. An Indo-Czechoslovak
<pg70>
Committee for Economic, Trade and Technical Cooperation was set up during the year and the first meeting of
the Committee took place in January, 1967.
Tripartite Economic Conference

In pursuance of the decisions reached at the TripartiteSummit, a Ministerial meeting on Economic Cooperation
between India, the UAR and Yugoslavia was held in
New Delhi from Dec 12, 1966 to 14 December, 1966. The discussions
related to identifying areas where Tripartite Cooperation
would be beneficial. The main conclusions reached at the
meeting were:
(1) Trade exchanges among the three countries
should be developed to much higher levels.
(2) Steps should be taken to establish preferential
tariff arrangements amongst the three within
the frame-work of the developing international
commercial policy.
(3) The bilateral trade and payments procedures in
force between the three countries should be
reviewed with a view to enlarging mutual trade
exchanges. The scope for mutual cooperation
in exports to one another's market and to markets
of the other countries should be explored.
(4) Maritime transport services among the three.
countries should be improved and consideration should be given to the establishment of a
permanent and regular joint shipping service.
(5) Cooperation in the industrial field should be intensified and enterprises should be encouraged
to negotiate Tripartite arrangements. Provision of credit facilities should also be examined
in this context.
(6) Technical and scientific cooperation between the
three countries should be strengthened and
specific measures taken for the utilisation of
<pg71>
services, facilities and expertise as are available in the three countries.
(7) Contacts among themselves and with the other
developing countries in the work of international
forums should be strengthened.
(8) The developed and the developing countries
should prepare themselves in advance and adequately for the Second UN Conference on
Trade and Development and to this end they
endorsed the need for meeting of all the
developing countries to formulate their concrete proposals and also for a special Ministerial
delegation of these countries meeting the

Heads of Government/State of the principal
developing countries.
It was also decided to set up three ad hoc groups to
study the above subjects. One of these groups, on tariff
preferences etc., met in Cairo in February, 1967. The
report of the Indian team is being finalised. The other two
groups are expected to meet shortly. In. order to implement the conclusions reached at the Conference, it was
decided to establish a permanent Joint Committee which
will meet periodically to consider reports of the ad hoc
groups, to guide and coordinate the work in the technical,
industrial and commercial fields and to review the progress made from time to time. A copy of the Joint Communique issued at the end of the Conference is. given at
Appendix II.
INDIA
USA AFGHANISTAN KUWAIT TANZANIA TUNISIA UGANDA INDONESIA MALI SOMALIA
ZAMBIA ANGOLA ETHIOPIA IRAQ SYRIA SWITZERLAND GERMANY NORWAY YUGOSLAVIA
EGYPT
Dec 12, 1966

Passport and Consular Services
CHAPTER XIII
PASSPORT AND CONSULAR SERVICES
Passport services
T H E Passport and Visa Division continued to be responsible for the implementation of the passport and emigration
policy of the Government of India, administration of the
Emigration Act of 1922 and control of the Central Passport
and Emigration Organisation and the Regional Passport
and Emigration Offices in Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi, Lucknow and Madras.
During the year 1966 the percentage of rejected applications was about 0.4 per cent of the total number of applications received. The number of applications received in the
five Regional Passport Offices including those brought forward from previous year, was 85,335. As against this
72,048 passports were issued by them.

At the headquarters of the Ministry, 3623 official passports, 399 Diplomatic passports and 2721 visas to foreigners
were issued.
Liberalisation of passport rules
It was felt that delay was caused in the issue of passports and the applicants were required to undergo too
many formalities. The procedure and rules relating to the
grant of passports were, therefore, reviewed at, a Conference held in the Ministry of External Affairs at which
all concerned Departments and Ministries were represented. In pursuance of the decisions taken, changes have been
introduced to enable expeditious handling of applications.
The main features of the liberalized rules are as follows:
Applicants proceeding abroad at the invitation of relations and friends or for medical treatment are no longer
<pg72>
<pg73>
required to furnish sponsorship declarations and medical
certificates.
Persons proceeding to UK etc., are no longer required
to furnish entry-certificates.
Financial guarantee will no longer be necessary in the
following cases:
(i)

When the applicant pays income-tax or property
tax.

(ii) When there is an Entry Permit issued by a
foreign Government.
(iii) When the applicant is proceeding abroad under
the Indian Emigration Act 1922 and the employer has furnished the required security deposit.
(iv) When the applicant is proceeding to U.K. on an
Employment Voucher.
(v)

Students proceeding on scholarship, fellowship
etc.

(vi) Persons going on pilgrimage or for other purpose to neighbouring countries.

(vii) Persons holding return tickets.
A guarantor will be considered acceptable if he pays income-tax/property tax.
Regional Passport Officers have been authorised to dispose of majority of the cases at their level and to refer to
the Ministry only a few cases.
Residents of places other than Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi,,
Lucknow and Madras will send the original copies of their
applications to the Regional Passport Officers and the
duplicate copies to the District Magistrates. The Regional
Passport Officers will take the initiative to dispose of the
applications expeditiously in consultation with the District
Magistrates.
If an applicant is in a hurry and furnishes a certificate
from a 1st Class Stipendiary Magistrate or an officer equivalent to the rank of Deputy Secretary and above in the
<pg74>
Government of India or the State Government to the effect
that the applicant has been known to the officer for more
than two years, that the particulars furnished in the passport application are correct to the best of his knowledge
and that the applicant is a fit person for the grant of a passport, efforts will be made to grant him a passport within
48 hours without a Financial Guarantee and dispensing
with other formalities, provided the Regional Passport
Officer is satisfied about his bona fides.
If an applicant cannot furnish a certificate from an
officers of the status mentioned above but furnishes a sworn
affidavit or a certificate from an officer of the status of an
Under Secretary that the particulars furnished by him in
the application are correct, efforts will be made to give him
a passport as soon as possible within a few weeks.
Emigration to Britain
According to the statistics published by the British Government, Indian visitors to Britain during 1965 were 50,829
as against 44,468 during the year 1964. The net inflow of
Indian nationals into Britain calculated after deducting the
number of those who left Britain during 1965 comes to
18,815. The corresponding figures in earlier years were
15,513 in 1964, and 17,498 in 1963. For the calendar year
1966, 4,282 employment vouchers were issued by the British
Government to Indian nationals for employment in Britain
as against 5,899 during 1965.
Up to the month of September, 1966, 173 Indian nationals

had to return after reaching Britain, as they were refused
admission into that country by the British immigration
authorities, mostly on the ground that they were seeking
employment in Britain and did not hold any employment
voucher.
Emigration to countries other than Britain
Applications for passport facilities for countries other
than Britain, especially for African and Persian Gulf countries, continued to be received from applicants who had
<pg75>
secured employment as teachers, engineers, doctors, nurses
etc., in these countries. About 287 Indian teachers secured
employment in Ethiopia and Ghana and passport facilities
were extended to them. Ten engineers who secured
employment in Ghana were also extended passport facilities. A few nurses and medical doctors were given passport facilities for Persian Gulf and African countries.
Passports were also issued to various parties of artists/
musicians/magicians touring abroad for cultural purposes.
The Protector of Emigrants at air and sea ports registered the departure for employment abroad of 2,899 skilled
workers under the Emigration Act. Most of the workers
went to Persian Gulf countries South-East Asian countries,
Arabia and East African countries.
The devaluation of Indian rupee in the year 1966 affected the wages prescribed for certain categories of low-paid
skilled workers proceeding abroad to take up employment
as cooks, domestic servants, mechanics etc. Since- the
minimum wages were fixed in terms of Indian rupee, it became necessary to revise and raise the prescribed rates so
as to ensure that these skilled workers were not exploited
on account of devaluation. Necessary orders were accordingly issued raising the minimum wage of these workers
before they could be allowed to be recruited and employed
abroad.
Deportation
989 Indian nationals were deported from Ceylon on
charges of illicit emigration.
Repatriation
236 Repatriates arrived in India from Malaysia during
the year 1966 as against 182 in 1965.
Revenue Receipts

The Regional Passport Offices earned a revenue of
Rs. 14,18,272 during the year 1966.
<pg76>
Consular Services
The Consular Division of the Ministry of ExternalAffairs are responsible for guiding the Indian Missions/
Posts abroad on consular work. They also render assistance and tender advice to foreign Missions in India on.
consular matters. Broadly speaking, the Consular Division deal with cases of repatriation, deportation and extardition of Indian nationals from abroad and also arrange
to afford financial and other reliefs to stranded Indian,
nationals abroad. They also deal with the properties of
Indian nationals who die abroad and render assistance to.
foreign Missions in India for the disposal of properties and
estates of foreigners in India,
The Consular Division also make reciprocal arrangements with other countries regarding service of summonses
in the civil cases, execution of decrees, examination of witnesses in criminal cases and enforcement of maintenance
orders, etc. They also perform consular and quasi-consular
functions on behalf of foreign governments and help,
Indian nationals in India in tracing the whereabouts of
their relatives abroad.
The work relating to compilation of Consular Manual
has been completed so far as this Ministry is concerned.
All but two chapters have been finalised. These two,
chapters are under reference to other Ministries and Departments concerned for vetting.
40 Letters of request and commissions for examination of witnesses abroad and vice-versa were forwarded to
the authorities concerned after due scrutiny. Similarly 20
summonses and 19 maintenance orders and other processes,
were sent for execution or service abroad.
The proposal to make reciprocal arrangements underSection 29(c) of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 for service,
of summons and other processes with Japan, West Germany, Belgium, Hong Kong, the UAR, the USSR, and,
Switzerland could not be put through unless Order 5, Rule
<pg77>
26(b) is amended. The Ministry of Law have taken up the
matter with the Law Commission and the latter's report
is still awaited.
Cases relating to reciprocal arrangements for execution

of decrees under Section 44A ibid with Japan, Trinidad and
Tobago are still pending for want of final replies from the
Governments concerned.
Negotiations for reciprocal arrangements under Section 504(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure for examination of witnesses on commission of criminal cases with
Nepal, Nigeria, Libya, West Germany, Norway, Czechoslovakia, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Aden and Malaysia are still in
progress.
1,533 commercial and judicial documents including
powers of attorney and births, deaths, marriages, and educational certificates etc. were attested for use in foreign
countries.
Proposal to make reciprocal arrangements under section
14 of the Notaries Act, 1952, with Czechoslovakia is being
pursued.
On a reference received from the Commission of India,
Hong Kong that the Certificates of Origin issued by the
Indian Chamber of Commerce, Hong Kong were not being
accepted by certain countries who are signatories to the
International Convention Relating to the Simplification of
Customs Formalities, 1923, even though the Government of
Hong Kong had designated that Chamber as competent to
issue such Certificates of Origin in accordance with the
provisions of that Convention, the matter was taken up with
the countries concerned through our Missions. As a result
of these efforts, the Governments of Sweden, Denmark,
West Germany, the Philippines and Sierra Leone have
agreed to accept such Certificates issued by the above-mentioned Chamber. The matter is still under correspondence
with the Governments of Nigeria, Ruanda and Burundi.
<pg78>
38 cases of estates and properties of Indians abroad and
6 cases relating to foreigners in respect of their properties
in India were dealt with during the period under review.
Negotiations for concluding Reciprocal Arrangements
under Section 57 of Administrator General's Act, 1963 with
Czechoslovakia, Poland, Afghanistan, Iran, Denmark and
the United States of America were completed and a revised notification in the matter was issued by the Ministry
of Law.
During the period under review 15 persons were repatriated from foreign countries by our various Missions
at public expense at a total expenditure of Rs. 20066-41.
A total sum of Rs. 4380.64 was advanced to 12 Indian

citizens to enable them to tide over temporary difficulties
which arose due to unforeseen circumstances such as theft.
illness, delay in the departure of ships or their traveller
cheques not being endorsed for the country where they
were stranded.
During the period under review notifications applying
the provisions of the Extradition Act 1962, other than
Chapter III thereof to the United States of America and
Tanzania were issued. Also 18 cases relating to extradition of offenders from or to India, trial of citizens of India
for offences committed abroad and trial of foreigners in
the country of their nationality for offences committed in
India were dealt with in the Section. In addition, 57 cases
of deportation of Indian citizens from other countries and 12
cases of arrests of Indian nationals in foreign countries
were also dealt with.
A large number of cases for the grant of Indian citizenship referred to by the Ministry of Home Affairs for our
views was returned to them with our comments. Besides, 113 references on this subject received from our
Missions abroad, Foreign Missions in India, Goa Administration etc., were handled. These include requests received
<pg79>
from persons of Goan origin who failed to surrender their
foreign passports within the prescribed time limit for being
recognised as Indian citizens. In addition, a large number
of references received from the PV Division in respect of
persons who had applied for Indian passports was also examined and comments offered.
33 cases relating to marriage, desertion, bigamy etc. and
16 cases of adoption of Indian children by foreigners were
dealt with. 88 cases of whereabouts and welfare of Indian
nationals abroad were also dealt with.
97 cases of death of foreigners in India were reported
to the foreign Missions concerned. 44 cases of death of
Indian nationals abroad were also dealt with.
21 cases relating to remittance facilities from or to India
were dealt with. 127 cases relating to complaints against
Indians abroad and foreigners in India and against Indian
firms and vice-versa, recovery of private outstanding dues
from Indians abroad, were handled during the period under
review. Also 28 cases regarding issue of birth, death,
marriage certificates were dealt with. 15 cases relating to
verification of date of birth and other particulars were
dealt with. 55 cases relating to issue of `No Objection to
return to India' certificates to Indian citizens who wanted
to settle down in Canada and the U.S.A. were dealt with

during this period. 33 cases relating to settlement of
claims of Indian citizens for pay, pension, gratuity, etc.
against foreign Governments were received and pursued
with the Governments concerned.
During the period under review several officers and staff
who were either fresh appointees or who had not handled
consular work in Missions/Posts abroad previously were
imparted training in consular matters.
During the period 1942-47, a sum of Rs. 7,18,03,561.00
was advanced to the evacuees from war zones during World
War II on repayable basis. Out of this amount a sum of
Rs. 25,53,381.85 is debitable to the Government of Burma.
<pg80>
So far a sum of Rs. 39,90,062.21 has been recovered, a sum
of Rs. 4,06,07,878.93 is still outstanding. This outstanding
amount will be further reduced by Rs. 25,53,381.85 when
debits are accepted by the Government of Burma. Efforts
are also being made to recover outstanding balance from the
evacuees through the State Governments and Missions
concerned and to write off the irrecoverable amount.
Besides looking after the consular and quasi-consular
functions on behalf of the Governments of Jamaica and
Malta, the Government of India have agreed to perform
similar functions on behalf of the Government of Malawi.
The above work is being handled in the Consular Section.
Consequent upon the devaluation of the Indian rupee
the consular fees charged abroad has been increased by
57.5 % to avoid any loss of revenue. The schedule of
consular fees is being revised accordingly.
Consular Activities Abroad
A statement showing the statistical data regarding consular activities of Missions/Posts abroad is given at Appendix XI.
Diplomatic Missions and Consular Posts in India
During the period under review, the Government of
Venezuela accredited His Excellency Mr. Benjamin Delgado
L as their first Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary to India. He presented his Letter of Credence on
Jun 06, 1966.
The total number of diplomatic missions in. India is 67.
A list of the Diplomatic Missions in India and a list of the
Sub-offices of the High Commissions of the Commonwealth

countries are given at Appendix V.
Consular Posts in India
The total number of foreign Consular Posts is 106. The
Government of India have approved the opening of
Honorary Consulate of Lebanon in Calcutta.
<pg81>
A list of Consular posts in India is given at Appendix VI.
Distinguished visitors from abroad
A list of distinguished visitors to India from abroad
during the year is given at Appendix VII.
INDIA
USA MALI UNITED KINGDOM ETHIOPIA GHANA MALAYSIA JAPAN BELGIUM HONG KONG
SWITZERLAND GERMANY LIBYA NEPAL NIGER NIGERIA NORWAY LIBERIA SIERRA LEONE
SLOVAKIA DENMARK SWEDEN PHILIPPINES BURUNDI AFGHANISTAN IRAN POLAND
TANZANIA CANADA BURMA JAMAICA MALTA MALAWI VENEZUELA LEBANON
Jun 06, 1966

Organization and Administration
CHAPTER XIV
ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION
T H E R E was no change in the sphere of responsibilities
of the Ministry of External Affairs. The items of work
allotted to this Ministry under the Government of India
(Allocation of Business Rules 1961 as amended from time
to time) are listed at Appendix VIII.
Organization: There were a few changes in the organization of the Ministry at Headquarters. With the appointment of Shri Swaran Singh as Minister of Defence, Shri
M. C. Chagla took over as Minister of External Affairs on
Nov 14, 1966. Shri M. C. Chagla again assumed
charge of the Foreign Ministry on 13 March, 1967 after the
General Elections. The Minister of Foreign Affairs is now
assisted by Shri Surendra Pal Singh who took over as
Deputy Minister on 18 March, 1967. Shri Dinesh Singh,
formerly Minister of State in the Ministry of External

Affairs, has now been appointed as Minister of Commerce.
The Secretariat of the Foreign Office, headed by three
Secretaries, consists of eighteen Divisions, of which eight
are territorial Divisions dealing with India's relations with
foreign countries, six specialised Divisions deal with Protocol, Consular matters and Passports and Visas, External
Publicity, Historical Research and Records, Legal matters
and Treaties and Policy Planning and the remaining four
Divisions deal with United Nations and Conferences, Administration, Economic and Security matters.
During the year under report, the Ministry constituted
a machinery which, unburdened with any day-to-day responsibilities, would be engaged in the planning and review
of the foreign policy of the Government of India in the
context of the changing world situation. The Policy Planning and Review Division was constituted in May, 1966,
<pg82>
<pg83>
and a Policy Planning and Review Committee, presided
over by the Foreign Secretary, with the other two Secretaries in the Ministry, an Additional Secretary from the
Cabinet Secretariat, as Members, and the Joint Secretary
in-charge of the Policy Planning and Review Division as
Member-Secretary, was established.
The Policy Planning Division undertakes the study in
depth of important problems pertaining to our external
relations; it collects factual data based on historical research and analyses, and reports from our Representatives
abroad, and endeavours, in the light of developing trends
and after weighing the political, economic and security
aspects of a question, to evaluate the adequacy of the
current policies, and anticipates the short and long-term
problems which may arise, and seeks the promotion of
our relations with the outside world in the future. The
studies and recommendations, after scrutiny by the Policy
Planning and Review Committee, are submitted to Government for approval and form the guidelines and directives
for our future policy.
IFS Review Committee: The Committee to review the
Indian Foreign Service set up in June, 1965, submitted its
report to the Government on 17 October, 1966. Noting that
the Foreign Service has served the country reasonably
well, the Committee has suggested several measures for
furthering its efficiency and effectiveness to achieve India's
foreign policy objectives. The Committee has urged that
it would be prudent to plan for an expansion in India's
representation abroad and in the cadre and resources of

the service to meet the growing needs of the future. The
Committee's report was laid before Parliament on 23
November, 1966.
The examination of the recommendations of the IFS
Committee in the Ministry of External Affairs has been
completed. It is now proposed to consult other Ministries
of the Government of India so that final decisions of Government can be taken at an early date.
<pg84>
Deputations/Delegations Abroad: During. the year
under review several Deputations and Delegations were
sponsored by the Ministry. A statement giving the names
of persons sent abroad, the countries visited by them and
the purpose of their visit is at Appendix IX.
Rationalisation of Methods of Work etc.: The process
of rationalisation and simplification of methods of work
continues. The Reorganisation Unit of the Ministry is conducting inspection of the Territorial Divisions of the
Ministry jointly with the O & M Officer. Applying modern
work study techniques, recommendations are made in each
case about the staffing pattern, reorganization or organization of the Sections and Divisions on officer-oriented or
conventional patterns and for the shifting of the Sections/
Divisions nearer the officers etc. All the important orders
and instructions issued by the Ministry on organization,
methods and procedures have been consolidated and compiled for publication in the form of a book which will
enable officers at Headquarters and in Missions abroad to
observe the prescribed procedures and instructions uniformly.
Systematic weeding of old records has been undertaken and more than half of 45,000 files sent during the
year to various Sections/Divisions have been destroyed.
The resultant reduction in congestion in the Central Record Rooms has enabled improvements in the storage and
up-keep of records.
Incentive Awards: The scheme of Incentive Awards
for superior performance in operation in this Ministry since
1959 has been reviewed and extended further.
Missions Abroad: During the year one new resident
Mission at Embassy level was opened at Conakry in Guinea.
With the former British Guiana attaining independence
under the name of `Guyana', the Commission of India
there has been designated as High Commission. Several
<pg85>
proposals for opening of new missions have been deferred

because of paucity of funds. The list of Indian Missions
and Posts abroad is given at Appendix X.
The Indian Foreign Service: The total strength of the
IFS cadre is now 375. The number of officers recruited in
1966 was 10 (including 3 from Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes) as against 21 in 1965 and 19 in 1964.
The total strength of the IFS(B) cadre is 2,481.
The Ministry has decided to appoint a Senior Welfare
Officer in the High Commission of India, London, in view
of growing number of Indian migrants in the United Kingdom.
Foreign Service Inspectorate: The Foreign Service Inspectorate, consisting of two officers of the rank of Joint
Secretary, one each from the Ministries of External Affairs
and Finance, which was set up in May, 1954, wound up in
1960 and briefly revived in 1964-65, has again been revived
in October, 1966. The Inspectors visited Indian Missions in
Poland, Czechoslovakia, Austria and Yugoslavia during
their last tour.
The Inspectors are scheduled to visit London and Budapest during March-April, 1967.
The Inspectors make a thorough survey of the staffing
and functioning of Missions and recommend appropriate
allowances and rental ceilings for the India-based staff.
Residential Accommodation at Headquarters: The External Affairs Hostel, where all the available accommodation has been occupied, has given great relief to the staff
of this Ministry, particularly in view of the acute shortage of houses and the continuous rise in rents.
Office Accommodation at Headquarters: The position
regarding office accommodation for this Ministry has not
improved. There is a shortage of 81,000 sq. ft. on the
assessed requirement, even leaving out fresh requirements resulting from the creation of the Policy Planning
<pg86>
Division. The office space is scattered in six different
buildings, causing over-crowding all round and delays in
the disposal of work as well as security risk. It was hoped
that the Home Ministry would vacate the South Block
releasing accommodation for this Ministry. This has not
yet come about. It is proposed to take up this question
again with the Cabinet Secretariat in the interest of both
efficiency and security.
EXPENDITURE

Under the Revised Estimates, the expenditure of this
Ministry in 1966-67 is expected to be Rs. 30.54 crores and
falls under two main heads as shown below:
(In crores of rupees)
(1) External Affairs
22.45
(2) Other Revenue Expenditure
of the Ministry of External
Affairs
8.09
----30.54
----The annual expenditure on 97 resident Missions and
Posts abroad amounts to Rs. 898.22 lakhs. This works out
to an average of Rs. 9.26 lakhs per Mission Post per
annum. Of this, a sum of Rs. 61.85 lakhs is spent on the
Pay and Allowances of Officers, Rs. 137.66 lakhs on the
Pay and Allowances of Staff, and about Rs. 158.20 lakhs
on office and residential accommodation and the balance of
Rs. 540.51 lakhs on contingent and other expenditure.
A broad breakdown of the figures is as follows:
HEAD
R. E. 1966-67
(In Lakhs)
Headquarters including XP Division but
excluding discretionary expenditure.
262.37
Missions abroad including High Commission of India, London.
898.22
Subsidies to Sikkim
180.00
Subsidies to Bhutan
314.00
Tibetan Refugees
52.51
<pg87>
Technical and Economic Aid to other
Developing countries
37.00
Repatriates from Burma
60.00
Repatriates from Ceylon
0.03
Contributions to UNO
135.89
UNICEF
5.86
Commonwealth Secretariat Foundation
8.98
U.N. Relief and Work Agency
1.00
U.N. International School
Entertainment Charges/Hospitality Fund
24.72
Passport and Emigration Organisation
33.43
Indian Medical Team to Laos
4.44
Indo-China Commissions
14.08
Indian Delegation to UNO
15.00
Other Items including demarcation of

Indo-Pakistan Boundary and discretionary expenditure
198.09
-------Total
2,245.62
-------Other Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry of External
Affairs
Aid to Nepal
771.73
Kutch Tribunal
16.00
Directorate of Aid to Nepal
12.56
Contribution to Economic Committee
4.14
Other Items including Loss of Exchange
5.09
-------Total
809.52
-------INDIA
USA GUINEA GUYANA UNITED KINGDOM AUSTRIA NORWAY POLAND SLOVAKIA
YUGOSLAVIA BHUTAN BURMA LAOS CHINA PAKISTAN NEPAL
Nov 14, 1966

Appendix I JOINT COMMUNIQUE OF THE TRIPARTITE
MEETING OF INDIA,
APPENDIX I
JOINT COMMUNIQUE OF THE TRIPARTITE MEETING OF INDIA,
YUGOSLAVIA AND THE U.A.R., Oct 21, 1966 To 24 OCTOBER, 1966.
The President
His Excellency Mr.
Arab Republic, His
the Prime Minister
Delhi from October

of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
Josip Broz Tito, the President of the United
Excellency Mr. Gamal Abdel Nasser, and
of India, Shrimati Indira Gandhi, met in New
21 to 24, 1966.

2. The two Presidents recalled their 1956 and 1961 meetings
with Shri Jawaharlal Nehru in Brioni and Cairo. They paid their
tribute to his great contribution to the cause of world peace and
justice as well as to the formulation of the principles of nonalignment.
3. The two Presidents and the Prime Minister examined the
present world situation and exchanged views on international
problems as well as on the further strengthening of cooperation
in all fields of interest to their respective countries. These talks

were held in an atmosphere of complete frankness, mutual
understanding and cordiality and confirmed the concordance of
views characteristic of the close friendship between the Governments and the peoples of the three countries.
4. The two Presidents and the Prime Minister expressed their
deep concern at the increasing threat to world peace due to the
violation of the principles of peaceful co-existence and the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations.
They noted in particular the increasing interference, intensified
use of force, and the exercise of pressures on the part of some
Powers against the newly independent and other developing
countries. They believe that the main source of persisting difficulties is the opposition of imperialist and neo-colonialist forces
to the aspirations and the struggle of many peoples and countries
towards achievement of complete political and economic emancipation.
5. The two Presidents and the Prime Minister noted with satisfaction that there is a strong determination amongst the peoples
of the world to safeguard peace and intensify their struggle for
<pg88>
<pg89>
political and economic independence. They welcomed the
encouraging trend of an increasing number of countries taking
an independent and active stand with regard to world problems,
thus contributing to the maintenance of international peace and
security. Further, they noted favourable
developments in
Europe and expressed the hope that these would have a beneficial
effect on international relations as a whole.
6. The two Presidents and the Prime Minister consider that
recent trends and developments which have taken place in the
world in general confirm the validity of the policy of nonalignment. They note with satisfaction that the principles of nonalignment as formulated at Belgrade and Cairo are gaining more
and more ground among independent countries which are exerting efforts towards the achievement of peace and progress in the
world.
The policy of non-alignment stands against every form of
imperialism, hegemony or monopoly of power and military
alliances. The aim of non-alignment is to strengthen international peace, not through division of the world but through
the expansion of areas of freedom, independence and cooperation on the basis of equality and mutual benefit,
7. The two Presidents and the Prime Minister remain resolutely opposed to colonialism and neocolonialism in all their
forms and manifestations, which seek to curb the freedom of
action of newly independent countries, distorting their national
goals, and to exploit their natural and human resources. They
deprecate the use of economic and financial assistance as an instrument of pressure, and noted with satisfaction that many
developing countries have resisted such pressures. Furthermore,
they believe that as problems of growth and development multiply and become more difficult, ways and means should be devised
to initiate and further expand areas of cooperation among the

developing countries in the fields of trade and development.
8. The two Presidents and the Prime Minister reiterated their
conviction that the universal acceptance and application of the
principles of peaceful co-existence are essential if international
peace and security are to be safeguarded.
9. The two Presidents and the Prime Minister view with deep
concern the dangerous situation in South-East Asia, more particularly the escalation of the military operations in Vietnam,
which threatens to develop into a wider war. The sufferings of
the Vietnamese people, the loss to human life and the material
<pg90>
damage cannot but cause great anxiety to all peace-loving
peoples of the world. They reiterate that the bombing of North
Vietnam should be ended immediately without any preconditions.
They firmly believe that the implementation of the Geneva
Agreements of 1954 and the withdrawal of all foreign forces
would lead to peace and enable the Vietnamese people to decide
their future themselves free from all external interference.
They recognise that the participation of the South Vietnamese
National Liberation Front would be necessary as one of the main
parties in any efforts for the realisation of peace in Vietnam.
10. The two Presidents welcomed the Tashkent Declaration as
a significant contribution to the cause of peace.
11. The two Presidents and the Prime Minister welcome the
progressive developments in Asia and Africa leading to the
independence of a large number of countries and their emergence
as a powerful new factor for peace and international cooperation.
12. They note, however, that colonialism still persists in certain parts of the world. They reiterate their firm opposition to
colonialism and neocolonialism in all their forms and manifestations. They fully support the just struggle of the peoples of
Zimbabwe, South West Africa. Angola, Mozambique, the socalled Portuguese Guinea, Aden and the Protectorates. They
equally reaffirm their opposition to racialism as practised in
South Africa, South West Africa and Southern Rhodesia. They
consider it imperative that these oppressed peoples should
recover their freedom and independence in the immediate future.
They condemn the alliance between the forces of colonialism and
racialism and are confident that these forces shall be defeated.
The two Presidents and the Prime Minister fully support the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian Arabs and their struggle for
the realisation of their aspirations in accordance with the declaration of the Cairo Conference of non-aligned countries.
13. The two Presidents and the Prime Minister reiterated their
conviction that the intensification of the arms race poses a serious
threat to international peace and security and that an early
agreement on general and complete disarmament under effective
international control constitutes one of the most urgent problems
facing the international community. They reaffirmed their
support for the convening of a world disarmament conference to

which all countries should be invited.
<pg91>
They emphasised the serious dangers inherent in the spread
of nuclear weapons and called for the early conclusion of a treaty
on non-proliferation of nuclear weapons in accordance with the
principles approved by the United Nations General Assembly at
its XX Session.
14. The two Presidents and the Prime Minister reiterated their
faith in the vital role of the United Nations for the promotion of
international cooperation, peace and security. They pledge
their continuing support to make the world organization more
effective in discharging its responsibilities in accordance with the
Charter. They support the principle of universality of the United
Nations. They urge the restoration of the legitimate rights of
the People's Republic of China in the world organization.
15. The two Presidents and the Prime Minister consider that
rapid economic progress of the developing countries is a prerequisite for safeguarding their political and economic independence. They reviewed the struggle of developing countries to
break the shackles of poverty and technological backwardness,
and noted with concern that the rate of economic growth of the
developing countries has fallen short even of the target envisaged for the development decade. They recognized that the
responsibility for development rests primarily with the developing countries themselves. The developing countries have made
strenuous efforts to mobilise domestic resources and over the
past decade and a half appreciable progress has been made in
social welfare and economic development. However, self-sustaining growth has yet to be attained and in the meanwhile the
disparity between the developed and developing countries of
the world continues to widen, resulting in increase of social,
economic and political tensions.
16. The two President? and the Prime Minister feel that a
principal obstacle to rapid economic growth is the insufficiency
of external resources. The modest target of 1 per cent of gross
national product set by the United Nations for the transfer of
net resources from developed to developing countries has not
been reached and the terms and conditions for the transfer of
these resources impose fresh burdens on the limited capacity of
weaker economies. The policies followed by affluent countries
in relation to prices of primary products and their reluctance to
provide satisfactory conditions for the increase in imports of
processed and finished products from developing countries have
made it difficult for these countries to augment their foreign
earnings.
<pg92>
17. The two Presidents and the Prime Minister accordingly
consider that the creation of more favourable international conditions for development remains one of the vital pre-requisites
for promoting economic progress of developing countries. They
highly appreciate the concerted efforts that led to the convening
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development;
they regretted that effective measures have not been taken to
implement its recommendations and expressed the hope that
development policies of both developed and developing countries

would be guided by the Final Act.
18. The two Presidents and the Prime Minister are convinced
that the 77 developing countries will strengthen their unity and
consolidate their efforts to ensure the success of the Second
Conference when it meets in the autumn of 1967.
19. The two Presidents and the Prime Minister consider that
it is necessary for developing countries to initiate new measures
and to coordinate their individual efforts to face the challenge
posed by the slackening in their rate of growth. They are resolved to take practical steps in this direction and trust that all
developing countries would join in the effort to expand the area
of mutual cooperation, increase trade exchanges among themselves, pool technical and scientific experience, and undertake
joint endeavours to develop mutually beneficial patterns of trade
and development.
20. The two Presidents and the Prime Minister expressed
satisfaction that friendship and
understanding between their
countries, based on common objectives and a common approach
to world problems. as well as close cooperation in the economic, technical and cultural spheres, has continued to grow
stronger over the years. They discussed the further steps to be
taken by their Governments and agreed that their concerned
Ministers meet at an early date to examine the possibilities of
cooperation between their Governments in technical, commercial and industrial fields.
21. They appreciated that their three countries have continued to draw closer together and have strengthened bonds of
warm friendship and brotherhood, reflecting the sentiments and
common aspirations of their peoples towards lasting peace and
social and economic progress.
22. The two Presidents and the Prime Minister agreed to work
together to strengthen the forces of non-alignment in the changing
world context and to cooperate with other countries in the task
<pg93>
of promoting world peace and security in conditions of freedom
and equality of all countries.
23. President Gamal Abdel Nasser and President Josip Broz
Tito expressed to President Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan and to
Prime Minister Indira Gandhi their, great appreciation for the
warm reception and hospitality accorded them throughout their
stay in New Delhi by the Government and people of India.
New Delhi, October 24, 1966.
INDIA
YUGOSLAVIA EGYPT USA VIETNAM SWITZERLAND
ZIMBABWE GUINEA SOUTH AFRICA CHINA
Oct 21, 1966

UZBEKISTAN

ANGOLA

MOZAMBIQUE

Appendix II JOINT COMMUNIQUE OF THE TRIPARTITE MEETING OF MINISTERS

APPENDIX II
JOINT COMMUNIQUE OF THE TRIPARTITE MEETING OF MINISTERS OF
THE UAR, YUGOSLAVIA AND INDIA ON ECONOMIC COOPERATION,
Dec 14, 1966.
In pursuance of the decision taken by President Tito, President
Nasser and Prime Minister Indira Gandhi at the Tripartite
meeting held in October this year, the Ministers of the three
countries met in New Delhi from December 12th to 14th, 1966, to
examine the possibilities of cooperation between their Governments
in the technical, commercial and industrial fields.
2. The Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was represented
by H.E. Mr. Aleksander Grlickov, Member of the Federal Executive Council; the United Arab Republic by H.E. Mr. Hassan Abbas
Zaki, Minister for Economy and Foreign Trade; and the Republic
of India by Shri Manubhai Shah, Minister of Commerce.
3. The three Ministers noted the progress already achieved in
developing economic
cooperation on a bilateral basis, and agreed
that there was considerable scope for strengthening and widening
economic relations on a tripartite basis.
Expansion of Trade
4. The Ministers were impressed by the possibilities that
existed for augmentation of production in each of the three countries, with a view not only to meeting one another's growing
requirements of primary products, industrial raw materials, intermediate goods and finished products, but also to build up their
export capacity in general. They accordingly decided that these
possibilities should be explored in depth, and that the scope for
mutual cooperation in export sales to one another's markets and
to markets of other countries determined as concretely as practicable. They considered that to this end special payment arrangements may be entered into as and when necessary.
5. The Ministers discussed the possibilities of reciprocal expansion of trade, and were of the view that trade exchanges among
the three countries could be developed to much higher levels than
at present.
<pg94>
<pg95>
6. In this connection, they agreed that steps should be taken
to establish preferential tariff arrangements within the framework of the evolving international commercial policy. It was
decided that officials of the three countries should meet at an
early date to negotiate mutual exchange of preference, extendable to other developing countries on a basis of mutual benefit.
These officials would also make recommendations for simplifying

and adapting
trade regulations and procedures with a view to
promoting the expansion of trade. The hope was expressed that
their work would be completed within three months.
7. It was also agreed that trade and payments procedures currently in force on a bilateral basis between the three countries
should be reviewed, taking into account the developments in
their respective economies and the recent trends in their commercial policies, with a view to evolving measures for enlarging
mutual trade exchanges and for furthering the trend in the direction of multilateralising their trade relations.
8. The Ministers were of the view that maritime transport
services among the three countries should be improved, and that
consideration should be given to the establishment of a permanent and regular joint shipping service. They decided that the
details in this regard should be worked out by a group consisting
of shipping experts and representatives of the organisations concerned in the three countries.
9. The Ministers noted that facilities were available in the free
trade zones of the three countries for storing, processing
and
transhipment of goods, and considered that the utilisation of these
facilities would promote not only trade between the three countries but also the expansion of trade with other
countries. If was
agreed that the organisations and enterprises concerned should be
encouraged to enter into specific arrangements for utilising the
facilities.
Industrial Cooperation
10. The three Ministers reviewed the existing arrangements for
technical and industrial cooperation, and noted with satisfaction
that considerable progress had already been made in several sectors. It was agreed that in these sectors the basis of cooperation
could be intensified, and wherever practicable, enterprises encouraged to negotiate tripartite arrangements. It was further considered
that industrial cooperation could be usefully extended to a number
of other sectors, more particularly to industries engaged in the
processing of agricultural products and of minerals, in the manufacture of capital goods and durables, and in the production of
fertilisers and other chemical products.
<pg96>
11. To this end, it was felt that steps should be taken to ex
change information on development perspectives, programmes and
projects, and thereafter to consult with one another In order to
Identify areas of fruitful cooperation with a view to promoting
specialisation in production, bringing about economies of scale and
facilitating the establishment of joint ventures.
12. It was decided that the three Governments should examine
the current difficulties and take suitable measures, particularly in
the field of adaptation of trade regulations and provision of credit
facilities, so as to intensify industrial cooperation and to provide
expanding markets for their finished products.
13. The adequacy of the services provided by banking and
insurance institutions in the three countries was reviewed, and
it was considered that closer contacts between these institutions,

especially for financing trade exchanges and Providing reinsurance
facilities and credit support, would help to promote trade and
industrial and technical collaboration.
14. The Ministers took note of the existing facilities for travel,
particularly for businessmen, industrialists and technicians, between the three countries, and agreed that the question of
streamlining procedures for the grant of visas, as also the suggestion for waiving visa fees, should be studied. It was decided that
appropriate measures, including payment arrangements, to promote
travel and tourist traffic between the three countries, should be
adopted. It was also agreed that consultation and contact between
the tourist agencies of the three countries would contribute towards
the promotion of tourism.
Technical and Scientific Cooperation
15. The Ministers noted the progress which had been made in
the three countries in the field of industrial technology and scientific research and felt that the sharing of technical and scientific
knowledge between them on a tripartite basis was not only practicable but could prove mutually helpful, and could hasten the process of industrial cooperation. They felt that such cooperation
could with advantage extend to: the provision of the services of
experts; utilisation of training facilities in institutes of technology,
industrial establishments, laboratories etc.; fuller use of engineering and other consultancy services available in the three countries,
greater and regular exchange of information on research work
conducted in the industrial and scientific fields, including the
adoption of production processes developed in any of the three
countries; conducting joint research in scientific, technological and
industrial fields; and promoting greater exchange of students and
trainees.
<pg97>
16. As a first step, it was agreed that information in regard
to institutions and organisations and availability of facilities and
expertise in various fields such as productivity, management,
technical skills, planning, consultancy, market research etc., should
be exchanged, and specific measures for the utilisation of such
services, facilities and expertise devised thereafter by means of
joint consultations.
17. The three Ministers considered that fuller use could be
made of the consultancy and design services available in the three
countries and agreed to encourage contacts and collaboration between competent organisations towards that end.
18. The Ministers considered that the various steps proposed to
be taken by their Governments to strengthen economic relations
between the three countries have been conceived as an integral
part of the efforts currently being made by developing countries
to strengthen mutual cooperation. It was their hope that their
initiative would lead to concrete results, and that it would be
possible to bring together initiatives in other parts of the world
for regional and inter-regional cooperation, with a view to promoting mutual cooperation embracing all developing countries.
Cooperation in International Forums

19. The three Ministers surveyed the course of
the struggle
against under-development, and noted with appreciation on the
consensus among developing countries, members of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in regard to their
common interests, objectives and endeavours. They expressed
satisfaction at the close collaboration that had developed between
the three Governments, and addressed themselves to the task of
what needed to be done to strengthen their contacts, among themselves and with the other developing countries, in the work of
international forums like the UN, UNCTAD and GATT.
20. The Ministers noted with deep concern that action since
the first Conference for meeting the needs of developing countries
had not matched the promise held out by the Final Act of
UNCTAD. In view of the recent decision to Postpone the Conference to early 1968, the need had become more imperative,
during the year 1967, for the implementation of the recommendations of the first Conference and for taking concerted action in
fields which are of immediate and primary concern to developing countries. The Ministers expressed the confidence that it
would be possible to take meaningful action in this interval in
particular matters, such as, stabilising prices of primary commodities and providing fuller access for them, improving the conditions of access for the manufactures and semi-manufactures of
<pg98>
developing countries Into the markets of developed countries, fulfilling the targeted increase in the magnitude of transfer of capital
from developed to developing countries and improving its terms
and conditions, resolving the difficulty posed by the outstanding
debt burdens of developing countries, and finding suitable solutions
to the problems of liquidity as affecting the developmental process
in developing countries.
21. The Ministers reiterated the importance they attached to
the second Conference, due to be held in New Delhi in early 1968,
and took note of the consensus that had already emerged among
the developed as well as developing countries that it should concentrate on action and achievement. They expressed the hope that
further dialogue between the developed and developing countries
and further work in the UNCTAD and its organs, would help the
extension of this consensus, and promote the emergence of a
common determination to deal conclusively at the Conference with
matters of immediate concern to developing countries, and to
provide guidelines for tackling other problems. The Ministers felt
that such an approach should lead to a programme of practical
action for the remaining part of the current Development Decade,
and pave the way for securing more substantial progress during
the succeeding decade.
22. The Ministers felt that it was essential for developed and
developing countries to prepare themselves in advance and adequately for the second Conference. Towards this end, the Ministers thought it important for
developing countries to meet
together, preferably in the autumn of 1967, to formulate their
concrete proposals for a fruitful dialogue with developed countries.
They endorsed the proposal for a special Ministerial mission of
developing countries meeting the Heads of Governments/States of
the principal developed countries with a view to impressing on
them the urgency of finding solutions to the problems of develop-

ing countries, and consulting with them on the programme of work
and action necessary to secure a further move, for progress in these
fields.
23. The Ministers agreed that the three countries should continue to exchange views and information, not merely amongst
themselves but with other developing countries, on the various
aspects of preparations both for the meeting of developing countries and for the second Conference itself, and expressed their
readiness to take appropriate initiatives in that behalf.
<pg99>
24. The Ministers reviewed the work in the GATT and the
progress in the Kennedy Round negotiations. While noting that
Part IV of the General Agreement had now come to have legal
effect, they were disappointed that the commitments made therein
remained unfulfilled. The hope was expressed that the forthcoming meeting of the Trade and Development Committee in Punta
del Estate would help to make substantial progress.
25. The Ministers were concerned to note that the trading
concessions so far offered in the course of the Kennedy Round
were inadequate and urged the principal Contracting Parties to
make meaningful improvements in their offers so that the commitments made at GATT Ministerial level meetings might be at
least Partially fulfilled. They considered that it might be necessary for the Contracting Parties to address themselves at an early
date to seeking solutions for the trading problems of the developing countries which might remain unresolved at the conclusion of
the Kennedy Round negotiations.
Machinery and Measures for Implementation
26. With a view to implementing the conclusions reached by
them during the course of their discussions, the Ministers decided
to set up a number of ad hoc Working Groups, to deal with and
make recommendations in regard to the various aspects of cooperation. They further decided to establish a permanent Joint
Committee to guide and coordinate the work in the technical,
commercial and industrial fields, and to review the progress from
time to time.
27. In the course of these discussions, the Ministers were gratified at the closeness of approach and similarly of outlook on the
Part of the three Governments in regard to problems and Possibilities of economic cooperation. The cordiality, friendliness and
frankness with which the talks were held enabled them to evolve
a common understanding and a community of thought which, they
felt, constituted a very good augury for the future of economic
cooperation among themselves and in the comity of nations.
New Delhi, December 14, 1966.
INDIA
YUGOSLAVIA

USA

Dec 14, 1966

RUSSIA

Appendix III INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES, CONGRESSES AND SYMPOSIA ETC

APPENDIX III
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES, CONGRESSES AND SYMPOSIA ETC., IN
WHICH INDIA PARTICIPATED IN 1966.
In India
S. No.

Name of the Conference

1.

World Congress on Diabetes in the Tropics in Bombay
sponsored by "Diabetic Association of India", Jan 20, 1966 to 22
January, 1966.

2.

15th Annual Conference of the Pacific Area Travel Association in New Delhi, 21 to 29 January, 1966.

3.

Symposium on `CNS-Drugs' at the Regional Research
Laboratory, Hyderabad (India), 24 to 29 January, 1966
sponsored by C.S.I.R.

4.

Asian Productivity Organisation-symposium on small
business development in India, 30 January to 11 February, 1966 organised by the National Productivity Council
of India.

5.

UNESCO Training Seminar on Social and Economic
Development and Research Methodology held in New
Delhi in March, 1966.

6.

22nd Session of the ECAFE held in New Delhi, 22 March
to 4 April, 1966.

7.

Symposium on recent advances with development production and utilisation of medicinal and Aromatic Plants
in India in April, 1966 at Lucknow organised by the Central Indian Medical Plant Organisation.

8.

Regional Conference for South-East Asia on the Universities and the Quest for Peace at the University of Mysore,
June, 1966.

9.

Seminar on Planning Adult Literacy held in New Delhi
in June, 1966.

10.

YMCA International Conference on World Peace in
New Delhi, 30 August to 10 September, 1966.

11.

UNESCO-International Round Table Conference on
Jawaharlal Nehru's role in the Modern World held in
New Delhi in September, 1966.
<pg100>

<pg101>
12.

V World Congress of Cardiology in India organised by
Cardiological Society of India, 30 October to 5 November, 1966.

13.

International Exhibition of the latest development of
drugs and technical instruments in the diagnosis and
management of cases of heart diseases on the occasion of
the V World Congress of Cardiology. 30 October to 6
November, 1966.
Second Mobile Education Seminar in New Delhi, 18 to
22 October, 1966 organised by Pan-Pacific Surgical
Association.

14.

15.

Seminar on Inter-Asian Maize Improvement Workshop
held in New Delhi in October, 1966.

16.

International Conference on Family Planning and Marriage guidance in India in November, 1966-sponsored by
the Family Planning Association in India.

17.

International Seminar on Epidemiology held in November,
1966 organised by the International Epidemiological Association of California.

18.

Third World Conference on Medical Education in New
Delhi from 20 to 25 November, 1966 organised by the
Indian Medical Association.

19.

Symposium on Construction Costs arranged by the National Building Organisation in New Delhi in November,
1966.

20.

Symposium on Implementation of Standardisation in
irrigation and Power sector along with annual Board
Meeting in November, 1966. Ministry of Irrigation and
Power.

21.

FAO/WHO Seminar on Plannnig and Evaluation of
Applied Nutrition Programme held in New Delhi in
November-December, 1966.

22.

33rd International Foundry Congress, 4 to 9 December,
1966, at New Delhi.

23.

X Indian Standards Convention at Ernakulam, 26 to 31
December, 1966.

Abroad
24.

FAO Seminar on Agricultural Experimentation and
Demonstration on Irrigation Land in Vientiane and Khon
Khaen in January, 1966.

25.

164th Session of the Governing Body of the ILO held
in Geneva in February-March, 1966.

26.

6th FAO/UNSF Training Course on Desert Locust Control
held in Tehran in February-March, 1966.

27.

<pg102>
2nd Coordinating meeting of the Coordinated Rice Mutation Group held in Manila in February, 1966.

28.

FAO Conference on Cereal and Bread Technology for the
Near East held in Cairo in February, 1966.

29.

International Symposium on Fine Arts held in Tokyo in
March, 1966.

30.

UN Commission on Human Rights held in New York in
March, 1966.

31.

FAO Consultation on Tea Statistics held in Rome in
March, 1966.

32.

First Session of the Executive Committee and 2nd Session
of the Commission for controlling the Desert Locust in the
Eastern Region of its distribution area in the West Asia
Region in Tehran in March, 1966.

33.

Meeting of the Section Committee on uses and managemerit of Biological Resources of the International Council
of Scientific Unions held at Paris, 4 to 5 April, 1966.

34.

International Congress on Date Processing in Europe held
at Graz, Austria, 17 to 21 April, 1966.

35.

UNESCO-International Music Symposium held in Manila
in April, 1966.

36.

Second Meeting of the Coordinating Council of the International Hydrological Decade held at Paris in April,
1966.

37.

10th Session of FAO Group on Grains held in Rome,
18 to 22 April, 1966.

38.

Ad-Hoc Consultation on Hard Fibres held in Rome in
April, 1966.

39.

Membership of the Inter-Governmental Committee of the
World Food Programme-9th Session of Committee held
in Rome in April, 1966.

40.

FAO International Seminar on Grassland Management
Utilisation in Arid and semi-Arid Areas held in Alma-Ata.
Kazakhstan in April-May, 1966.

41.

International Seminar for Research and Education in
Chemical Engineering and Physical Chemistry, in cooperation with UNESCO held in West Germany in May,
1966.

42.

<pg103>
International Oceanographic Congress and related FAO/
EPTA Group fellowships study tour on
Fisheries, Biology
and Oceanography held in USSR in May, 1966.

43.

International Conference on Second Language Teaching
held in Hamburg in May, 1966.

44

165th and 166th Sessions of the Governing Body of ILO
held in Geneva in May-June, 1966.

45.

38th Session of the Executive Board of WHO held in
Geneva in May, 1966.

46.

19th World Health Assembly held in Geneva in May,
1966

47.

Meeting of the Executive Board of UNICEF held in Addis
Ababa in May, 1966.

48.

Meeting of the Programme Committee of UNICEF held
in May, 1966.

49.

Meeting of the Second Committee of Governmental Experts on Administration and Structure Matters held at
Geneva in May, 1966.

50.

Extraordinary Congress of the International Council of
Archives held at Washington in May, 1966.

51.

14th Session of the FAO Technical Advisory Committee
on Desert Locust Control held in Rome in May-June, 1966.

52.

Third FAO/WHO Training Centre on Abattoir Management
and Operation held in Roskilde, Denmark in May-July,
1966.

53.

UNESCO Symposium on Water in unsaturated Zones held
in Holland in June, 1966.

54.

UNESCO Seminar on Statistics in Educational Planning
held in Paris in June, 1966.

55.

50th Session of the International Labour Conference held
in Geneva in June, 1966.

56.

51st Annual Meeting of the International Dairy Federation held at Munich, Federal Republic of Germany in
June-July, 1966.

57.

9th General Assembly and 10th Technical Meeting of the
International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources held at Lucerne (Switzerland) in June-July,
1966.

58.

First Session of the Committee on Fisheries in Rome in
June, 1966.

59.

60.

<pg104>
9th Session of the Committee Of Experts on the Code of
Principles concerning Milk and Milk Products held in
Rome, 20 to 25 June, 1966.
40th Session of the Committee on Commodity Problems
held in Rome in June, 1966.

61.

10th Session of the FAO Desert Locust Control Committee
held in Rome in June, 1966.

62.

Joint Special Survey by Indo-Afghanistan Locust Team
in South Western Afghanistan under auspices of the FAO
in June, 1966.

62.

UNESCO-International Bureau of Education-29th Session on Publication Education held in Geneva in July,
1966.

64.

Meeting of the Free Association of the Heads of Laboratories of Milk Industry held at Kempton, Federal Republic of Germany in July, 1966.

65.

17th International Dairy Congress held at Munich, Federal Republic of Germany in July. 1966.

66.

International Rice Commission Working Party's meeting
held in Lake Charles, USA in July, 1966.

67.

FAO International Conference on Animal Husbandry
Education held in Gottingen, West Germany in July,
1966.

68.

FAO/UNDP Training Centre on Forest Seed and Tree
Inprovement in English-speaking countries held in
Copenhagen in July, 1966.

69.

FAO/IAE Seminar on the Use of Radioisotopes and Radiation in Dairy Science and Technology in Vienna in July,
1966.

70.

United Nations Seminar on Apartheid held in Brasilia in
August. 1966.

71.

World Congress of International Reading Association held
at Paris in August, 1966.

72.

35th General Assembly of the International Organisation
of Police (INTERPOL) held at Berne (Switzerland) in
August-September. 1966.

73.

Young World Foods Development-Regional Seminar for
Asia and the Far East held in Bangkok in AugustSeptember, 1966.

74.

FAO Seminar of Experts to Advise on the Soil Map of
the World Project held in Moscow in August, 1966.

75.

<pg105>
Meeting of the FAO Panel of Experts on Animal Nutrition held in Gellingen, Germany in August, 1966.

76.

UNESCO Seminar on Educational wastage and School!
Dropouts held in Bangkok in September, 1966.

77.

72nd Session of the UNESCO Executive Board held in
Paris in September, 1966.

78.

13th International Conference of Social Work held at
Washington in September, 1966.

79.

Meeting of the U.N. Ad Hoc Committee of Experts on
Programme in Fertility held at New York, 12 to 16 September, 1966.

80.

FAO/OIE Conference on Sheep Diseases held in Rome in
September, 1966.

81.

General Assembly of the International Union of Pure and
Applied Physics held at Basle, Switzerland, 25 to 28
September, 1966.

82.

First Session of FAO Study Groups on Oil Seeds, Oils and
Fats held in Rome in September-October, 1966.

83.

IAEA/FAO Symposium on the Use of Isotopes in Plant
Nutrition and Physiology Studies at Vienna in September,
1966.

84.

8th FAO Regional Conference for Asia and the Far Eastheld in Seoul, 15 to 24 September, 1966.

85.

3rd Session of the Consultative Committee of the StudyGroup on Jute. Kenaf and Allied Fibres held in Rome in
September. 1966.

86.

FAO/UNDP/Danish Inter-Regional Seminar on Agrarian
Structure and Cooperatives held in Warsaw in SeptemberOctober, 1966.

87.

First Session of the Study Group on Hard Fibres held Irk
Rome in September, 1966.

88.

Joint FAO/IAEA Review Committee Meeting at Vienna
and Rome in September, 1966.

89.

FAO International Seminar on Agricultural Statistics as,
applied to Balance of National Economy In AugustSeptember, 1966.

90.

14th General Conference of UNESCO held in Paris in
October, 1966.

91.

Meeting of the U.N. Ad Hoc Committee of Experts on
Programme in Fertility held at New York, 12 to 16 September, 1966.

92.

<pg106>
167th Session of Governing Body of ILO held In Geneva
in October-November. 1966.

93.

Third General Assembly of the International Computation
Centre held at Rome in October, 1966.

94.

50th Anniversary of the International Planned Parenthood Conference held at New York, 18 to 19 October;
1966.

95.

Special Meeting of the World Federation of Public Health
Association held at San Francisco in October, 1966.

96.

Third Steel Congress held in Luxemburg in October,
1966.

97.

Fourth FAO Far East Regional Conference on Animal
Production and Health in Nuwara Eliya, Ceylon in
October, 1966.

98.

Joint FAO/IAEA-Eight-Week Inter-Regional Training
Course on the use of Radioisotopes in Soil and Plant Investigations held in Manila in October-November. 1966.

99.

47th Session of the FAO Council held in Rome in October,
1966.

100. FAO Farm Broadcasting Seminar held in Tokyo during
October, 1966.
101. 14th Session of the Maritime Safety Committee of IMCO
in October, 1966.
102. Informal Planning Meetings on Coordination of Regional
and Global Telecommunication Plans and Functions and
Locations of Regional Meteorological Centres, under World
Weather Watch Plan held in Geneva in October-Novemberber, 1966.
103. 13th Session of the Asian Advisory Committee of ILO
held in Singapore in November-December, 1966.
104. FAO Conference on Fishery Administration and Services
at Rome in November, 1966.
105. 25th Session of the FAO Arabian Peninsular Desert Locust
Control Sub-Committee held in Kuwait in November,
1966.
106. FAO/UNDP (SF) Desert Locust Project Special Conference of Participating Governments held in Rome in November, 1966.
107. Tenth Session of Study Group of Rice held in Bangkok
In November, 1966
<pg107>
108. 3rd Extraordinary Session of the Assembly of IMCO and
17th Session of the Council of IMCO held in November,
1966.
109. International Seminar on Leisure, Time and Recreation
held In Cuba In December. 1966.
110. Seminar on measures required for the advancement of
Women with special reference to the establishment of a
long-term programme held in Manila in December, 1966.
111. Asian Labour Ministers' Conference held in Manila in

December, 1966.
112. 14th Session of the U.N. Statistical Commission held at
Geneva, 10 to 21 October, 1966.
113. Second Session of the Bureau of Coordinating Council of
the International Hydrological Decade held at Paris In
December, 1966.
114. First Session of the FAO Committee on Wood Based Panel
Products in Rome during December, 1966.
INDIA
USA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC LATVIA LAOS SWITZERLAND IRAN PHILIPPINES
EGYPT JAPAN ITALY FRANCE AUSTRIA KAZAKHSTAN GERMANY DENMARK
AFGHANISTAN BRAZIL RUSSIA KOREA POLAND REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE KUWAIT
CUBA
Jan 20, 1966

Appendix IV LIST OF INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS OF WHICH INDIA Is A MEMBER

APPENDIX IV
LIST OF INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS OF WHICH INDIA Is A MEMBER
United Nations
1.

General Assembly.

2.

Committees and Commissions of the General Assembly:
(a)

Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.

(b)

Committee on Agreements for a Conference for the
purpose of Reviewing the Charter.

(c)

Special Committee of 24 on the situation with regard
to the implementation of the. Declaration on the
granting of independence to Colonial countries and
peoples.

(d)

Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation.

(e)

Peace Observation Commission.

(f)

Disarmament Commission.

(g)

International Law Commission.

(h)

Committee on Contributions.

(i)

Administrative Tribunal.

(j)

18-Nation Disarmament Committee.

(k)

Investment Committee.

(l)

Working Group of 21 to examine Administrative and
Budgetary Procedures of the United Nations.

(m)

Staff Pension Committee.

(n)

UN Committee for International Cooperation Year.

(o)

UN Advisory Committee on Congo.

(p)

Scientific Advisory Committee.

(q)

Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions.

3.

Security Council.

4.

Economic and Social Council.

5.

Functional Commissions & Committees of the ECOSOC.
(a) Human Rights Commission.
<pg108>

6.

(b)

<pg109>
Narcotic Drugs Commission.

(c)

Statistical Commission.

(d)

Population Commission.

(e)

Sub Commission on Prevention of Discrimination
and Protection of Minorities.

(f)

Regional Commission of the Economic and Social
Council: Economic Commission for Asia and the
Far East (ECAFE).

Other Subsidiary Bodies of the
Council:

Economic and Social

(a)

Executive Board of UN Children's Fund (UNICEF).

(b)

UN/FAO, Inter-Governmental Committee on the
World Food Programme.

(c)

Permanent Central Opium Board.

(d)

Advisory Committee on the Application of Science
and Technology and Development.

(e)

Committee on the International Year for Human
Rights.

(f)

Drug Supervisory Body.

7.

UN Conference on Trade & Development (The Trade and
Development Board).

8.

UN

9.

Specialised Agencies:

(a)

Food & Agriculture Organisation (FAO).

(b)

International Bank of Re-construction and Development (IBRD).

(c)

International Monetary Fund (IMF).

(d)

International Finance Corporation (IFC).

(e)

International Development Association (IDA).

(f)

International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO).

(g)

International Telecommunication Union (ITU).

(h)

World Meteorological Organisation (WMO).

(i)

Universal Postal Union (UPU).

(j)

International Labour Organisation (ILO).

(k)

UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO).

(l)

World Health Organisation (WHO).

(m)

Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organisation (IMCO).

<pg110>
International Atomic Energy Agency.
Other International Organisations

10.

Afro-Asian Rural
Delhi.

Reconstruction Organisation,

New

11.

Advisory Committee of Marine Resources Research.

12.

Asian African Legal Consultative Committee, New Delhi.

13.

Asian Broadcasting Conference, Tokyo.

14.

American Society of Travel Agents, New York.

15.

Asian Productivity Organisation, Tokyo.

16.

Asian Statisticians Conference.

17.

Commonwealth Advisory Aeronautical Research Council,
London.

18.

Commonwealth

Agriculture Bureau, London.

19.

Commonwealth

20.

Commonwealth

Broadcasting Conference.

21.

Commonwealth

Statisticians Conference.

22.

Commonwealth

Telecommunication Board, London.

23.

Commonwealth

Parliamentary Association, London.

24.

Commonwealth

Defence Science Organisation.

25.

Commonwealth
Joint Services Committee on Clothing &
General Stores.

26.

Commonwealth

27.

Universal Federation
(UFTAA).

28.

General Agreement on Tariff and Trade.

29.

Indo-Pacific Fisheries Council, Bangkok.

30.

International Air Transport Association, Montreal.

31.

International Association for
Engineering, Zurich.

32.

International

33.

International Association for the Exchange of Students
for Technical Experience, Stockholm.

34.

International

35.

International Association of Light
Paris.

36.

International Association of Shell Structures, Madrid.

37.

International Association of Ports and Harbours, Tokyo.

38.

<pg111>
International Bureau of Education, Geneva.

Forestry Institute.

War Graves Commission.
of

Travel Agents Association

Bridges and Structural

Association of Hydraulic Research, Delft.

Association of Cereal Chemistry, Vienna.
House Authorities,

39.

International Centre for the Study of Preservation and
Restoration of Cultural Property, Rome.

40.

International

Coffee Council.

41.

International
Delhi.

Commission on Irrigation & Drainage, New

42.

International

Commission on Large Dams, Paris.

43.

International Committee of Military Medicine
macy, Liege
(Belgium).

Phar-

44.

International

Council of Archives, Paris.

45.

International Council of Building Research Studies &
Documentation, Rotterdam (Holland).

46.

International

Council for Bird Preservation, London.

47.

International

Criminal Police Commission, Paris.

48.

International

Customs Tariff Bureau, Brussels.

49.

International

Dairy Federation, Brussels.

50.

International

Federation of Film Archives, Paris.

51.

International

Institute for Refrigeration, Paris.

52.

International
Law, Rome.

Institute for the Unification

53.

International

Lead & Zinc Group, New York.

54.

International Liaison Centre of Cinema & Television
Schools, Paris.

55.

International

Mathematical Union, Zurich.

56.

International

Office of Epizootics, Paris.

57.

International

Union for Pure and Applied Biophysics.

58.

International

Railway Congress Association, Washington.

59.

International
(Holland).

Seed

60.

International Society of Soil Mechanics & Foundation
Engineering, London.

61.

International Society for Horticultural Science, The
Hague.

62.

International Sugar Council, London.

63.

International Secretariat for Voluntary Service, Washington.

64.

International Statistical Institute, The Hague.

Testing

of Private

Association, Wageningen

<pg112>
65.

International Tin Council, London.

66.

International

67.

International Union of Official Travel Organisations,
Geneva.

68.

International

Union of Geodesy and Geophysics, Paris

Union of Astronomy, Greenwich.

69.

International Union Against Venereal Diseases & Treponematoses, Paris.

70.

International

Union of Geological Sciences, Copenhagen.

71.

International

Union of Railways, Paris,

72.

Inter-Parliamentary Union, Geneva.

73.

Pacific Area Travel Association, San Francisco.

74.

Permanent International Association of Navigation Congress, Brussels.

75.

Permanent International Association of Road Congress,
Paris.

76.

World Power Conference, Paris.

77.

World Poultry Science Association, London.

78.

British Institute of International & Comparative Law.

79.

Association of Secretaries General of Parliaments.

80.

International Wheat Council, London.

81.

Commonwealth Sugar Agreement.

82.

International Social Security Association, Geneva.

INDIA
USA CONGO JAPAN UNITED KINGDOM SWITZERLAND
SPAIN ITALY LATVIA BELGIUM DENMARK

SWEDEN

Jan 20, 1966

Appendix V FOREIGN DIPLOMATIC MISSIONS IN INDIA
APPENDIX V
FOREIGN DIPLOMATIC MISSIONS IN INDIA
(I) Embassies
1.

Afghanistan

29.

Jordan

2.

Algeria

30.

Kuwait

3.

Argentina

31.

Laos

4.

Austria

32.

Lebanon

AUSTRIA

FRANCE

5.

Belgium

33.

Mexico

6.

Bolivia

34.

Mongolia

7.

Brazil

35.

Morocco

8.

Bulgaria

36.

Nepal

9.

Burma

37.

Netherlands

10. Cambodia

38.

Norway

11. Chile

39.

Peru

12. China

40.

Philippines

13. Colombia

41.

Poland

14. Cuba

42.

Rumania

15. Czechoslovakia

43.

Saudi Arabia

16. Denmark

44.

Spain

17. Ethiopia

45.

Sudan

18. Finland

46.

Sweden

19. France

47.

Switzerland

20. Germany (Federal Republic)

48.

Syria

21. Greece

49.

Thailand

22. Hungary

50.

Turkey

23. Indonesia

51.

U.S.S.R.

24. Iran

52.

U.A.R.

25. Iraq

53.

U.S.A.

26. Ireland

54.

Uruguay

27. Italy

55.

Venezuela

28. Japan

56.

Yugoslavia

<pg113>
(II) High Commissions
1.

Astralia

2.

Britain

3.

Canada

<pg114>

4.

Ceylon

5.

Ghana

6.

Malaysia

7.

New Zealand

8.

Nigeria

9.

Pakistan

10. Tanzania
11. Uganda
(III) Legations
1. Albania (stationed at Baghdad)
2. Apostolic Internunciature (Holy See)
(IV) Sub-offices of High Commissions
1.

Office

of the

Assistant High Commissioner for Ceylon at Madras.

2.

Office

of the

Assistant High Commissioner for Malasyia at Madras.

3.

Office

of the

Deputy High Commissioner for Pakistan at Calcutta.

4.

Office

of the Deputy High Commissioner for Britain at Bombay.

5.

Office

of the

Deputy High Commissioner for Britain, at Calcutta.

6.

Office

of the

Deputy High Commissioner for Britain at Madras.

INDIA
AFGHANISTAN JORDAN ALGERIA KUWAIT ARGENTINA LAOS AUSTRIA LEBANON USA
BELGIUM MEXICO BOLIVIA MONGOLIA BRAZIL MOROCCO BULGARIA NEPAL BURMA
CAMBODIA NORWAY CHILE PERU CHINA PHILIPPINES COLOMBIA POLAND CUBA
SAUDI ARABIA SLOVAKIA DENMARK SPAIN ETHIOPIA SUDAN FINLAND SWEDEN
FRANCE SWITZERLAND GERMANY SYRIA GREECE THAILAND HUNGARY TURKEY
INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ IRELAND URUGUAY ITALY VENEZUELA JAPAN YUGOSLAVIA
CANADA GHANA MALAYSIA NEW ZEALAND NIGER NIGERIA PAKISTAN TANZANIA
UGANDA ALBANIA
Jan 20, 1966

Appendix VI FOREIGN CONSULAR OFFICES IN INDIA

APPENDIX VI

FOREIGN CONSULAR OFFICES IN INDIA
-------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No.
Country
Location
Status
-------------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Afghanistan
Bombay
Consulate General
2.

Argentine

Calcutta

Vice Consulate

3.

Austria

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

4.

Austria

Madras

Hon. Consulate

5.

Austria

Calcutta

Consulate

6.

Belgium

Bombay

Consulate General

7.

Belgium

Calcutta

Consulate General

8.

Belgium

Madras

Hon. Consulate

9.

Bolivia

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

10.

Bolivia

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

11.

Brazil

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

12.

Burma

Calcutta

Consulate General

13.

Burma

Madras

Vice Consulate

14.

Costa Rica

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

15.

Costa Rica

Madras

Hon. Consulate General

16.

Czechoslovakia

Bombay

Consulate General

17.

Czechoslovakia

Calcutta

Consulate General

18.

Denmark

Bombay

Hon.

Consulate

19.

Denmark

Calcutta

Hon.

Consulate

20.

Denmark

Cochin

Hon.

Consulate

21.

Denmark

Madras

Hon.

Consulate

22.

Dominican Republic

Bombay

Hon.

Consulate General

23.

Dominican Republic

Calcutta

Hon.

Consulate

24.

Equador

Calcutta

Hon.

Consulate

General

25.
Ell Salvador
Calcutta
Hon. Consulate
-------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg115>
<pg116>
------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No.
Country
Location
Status

------------------------------------------------------------------------26.

Ethiopia

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

General

27.

Ethiopia

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

General

28.

Finland

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

29.

Finland

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

30.

Finland

Madras

Hon. Consulate

31.

France

Bombay

Consulate General

32.

France

Calcutta

Consulate General

33.

France

Cochin

Hon. Consular Agent

34.

France

Madras

Consulate General

35.

France

Pondicherry

Consulate General

36.

Germany

Calcutta

Consulate General

37.

Germany

Madras

Hon. Consulate General

38.

Germany

Bombay

Consulate General

39.

Greece

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

40.

Greece

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

41.

Haiti

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

42.

Haiti

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

43.

Indonesia

Bombay

Consulate

44.

Indonesia

Calcutta

Consulate

45.

Iran

Bombay

Consulate General

46.

Iraq

Bombay

Consulate General

47.

Israel

Bombay

Consulate

48.

Italy

Bombay

Consulate General

49.

Italy

Calcutta

Consulate General

50.

Italy

Cochin

Hon. Consular Agent

51.

Japan

Calcutta

Consulate General

52.

Japan

Bombay

Consulate General

53.

Japan

Madras

Consulate General

54.
Jordan
Bombay
Hon. Consulate
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

<pg117>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No.
Country
Location
Status
-------------------------------------------------------------------------55.

Kuwait

Bombay

Consulate General

56.

Lebanon

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

57.

Nepal

Calcutta

Consulate General

58.

Netherlands

Bombay

Consulate General

59.

Netherlands

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

60.

Netherlands

Madras

Hon. Consulate

61.

Nicaragua

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

62.

Nicaragua

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

63.

Norway

Bombay

Consulate General

64.

Norway

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

65.

Norway

Cochin

Hon. Vice Consulate

66.

Norway

Madras

Hon. Consulate

67.

Panama

Bombay

Consulate General

68.

Panama

Calcutta

Consulate General

69.

Panama

Madras

Hon. Consulate

70.

Peru

Calcutta

Consulate General

71.

Philippines

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

72.

Philippines

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

73.

Poland

Bombay

Consulate

74.

Poland

Calcutta

Consulate

75.

Spain

Bombay

Hon. Vice Consulate

76.

Spain

Calcutta

Hon. Vice Consulate

77.

Spain

Madras

Hon. Vice Consulate

78.

Sudan

Bombay

Consulate General

79.

Sweden

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

80.

Sweden

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

81.

Sweden

Madras

Hon. Consulate

82.

Switzerland

Bombay

Consulate General

83. Switzerland
Calcutta
Vice Consulate
-------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg118>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No.
Country
Location
Status
-------------------------------------------------------------------------84.

Switzerland

Cochin

Hon. Consular Agent

85.

Syrian Arab Republic

Bombay

Consulate General

86.

Thailand

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

87.

Thailand

Calcutta

Consulate General

88.

Turkey

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

89.

Turkey

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

90.

Turkey

Madras

Hon. Consulate General

91.

U.S.S.R.

Bombay

Consulate

General

92.

U.S.S.R.

Calcutta

Consulate

General

93.

U.S.S.R.

Madras

Consulate

General

94.

United Arab

Bombay

Consulate

General

95.

U.A.R.

Calcutta

Consulate

General

96.

U.S.A.

Bombay

Consulate

General

97.

U.S.A.

Calcutta

Consulate

General

98.

U.S.A.

Madras

Consulate

General

99.

Yugoslavia

Bombay

Consulate

General

100. Yugoslavia

Calcutta

Consulate

General

101. Korea (D.P.R.)

New Delhi

Consulate

General

102. Korea (Republic of)

New Delhi

Consulate

General

103. Monaco

New Delhi

Hon. Consulate General

104. San Marino

New Delhi

Hon. Consulate General

105. Vietnam (D.P.R.)

New Delhi

Consulate General

Republic

106. Vietnam (Republic of)
New Delhi
Consulate General
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

INDIA
USA AFGHANISTAN AUSTRIA BELGIUM BOLIVIA BRAZIL BURMA COSTA!!NORWAY
SLOVAKIA DENMARK DOMINICA ETHIOPIA FINLAND FRANCE GERMANY GREECE HAITI
INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ ISRAEL ITALY JAPAN JORDAN KUWAIT LEBANON NEPAL
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC NICARAGUA PANAMA PERU PHILIPPINES POLAND SPAIN
SUDAN SWEDEN SWITZERLAND SYRIA THAILAND TURKEY YUGOSLAVIA KOREA MONACO
SAN MARINO VIETNAM
Jan 20, 1966

Appendix VII LIST OF DISTINGUISHED VISITORS FROM ABROAD

APPENDIX VII
LIST OF DISTINGUISHED VISITORS FROM ABROAD
-------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No.
Name and Designation
Period of visit
-------------------------------------------------------------------------Heads of States
1.

H.H. Chogyal of Sikkim

Jan 12, 1966 to 14 January, 1966.

2.

H.E. General Ne Win, Chairman of the Revolutionary Council of the Union of Burma and
Madame Ne Win.

3.

His Majesty the Druk Gyalpo of
Bhutan.

27 April to 3 May, 1966.

4.

H.E. Mr. Josip Broz Tito,
President of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
Madame Jovanka Broz.

20 to 25 October, 1966.

5.

H.E. Mr. Gamal Abdel Nasser,
President of the United Arab
Republic.

20 to 27 October, 1966.

6.

H.E. Mr. Antonin Novotny,
President of the Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic.

18 to 24 November, 1966.

7.

Their Majesties the King and
Queen of Afghanistan.

28 January, to 7 February,
1967.

4 to 9 March, 1966.

Vice-Presidents
1.

H. E. Mr. Hubert Humphrey,
vice-President of the U.S.A.

12 to 13 January, 1966.

2.

H.E. Mr. Hussain-al-Shafi, Vice-

12 to 15 January, 1966.

President of the U.A.R.
3.

H.E. Mr. Hubert Humphrey,
VicePresident of the U.S.A.

16 to 17 February, 1966.

4.

H.E. Mr. Ruben C. Kamanga,
Vice-President of Zambia.

15 to 18 August, 1966.

5.

H.R.H. Prince Vongsavang,
3 to 18 November, 1966.
Crown Prince of Laos and
H. R. H. Princess Manilay Vongsavang.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg119>
<pg120>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No.
Name and Designation
Period of visit
-------------------------------------------------------------------------Heads of Governments
1.

H.E. Md. Hashim Maiwandwal,
Prime Minister of Afghanistan.

11 to 13 January, 1966.

2.

H.E. Mr. A. Kosygin, Prime
Minister of the U.S.S.R.

11 to 14 January, 1966.

3.

H. E. Shri Surya Bahadur Thapa,
Chairman of the Council o
Ministers, H.Ms'. Government
of Nepal.

11 to 13 January, 1966.

4.

H.E. Dr. Gyula Kallai, Chairman of the Council of Ministers
of the Hungarian People's Republic.

20 to 28 February, 1966.

5.

H.E. Dr. Peter Stambolic, President of the Federal Executive
Council of the Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslaiva.

10 to 17 March, 1966.

6.

H.E. Shri Surya Bahadur Thapa,
Chairman of the Council of
Ministers, H.M.'s Government
of Nepal.

11 to 28 April, 1966.

7.

H.E. Mr. Lee Kuan Yew,
Prime Minister of Singapore.

1 to 4 September, 1966.

Other Dignitaries
1.

2.

H.E. Mr. Son Sann VicePresident of the Council of
Ministers of Cambodia and Madame Son Sann.

6 to 14 January, 1966.

H.E. Mr. Gulam Farooq, Minister of Commerce, Pakistan.

11 to 12 January, 1966.

3.

Dasso Dewa Tsering, SecretaryGeneral, Development Wing,
Government of Bhutan.

11 to 14 January, 1966.

4.

Mr. Benjamin Romuldez, Brother-in-law of President Marcos,
Philippines.

11 to 14 January, 1966.

5.

Mr. C. V. Narasimhan, Special
Representative of the U.N.
Secretary-General.

11 to 12 January, 1966.

6.

Lord Mountbatten, Representa12 to 13 January, 1966.
tive of the Queen and Mr. George
Brown, First Secretary of State
U.K.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg121>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No.
Name and Designation
Period of visit
-------------------------------------------------------------------------7.

H.E. Mr. Dean Rusk, Secretary
of State, U.S.A.

12 to 14 January, 1966.

8.

H.E. Mr. Ong Pang Boon,
Education Minister of Singapore.

12 to 13 January, 1966.

9.

H.E. U Thi Han, Foreign
Minister of Burma.

12 to 14 January, 1966.

10. H.E. Mr. Jakov Blazevic, VicePresident of Yugoslavia.

12 to 14 January, 1966.

11. H.E. Mr. Naka Funada, Former
Speaker of the House of Representative of the Diet of
Japan.

12 to 15 January, 1966.

12. H.E. Mr. Walter Scheel, Minister of Economic Cooperation,
Federal Republic of Germany.

12 to 13 January, 1966.

13. H.E. Dr. Thanat Khoman,
Foreign Minister of Thailand.

12 to 13 January, 1966.

14. Rt. Hon. Edward Heath of
U.K.

12 January, 1966.

15. H.E. Mr. Ahmad Balafrej,
Personal Representative of King
Hassan of Morocco.

12 to 14 January, 1966.

16. H.E. Leuam Raja Sombat,
Ambassador of Laos in Bangkok.

12 January, 1966,

17. H.E. Mr. Louis Joxe, ViceChairman of the French Council
of Ministers.

12 to 15 January, 1966.

18. H.E. Mr. Abbas Aram, Foreign
Minister of Iran.

12 to 17 January, 1966.

19. H.E. Mr. Mathew T. Mbu.,
Minister of State for Navy,
Nigeria.

13 January, 1966.

20. H.E. Mr. Rabah Bitat, Minister
of State, Algeria.

13 to 16 January, 1966.

21. H.E. Mr. J. R. Nicholson,
Minister of Labour, Canada.

12 to 13 January, 1966.

22. H.E. Mr. Mongi Slim, Personal
19 to 23 January, 1966.
Representative of the President
of Tunisia.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg122>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No.
Name and Designation
Period of visit
-------------------------------------------------------------------------23. Hon'ble Mr. J.R. Marshall,
Deputy Prime Minister of New
Zealand.

20 to 21

March, 1966.

24. H.E. Mr. Paul M. C. Hasluck,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Australia.

20 to 21

March, 1966.

25. H.E. Dr. (Mrs.) Grate Wittkowski, Deputy Prime Minister
the G.D.R.

23 to 28

March, 1966.

26. H. E. Dr. Miguel Angel Zavala
Ortiz, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Worship of the
Republic of Argentina.

26 to 28

March, 1966.

27. H. E. Dr. L. Simovic, Deputy
Foreign Minister of Czechoslovak
Socialist Republic.

7 to 15

April, 1966

28. H.E. Mr. Sharabasi
Member, Presideney Council of
the U. A. R.

11 to 16

29. H.E. Dato Mohammed Asri Bin
Haji Mude, Chief Minister of
Kelantan (Malaysia).

18 to 24 April, 1966.

30. H.E. Mr. jean Sainteny, Special Envoy of the President of
France.

10 to 12 July, 1966.

April, 1966.

31. H. E. Mr. Per C. Haekkerup,
Foreign Minister of Denmark.
32

H.E. Mr. Adam Malik, Presidium Minister for Political Affairs and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Indonesia.

28 August to 1 September,
1966.
3 to 7 September, 1966.

33. H.E. Mr. Sultan Hamengku
Buwong IX, Presidium Minister
of Economic and Financial Affairs, Indonesia.

20 to 23 September, 1966.

34. Lord Chalfont, British Minister
of State for Foreign Affairs.

7 to 11 October, 1966.

35. Mr. Arnold Smith, Commonwealth Secretary-General.

31 October to 14 November.
1966.

36. Her Majesty Queen Frederica,
Queen Mother of Greece and
H. R. H. Princess Irene.

16 November to 22 December,
1966.

57. H.E. Mr. J. Krejci, Deputy
16 to 27 January, 1967.
Prime Minister and Minister of
Heavy Industry of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------BURMA
UNITED KINGDOM BHUTAN YUGOSLAVIA NORWAY AFGHANISTAN USA ZAMBIA LAOS
PHILIPPINES NEPAL REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE CAMBODIA PAKISTAN JAPAN GERMANY
OMAN THAILAND MOROCCO IRAN NIGER NIGERIA ALGERIA CANADA TUNISIA
AUSTRALIA ARGENTINA MALAYSIA FRANCE DENMARK MALI INDONESIA GREECE
Jan 12, 1966

Appendix VIII ITEMS OF WORK ALLOTTED TO MEA

APPENDIX VIII
ITEMS OF WORK ALLOTTED TO THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
1.

External Affairs.

2.

Relations with foreign States and Commonwealth countries.

3.

All matters affecting foreign, diplomatic and Consular
officers and U.N. officers and its specialised agencies in
India.

4.

Passports and visas excluding the grant of visas or endorse-

ments for entry into India but including the grant of
entry permits to South Africans of non-Indian origin under
the Reciprocity (South Africa) Rules, 1944 and the grant of
entry visas for Ceylon nationals except missionaries.
5.

Extradition of criminals and accused persons from India
to foreign and Commonwealth countries and vice versa,
and general administration of the Indian Extradition Act,
1903 (XV of 1903), and extra-territoriality.

6.

Preventive detention in India, for reasons of State connected
with External and Commonwealth Affairs.

7.

Repatriation of the nationals of Foreign and Commonwealth
States from India and deportation and repatriation of
Indian nationals from foreign and Commonwealth countries.
to India.

8.

All emigration under the Indian Emigration Act, 1922, from
India to Overseas countries and the return of emigrants;
immigration to India from the Union of South Africa or
any other country to which the Reciprocity Act may apply.

9.

All consular functions.

10. Travel arrangements for traders, muleteers, porters andpilgrims from India to Tibet region of China and vice versa.
11.

Liaison work connected with the Education Ministry's cultural scholarships schemes and nomination of private
students of Indian origin domiciled abroad to reserve seats
in medical and engineering colleges in India.

12.

Matters relating to the State of Nagaland.
<pg123>

13.

<pg124>
Political pensions paid to foreign refugees and descendants
of those who rendered services abroad.

14.

Ceremonial matters relating to foreign and Commonwealth
visitors and diplomatic and consular Representatives.

15.

Deleted.

16.

Matters in respect of Pondicherry, Goa, Daman and Diu,
involving relations with France and Portugal.

17.

Relations with States in special treaty relations with India,
such as Sikkim and Bhutan.

18.

Himalayan expeditions and permission to foreigners to
travel beyond the "Inner Line".

19.

Coordination and development measures in border areas.

20.

United Nations, Specialised Agencies and other International Conferences.

21.

Indian Foreign Services.

22.

Indian Foreign Service Branch `B'.

23.

Deleted.

24.

External

25.

Political
treaties, agreements and conventions with foreign
and Commonwealth countries.

26.

(a)

Pilgrimages to places outside India including the administration of the Port Haj Committee Act, 1932 and the
Rules made thereunder and Indian Pilgrim Ships Rules,
1933, and pilgrim parties from India to shrines in
Pakistan and vice versa.

(b)

Protection and preservation of non-Muslim shrines
in Pakistan and Muslim shrines in India in terms of
Pant-Mirza Agreement of 1955.

Publicity.

27.

Abducted Persons (Recovery and Restoration).

28.

Evacuation of non-Muslims from Pakistan to India.

29.

Protection of right of the Minority Communities in India
and Pakistan (except rehabilitation of Muslim migrants
who have returned from East Pakistan to West Bengal
under the Nehru-Liaquat Pact; Rehabilitation of Muslims
internally displaced in West Bengal at the time of communal disturbances on the Partition of the country and restoration of mosques and other places of religious worships
to Muslims in West Bengal).

30.

<pg125>
Non-Muslim migration from Pakistan and Muslim migration
from India.

31.

Recovery of Advances granted to the evacuees from Burma,
Malaya, etc. during the year 1942-47 and residual work
relating to refugees given asylum in India during World
War II.

32.

Notification regarding commencement or cessation of a state
of war.

33.

Foreign Jurisdiction.

34.

Piracies and crimes committed
on the High Seas or in the
air; offences against the law of nations committed on land
or the High Seas or in the air.

35.

Inquiries and statistics for the purposed of any of the subjects, allotted to this Ministry.

36.

Fees in respect of any of the subjects allotted to this
Ministry.

37.

Offences against laws with respect to any of the subjects
allotted to this Ministry.

38.

Hospitality Grant of the Government of India.

39.

Demarcation of the land frontier of India.

40.

Border raids and incidents on the land borders of India.

41.

Diplomatic flight clearances for non-scheduled chartered
flights of foreign civil and military aircraft transiting
India.

42.

Matters relating to the Continental Shelf, Territorial
Waters, Contiguous Zone and question of fishery rights in
the High Seas and other questions of International Law.

43.

Economic and technical assistance given by India to the
Government of Nepal under the Colombo Plan for Cooperative Economic Development.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------NOTE:-Commonwealth countries should be taken to include British Colonies, Protectorates and Trust Territories.
INDIA
SOUTH AFRICA
SRI LANKA

USA

CHINA

FRANCE

PORTUGAL

BHUTAN

PAKISTAN

BURMA

NEPAL

Jan 12, 1966

Appendix IX VISITS OF INDIAN DIGNITARIES TO FOREIGN COUNTRIES

APPENDIX IX
VISITS OF INDIAN DIGNITARIES TO FOREIGN COUNTRIES AND OTHER DELEGATIONS/DEPUTATIONS SPONSORED BY THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
-------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Name/Designation
Places visited
Purpose
-------------------------------------------------------------------------1.

Shri B. N. Lokur, Law
Secretary.

2.

Shri C. K. Daphtary,
Attorney General of
India.

"

"

3.

Shri N. A. Palkhiwala,
Advocates Supreme
Court.

"

"

4.

Shri N.

"

"

C. Chatterjee,

Geneva

Kutch Tribunal.

Advocate,
Court.

Supreme

5.

Dr. K. Krishna Rao,
Legal Adviser, Ministry of External Affairs.

"

6.

Shri Swaran Singh,
Foreign Minister and
Party.

Islamabad

Indo-Pak Ministerial
Meeting.

7.

Shri K. C. Pant, Mem-

New York

Session of

ber of Parliament.

"

U.N. Commis-

sion on Human Rights.

8.

Dr. Radhabinod Pal,
Member of Parliament.

Geneva

18th Session of I.L.C.

9.

Prof.

London

International Commission

Humayun Kabir,

Member of Parliament.

on South West Africa.

10. Shri C. S. Jha, Foreign
Secretary.

London

Official visit.

11. Shri M. Faki and Party

Jeddah

Haj Delegation.

12. Shri K. Partap, First
Secretary, Nairobi.

Dar-es-Salaam

Nehru Memorial Exhibition.

13.

Shri K. M. KannamSaigon, Phnom
Official tour.
pilly, joint Secretary,
Penh and VienMinistry of External
tiane.
Affairs.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg126>
<pg127>
------------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Name/Designation
Places visitted
Purpose
------------------------------------------------------------------------------14. Maj. Genl. K.A.S. Raja

Saigon, Phnom
Penh and Vientiane

Official tour.

15. Shri Manubbai Shah,

Baghdad

Funeral of late President

Minister of Commerce.
16. Shri T. T. P. Abdullah,
Director -(Personnel),
Ministry of External
Affairs.

Aref.
Colombo and
Kandy.

Official tour.

17. Shri Dinesh Singh, Minister in the Ministry
of External Affairs.

Georgetown

Independence Day Celebrations.

18. Shrimati Vijaya Lakshmi
Pandit, Member of
Parliament.

Australia, Fiji
and Kuala
Lumpur.

Goodwill Mission.

19. Shri M. Azim Hussain,
Secretary, Ministry of
External Affairs and
Party.

Afghanistan,
Paris and London.

Indian Expert Team
Annual discussions.

20. Shri
Swaran Singh,
Foreign Minister and
Party.

Paris and London.

Annual discussions with
French Government.

21. Shri L. R. Nair, Director, Mass Communication, New Delhi.

Cairo

Nehru Memorial Exhibition.

22. Shri Ali Ahmed Sarur,
Aligarh Muslim University.

Kabul

Seminar organised by
Franklin Institute.

23. Shri Malik Ram Baveja, Sahitya Academy.

"

"

24. Shri, Dinesh Singh,

Geneva

Ministry in the Minister
of External Affairs and
Party.
25. Shri S. K. S. Mudaliar,

Economic

and Social Council of
U.N.
Islamabad

Retd. Director of Survey and Party.
26. Shri J. C. Chakravarti,

Meeting - of

Inspection of Kutch documents.

Islamabad

Supdt. Surveyor of
Works and Party.

Inspection

of Building

Programme.

27. Shri Rai Bahadur, MiCelebration
s.
nister of I. & B.

Blantyre

Republic Day

28. Shrimati Vijaya Lakshmi

Algiers

4th Anniversary of In-

Pandit, Member of Parliament.

dependence.

29. Dr. Zakir Husain, ViceAfghanistan
Goodwill visit.
President and Party.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<pg128>
------------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Name/Designation
Places visited
Purpose
------------------------------------------------------------------------------30. Dr. S. C. Jamir, ParRangoon,
Goodwill Mission.
liamentary Secretary.
Singapore,
Kuala Lumpur,
Bangkok,
Phnom Penh.
Hongkong
and Tokyo.
31. Shri Homi J. Talyarkhan, Minister, Maharashtra Government.

West Germany

Goodwill Mission.

32. Dr. K. Krishna Rao,
Internat
ional
joint Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs.

Helsinki

Conference of

33. Shri M. C. Setalvad,

Bangkok

Law Association.

Member of Parliament
Consulta
and Party.

8th Session of Asian/
African Legal
tive Committee.

34. Shri S. N. Sinha, Law
Semi
Officer, Ministry of External Affairs.

Harvard

35. Shri Swaran Singh,
Prime
Foreign Minister and
Conference.

London

International Law
nar.
Commonwealth
Ministers,

Party.
36. Shri V. C Shukla, Deputy Home Minister.
37. Shri R. Bhandari, Director, Ministry of External
Affairs.
38. Shri S. C. Roy, joint
Inspecti
on.
Secretary, Ministry of
External Affairs and Shri

Basutoland and

Independence Day Cele-

Bechuanaland.

bration.

Niamey and

Meeting on Economic Co-

Cairo.

operation
Africa.

Belgrade, Prague,

Foreign Service

Vienna and
Warsaw.

in

West

M. S. Sundara, Financial Adviser to M.E.A.
39. Shri Swaran Singh,

New York

U.N. General Assembly.

New York

Tripartite

Foreign Minister and
Party.
40. Shri M. A. Hussain,
of
Secretary, Ministry of
External Affairs.

Meeting

Foreign Ministers.

41. Dr. Zakir Husain, VicePresident.

Phnom Penh,
Bangkok,
Singapore and
Malaysia.

Goodwill visit.

42. Shri C. S. Jha, Foreign
Wi
th
Secretary and Party.
of

Tokyo

Bilateral discussions
the

Government

Japan.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg129>
------------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Name Designation
Places visited
Purpose
------------------------------------------------------------------------------43. Dr. K. Krishna Rao,

London

joint Secretary, Minis-

Meeting of the International Law Association.

try of External Affairs.
44. Shri G. S. Pathak, Law
Minister.

Algeria

12th Anniversary of the
Algerian Revolution.

45. Shri K. K. Puri, Asstt.
Information Officer,
Ministry of Information
& Broadcasting.

Addis Ab ba

Nehru Memorial Exhibition.

46. Shri G. A. Shah, joint
Secretary, Ministry of
Law and Shri Sangat
Singh, Senior Research
Officer, Ministry of External Affairs.

London

Kutch Tribunal.

47. Shri M. C. Chagla,
Foreign Minister and
Party.

Djakarta,
Rangoon and
Bangkok.

Goodwill visit.

48. Dr. Vikram Sarabhai,
Chairman, Atomic Energy
Commission and Party.

U.S.A., U.K.
and U.S.S.R.

Outer Space Committee.

49. Shri K. M. Kannam-

Rangoon

Discussion with the Gov-

pilly, joint Secretary,
Ministry of External
Affairs and Party.
50. Shri Moinuddin Haris
and Party.

ernment of Burma.

Mecca

Haj Delegation.

51. Shri S. K. Roy, joint
London and
Foreign Service Inspection.
Secretary, Ministry of
Budapest
External Affairs aad Shri
M. S. Sundara, Financial
Adviser to M.E.A.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------INDIA
SWITZERLAND PAKISTAN USA UNITED KINGDOM SAUDI ARABIA KENYA IRAQ SRI
LANKA GUYANA AUSTRALIA FIJI AFGHANISTAN FRANCE EGYPT MALI ALGERIA
REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE MALAYSIA CAMBODIA JAPAN GERMANY FINLAND NIGER
CZECH REPUBLIC YUGOSLAVIA AUSTRIA POLAND INDONESIA BURMA HUNGARY
Jan 12, 1966

Appendix X LIST OF INDIAN MISSIONS/POSTS ABROAD

APPENDIX X
LIST OF INDIAN MISSIONS/POSTS ABROAD
------------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No.
Country
Location
Remarks
------------------------------------------------------------------------------1. Afghanistan
Kabul
2.

Algeria

Algiers

3.

Argentina

Buenos Aires

Ambassador concurrently

accredited to Paraguay
as Ambassador and Uruguay as Minister.
4. Austria

Vienna

5. Belgium

Brussels

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to Luxembourg as Ambassador. Additionally, the Ambassador is India's Special
Representative for economic, financial and commercial affairs and he is
also accredited to the
European
Economic
Community and the European Coal and Steel
Community.

6. Brazil

Rio-de-Janeiro

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to Venezuela
and Bolivia as Ambassador.

7. Burma

Rangoon

8. Cambodia

Phnom Penh

9. Chile

Sontiago

10. China

Peking

11. Congo

Kinshasa

12. Cuba

Havana

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to Colombia
and Peru as Ambassa.
dor.

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to Gabon.

Incharge of a First Secretary/Charge d'Affaires.
Ambassador resident in
Mexico.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg130>
<pg131>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No.
Country
Location
Remarks
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------13. Czechoslovakia

Prague

14.

Denmark

Copenhagen

15.

Ethiopia

Addis Ababa

16.
Finland
Counsel
lor/

Helsinki

Incharge of a
Charge d'Affaires.

A
m-

bassador

in

resident

Stockholm (Sweden).

17.

France

Paris

18.

Federal Republic of Germany.

Bonn

18-A. Guinea
concurrent
ly

Conakry

19.

Budapest

Hungary

20.
Italy
concurrent
ly

Ambassador
accredited to Mali.

Rome

Ambassador
accredited to

Albania
as

Minister and as High
Commissioner to

Malta

and First Secretary

c
on-

currently accredited

to

the Republic of San
Marino as Consul

Gene
-

ral.

21.

Indonesia

Djakarta

22.

Iran

Tehran

23.

Iraq

Baghdad

24.

Ireland

Dublin

25.

Japan .

Tokyo

26.
Sec
re-

Jordan

Amman

tary/Charge

d'Affair
es.

Ambassador resident

i
n

Beirut.

27.
Kuwait
S
ecre-

Kuwait

Incharge of a First
tary/Charge

d'Affair
es.

Ambassador resident

i
n
28.

Incharge of First

Beirut.
Laos

Vientiane

29.
Lebanon
concurrent
ly

Beirut

Ambassador
accredited as

Ambassa
-

dor to Jordan and

Kuw
ait

and as High Commis-

sioner at Cyprus.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg132>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No. Country
Location
Remarks
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------30. Malagasy

Tananarive

Ambassador concurrently
accredited
as
Consul
General to Reunion Island and Comores.

31. Mexico

Mexico City

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to Cuba and
Panama as Ambassador.

32. Morocco

Rabat

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to Tunisia as
Ambassador.

33.

Nepal

Kathmandu

34.

Netherlands

The Hague

35.

Norway

Oslo

36.

Philippines

Manila

37.

Poland

Warsaw

38.

Rumania

Bucharest

39.

Saudi Arabia

Jedda

40.

Senegal

Dakar

41.

Somalia

Mogadiscio

42.

Spain

Madrid

43.

Sudan

Khartoum

44.

Sweden

Stockholm

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to Finland as
Ambassador.

45.

Switzerland

Berne

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to the Vatican
as Ambassador.

46.

Syrian Arab Republic

Damascus

47.

Thailand

Bangkok

48.

Tunisia

Tunis

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to Bulgaria as
Ambassador.

Ambassador concurrently
accredited as Ambassador to Ivory Coast, Upper Volta and Gambia.

Incharge of a First Secretary/Charge d'Affaires.

Incharge of a First Secretary/Charge d'Affaires.
Ambassador resident in
Rabat.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg133>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No. Country
Location
Remarks
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

49.

Turkey

Ankara

50.

Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

Moscow

51.

United Arab Republic

Cairo

52.

United States of America

Washington

53.

Yugoslavia

Belgrade

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to Mongolia
as Ambassador.
Ambassador concurrently
accredited as Ambassador
to Libya and Minister to
Yemen.

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to Greece as
Ambassador.

EMBASSIES-(b) Non-resident
1.

Bolivia

Ambassador resident

in

Rio-de-Janeiro.

2.

Bulgaria

Ambassador resident

in

Bucharest.

3.

Cameroon

Ambassador resident

in

4.

Colombia

Ambassador resident

in

Santiago (Chile).

5.

Dahomey

Ambassador resident

in

Lagos.

6.

Greece

Ambassador resident

in

Belgrade.

7.

Ivory Coast

Ambassador resident in Dakar.

8.

Liberia

Ambassador resident in

Accra.

9.

Libya

Ambassador resident in

Cairo.

10. Luxembourg

Ambassador resident in

Brussels.

11. Mali

Ambassador resident in

Guinea.

12. Mauritania

Ambassador resident in

13. Mongolia

Ambassador resident in Moscow.

14. Panama

Ambassador resident in

15. Paraguay

Ambassador resident in Buenos Aires.

16. Togo

Ambassador resident in

Lagos.

17. Peru

Ambassador resident in

Santiago.

18. Upper Volta

Ambassador resident in

Dakar.

Lagos.

Dakar.

Mexico City.

19. Venezuela .
Ambassador resident in Rio-de-Janeiro
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<pg134>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No.
Country
Location
Remarks
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------HIGH COMMISSIONS-(a)

Resident

1.

Australia

Canberra

2.

Canada

Ottawa

3.

Ceylon

Colombo

High Commissioner accredited to Maldives.

4.

Ghana

Accra

High Commissioner accredited to Liberia as Ambassador and as High
Commissioner to Sierra
Leone.

5. Kenya

Nairobi

6.

Malawi

Blantyre

7.

Malaysia

Kuala Lumpur

8.

New Zealand

Wellington

9.

Nigeria

Lagos

Incharge of an Acting
High Commissioner.

High Commissioner concurrently accredited to
Togo, Dahomey and
Cameroon as Ambassador.

10. Pakistan

Karachi/
Islamabad.

11. Singapore

Singapore

Incharge of an Acting
High Commissioner.

12. Trinidad and Tobago

Port of Spain

High Commissioner concurrent
accredited as
High Commissioner to
Jamaica
and Guyana,
as Commissioner to Barbados, Antigua, Grenada, Dominica, St. Kitts,
St. Lucia, St. Vincent,
Montserrat and as Consul General to Surinam.

13.

Uganda

Kampala

High Commissioner accredited to Ruanda and

Burundi as Consul General.
14.

United Kingdom

London

15.

United Republic of Tanzania.

Dar-es-Salaam

16.
Zambia
Lusaka
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg135>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No.
Country
Location
Remarks
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------HIGH COMMISSIONS-(b) Non-resident
1.

Cyprus

High Commissioner resident at Beirut.

2.

Sierra Leone

High Commissioner resident in Accra.

3.

Jamaica

High Commissioner resident in Port of
Spain.

4.

Malta

High Commissioner resident in Rome.

5.

Gambia

High Commissioner resident in Dakar.

6.

Guyana

High Commissioner resident in Trinidad.
ASSISTANT HIGH COMMISSION

1.

Ceylon

Kandy

Assistant High Commissioner.

COMMISSIONS--(a) Resident
1.

Aden

Aden

2.

Fiji

Suva

3.

Hong Kong

Hong Kong

4.

Mauritius

Port Louis

5.

Mombasa

Mombasa
COMMISSIONS-(b) Non-resident

1.

Antigua

2.

Barbados

Commissioner resident in Port of Spain.,
Do.

3.

Dominica

Do.

4.

Grenada

Do.

5.

Montserrat

Do,

6.

St. Kitts

Do.

7.

St. Lucia

Do.

8.

St. Vincent

Do.
LEGATIONS-Non-resident

1.

Albania

*Minister resident in Rome
(Italy).

*He has not,
presented his
credentials.

2. Uruguay
Minister resident in Buenos
Aires.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg136>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No.
Country
Location
Remarks
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------3. Vatican
Minister resident in Berne.
4.

Yemen

Minister resident in Cairo.
CONSULATE GENERAL-(a) Resident

1.

Denmark

Copenhagen

Hon. Consul General
(Functioning under the
Ambassador).

2.

Germany (Federal Republic).

Berlin

Ambassador resident in
Bonn.

3.

Do.

Frankfurt

Do.

4.

Do.

Hamburg

Do.

5.

Muscat

Muscat

Consul General accredited
to Qatar.

6.

Switzerland

Geneva

Resident Consul General.

7.

United States of America

New York

Ambassador resident in
Washington.

8.

United States of America

San Francisco

Resident Consul General.
Ambassador resident in

Washington.
9.

Vietnam (North)

Hanoi

10.

Vietnam (South)

Saigon

11.

Paraguay

Asuncion

Honorary Consul General.

CONSULATE GENERAL-(b) Non-resident
1.

Burundi

Consul General resident in Nairobi.

2.

Comores

Consul General resident in Tananarive.

3.

Republic of San Marino

Consul General resident in Rome.

4.

Reunion Island

Consul General resident in Tananarive.

5.

Ruanda

Consul General resident in Nairobi.

6.

Surinam

Consul General resident in Port of Spain.
CONSULATES-Resident

1. Belgium

Ghent

Hon. Consul General.
Ambassador resident in
Brussels.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg137>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No.
Country
Location
Remarks
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------2.

Burma

Mandalay

Consul. Ambassador resident in Rangoon.

3.

Canary Islands

Las Palmas

Hon. Consul.

4.

French Somaliland

Djibouti

Hon. Consul.

5.

Germany (Federal Republic).

Munich

Hon. Consul. Ambassador
resident in Bonn.

Stuttgart

Hon. Consul. Ambassador
resident in Bonn.

Athens

Hon.

6.
7.

Do.
Greece

Consul General.

Ambassador resident in
Belgrade.

8.

Iran

Khorramshahr

Ambassador resident in
Tehran.

9.

Italy

Genoa

Hon. Consul. Ambassador resident in Rome.

10.

Indonesia

Medan

Ambassador resident in
Djakarta.

11.

Iraq

Basra

Ambassador
Baghdad.

resident in

12.
in

Japan .

Kobe

Ambassador

resident

Tokyo.
13.
in

U.S.S.R.

Odessa

Ambassador

resident

Moscow.
14.

U.S.A.

Cleveland

Hon. Consul. Ambassador resident in Washington.

15.

U.S.A.

Honolulu

16.

Panama

Bandar Abbas

Do.
Hon. Consul. Ambassador resident in Buenos
Aires.

VICE-CONSULATES-Resident
1.

Afghanistan

Jalalabad

Ambasssdor resident in
Kabul.

2.

Afghanistan

Kandahar

3.

Iran

Zahidan

Do.
Ambassador resident in

Tehran.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg138>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No.
Country
Location
Remarks
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------DEPUTY HIGH COMMISSION-Resident
1. Pakistan

Dacca

High Commissioner resi-

dent in Karachi.
TRADE COMMISSIONS AND OFFICES-Resident
1. Australia

Sydney

High Commissioner resident in Canberra.

2. Canada

Vancouver

High Commissioner resident in Ottawa.

3. Bahrein

Bahrein

Incharge
Agent.

4.

Dubai

Incharge of a Trade
Agent.

Dubai

of

a Trade

SPECIAL MISSIONS--(a) Resident
1.

Political Office, Sikkim

Gangtok

Political Officer.

2.

Permanent Mission of
India to the United
Nations.

New York

Permanent Representative.

SPECIAL
1.

MISSIONS-(b) Non-resident

Political Office, Bhutan . Political Officer

resident in Gangtok.

NEW MISSIONS-Resident
1.

Embassy of India, Guinea.
Upgradation

Ambassador concurrently accredited to Mali.
From
Hon. Consulate

TO

1.

Athens (Greece)

Hony. Consulate General.

2.

Ghent (Belgium).

Do.

Do.

Redesignation

From

To

1.

Guyana (former
Commission
High Commission
Br. Guiana)
of India.
of India.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------INDIA
AFGHANISTAN ALGERIA ARGENTINA PARAGUAY AUSTRIA USA BELGIUM BRAZIL
VENEZUELA BOLIVIA BURMA CAMBODIA CHILE COLOMBIA PERU CHINA CONGO
ZAIRE GABON CUBA MEXICO CZECH REPUBLIC NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK
ETHIOPIA FINLAND SWEDEN FRANCE GERMANY GUINEA MALI HUNGARY ITALY
ALBANIA MALTA INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ IRELAND JAPAN JORDAN LEBANON KUWAIT
LAOS CYPRUS PANAMA MOROCCO TUNISIA NEPAL PHILIPPINES POLAND ROMANIA
BULGARIA SAUDI ARABIA SENEGAL SOMALIA SPAIN SUDAN SWITZERLAND SYRIA
THAILAND TURKEY RUSSIA MONGOLIA EGYPT LIBYA YEMEN YUGOSLAVIA GREECE
CAMEROON GHANA LIBERIA MAURITANIA AUSTRALIA CANADA SRI LANKA MALDIVES
KENYA MALAWI MALAYSIA NEW ZEALAND NIGER NIGERIA PAKISTAN REPUBLIC OF
SINGAPORE TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO GUYANA JAMAICA DOMINICA MONTSERRAT UGANDA

BURUNDI
GRENADA

UNITED KINGDOM ZAMBIA SIERRA LEONE FIJI HONG KONG MAURITIUS
URUGUAY OMAN QATAR VIETNAM SAN MARINO DJIBOUTI BHUTAN

Jan 12, 1966

Appendix XI STATEMENT SHOWING STATISTICAL DATA REGARDING CONSULAR ACTIVITIES

APPENDIX XI
STATEMENT SHOWING STATISTICAL DATA REGARDING CONSULAR ACTIVITIES
OF MISSIONS/POSTS ABROAD
Passports issued

33,875

Visas issued

1,20,330

Emergency certificates issued

20,628

Cases relating to Estates

3,738

Total revenue on account of Consular
rendered
Repatriations

Financial assistance

Rs. 2,802,221.29

Number
Amount

136
Rs.

Number
Amount

Deportations

20,216.35
23

Rs.

5,265.54
145

<pg139>
GMGIPND-TSW-5 EA-6-6-1967-2000.

Jan 12, 1966

Services


