Annual Report
2008-2009

Ministry of External Affairs

Cover Photo:
Model of Jawahar Lal Nehru Bhawan,
the Headquarters of the Ministry of External Affairs,
under construction on Janpath, New Delhi

Published by:
Policy Planning and Research Division, Ministry of External Affairs, New Delhi
This Annual Report can also be accessed at website:
www.mea.gov.in
Designed and printed by:
Cyberart Informations Pvt. Ltd.
1517 Hemkunt Chambers, 89 Nehru Place, New Delhi 110019
Website: www.cyberart.co.in
Telefax: 0120-4231617

Contents

Introduction and Synopsis

i-xvi

1

India’s Neighbours

1

2

South East Asia and the Pacific

17

3

East Asia

30

4

Eurasia

34

5

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

41

6

Africa (South of Sahara)

54

7

Europe

79

8

The Americas

93

9

United Nations and International Organizations

108

10

Multilateral Economic Relations

125

11

Technical & Economic Cooperation and Development Partnership

132

12

Investment and Technology Promotion

135

13

Policy Planning and Research

136

14

Protocol

139

15

Consular, Passport and Visa Services

145

16

Administration and Establishment

149

17

Coordination

153

18

External Publicity

155

19

Public Diplomacy Division

157

20

Foreign Service Institute

161

21

Indian Council for Cultural Relations

163

22

Indian Council of World Affairs

168

23

Research and Information System for Developing Countries

170

24

Library

175

Appendices

Appendix I: Cadre strength at Headquarters and Missions abroad during 2008-09
(including Posts budgeted by Ministry of Commerce and those ex-cadred etc.)

179

Appendix II: Data on recruitment through direct recruitment, departmental promotion
and Ltd Departmental Examination made in the Ministry along with the reserved
vacancies for April 2008 to November 2008

180

Appendix III: Number of IFS Officers with Proficiency in various languages

181

Appendix IV: Statement showing the number of passport applications received
and passports issued including under Tatkaal Scheme, miscellaneous applications
received and services rendered as well as Revenue (including revenue under
Tatkaal Scheme) and Expenditure figures of the Passport Offices from 1 January 31 December 2008.

182

Appendix V: Finances of the Ministry of External Affairs in 2008-2009

183

Appendix VI: The Major Sectoral Allocations in the 2008-2009 Budget
(Revised Estimate) (Revenue & Capital)

184

Appendix VII: Principal Destinations of India’s Aid & Loan Programmes

185

Appendix VIII: Extracts from C&AG's Report on Ministry of External Affairs

186

Appendix IX: Treaties/Conventions/Agreements Concluded or Renewed by India
with other countries in the year 2008

187

Appendix X: Instruments of Full Powers Issued during the period 1 January 2008
to December 2008

198

Appendix XI: Instruments of Ratification/Accession issued during the period 1 January
2008 to December 2008

200

Appendix XII: Conference/ Seminars/ Study projects organized/ undertaken by
Institutions/ NGOs, which were funded, partially or wholly, by Policy Planning &
Research Division till January 2008

202

Appendix XIII: List of ITEC/SCAAP partner countries

204

Appendix XIV: List of ITEC Training Institutes in India (2008-09)

206

Appendix XV: Lectures/Seminars/Conferences/Bilateral Dialogues/Book Releases
organised by ICWA

207

Appendix XVI: Seminars Organized by RIS

209

Abbreviations

211

Introduction and Synopsis

I

Defence cooperation between the two countries has
contributed to enhancement of mutual trust. China
opened a new Consulate in Kolkata in September and
earlier in June India had opened its Consulate in
Guangzhou.

ndia’s foreign policy seeks to safeguard the country’s
enlightened self-interest. The primary objective of
India’s foreign policy is to promote and maintain a peaceful
and stable external environment in which the domestic
tasks of inclusive economic development and poverty
alleviation can progress rapidly and without obstacles.
Given the high priority attached by the Government of
India to socio-economic development, India has a vital
stake in a supportive external environment both in our
region and globally. India, therefore, seeks a peaceful
periphery and works for good neighbourly relations in its
extended neighbourhood. India’s foreign policy also
recognizes that the issues that are crucial to India’s
transformation are global and require global cooperative
solutions – issues such as climate change and energy and
food security.

India’s partnerships with the major powers became deeper
and stronger as we expanded the scope and depth of
economic and strategic interaction with different
countries, groups and regions including the USA, Russia,
China, Japan, EU, South-East Asia, Central Asia, IBSA,
ASEAN and many others with whom India has developed
a fruitful and active dialogue.
A major development was the signing of the India-US
Civil Nuclear Agreement in October 2008. Along with
the September 6 2008 decision of the Nuclear Supplier
Group enabling its members to engage in civil nuclear
trade and cooperation with India, the agreement marked
the end of thirty years of technology denial in the nuclear
field. Following the signing of this bilateral agreement,
agreements for civil nuclear cooperation have been signed
with France, Russia and Kazakhstan. The India-US
strategic partnership was further consolidated by PM Dr.
Manmohan Singh’s visits to the US in September 2008,
when he had a bilateral meeting with the US President
George W. Bush in Washington, and in November for the
G-20 Summit. The US remained India’s largest trading
partner and source of technology and relations expanded
in every field.

The year 2008-09 was marked by several positive
developments, some significant successes, and by emerging
challenges to India’s foreign policy.
India is committed to close and good neighbourly relations
with all the countries in the Indian sub-continent,
cooperating with them in a wide range of sectors on the
basis of sovereign equality and mutual respect. India shares
a common destiny with its neighbours. Relations with
Bhutan developed further in the year of His Majesty’s
coronation and the introduction of democracy in Bhutan.
India has strongly supported Nepal’s transition to a
democratic polity, and the restoration of democracy in
Bangladesh which is reflected in recent high-level bilateral
visits with these two countries. India has contributed to
the reconstruction and development of Afghanistan.
Apart from maintaining friendly and close bilateral
relations with its neighbours, India has also worked for
the evolution of SAARC into a result oriented
organization that effectively promotes regional integration.

India’s traditional friendship and strategic links with Russia
were consolidated during the period. The president of
the Russian Federation Mr. Dmitry Medvedev paid a state
visit to India in December 2008 for the annual bilateral
Summit. The year 2008 was observed in India as the ‘Year
of Russia’ in which almost 140 events were organized
throughout India. The year 2009 is being observed in
Russia as the ‘Year of India’. India is committed to further
carry forward its strategic relations with Russia. We intend
to build on our strong historical and cultural links with
the Central Asian countries, and to engage more closely
with this region by ensuring that our cooperation with
Central Asia receives greater substance and
diversification.

Bilateral relations with China were further consolidated
during 2008 with PM Dr. Manmohan Singh’s official visit
to China in January and External Affairs Minister Shri
Pranab Mukherji’s visit in June 2008. The situation along
the India-China border remained peaceful while the
boundary question continued to be addressed by the
Special Representatives. The Expert Level Mechanism
on trans-boundary rivers continued to expand its work.
i

Annual Report 2008-2009

India has maintained and intensified its engagement with
the EU, a strategic partner, as well as individual countries
in Europe in diverse fields such as defence and security,
nuclear and space, trade and investment, energy, climate
change, science and technology, culture and education.
The EU is today India’s largest trading partner and one of
our major sources of investment.

institutions better reflect the new realities of the world
order, taking into account the legitimate aspirations of
developing countries and emerging powers.
Simultaneously with these positive developments, India’s
foreign policy in 2008-09 faced major fresh challenges
including the unsettled security situation in India’s
immediate periphery and cross-border terrorism. New
threats to India’s security also emerged.

India continued to attach importance to its traditionally
friendly and cooperative relations with African countries.
A landmark event was the first ever India-Africa Forum
Summit in April 2008 which adopted the Delhi
Declaration and India-Africa Framework for Cooperation.
Both documents together define the future roadmap for
cooperation between India and African countries.
Government of India’s prestigious pan-African e-Network
Project was inaugurated in New Delhi on 26th February,
2009 by EAM Shri Pranab Mukherjee.

The composite dialogue process with Pakistan entered its
fifth round in 2008-09. The dialogue was premised on
Pakistan’s stated commitment that it would not permit
territory under its control to be used to support terrorism
against India in any manner. The dialogue process did
achieve some progress during the year in opening crossLoC trade and liberalizing travel, and in discussing
sensitive and divisive bilateral issues. However, Pakistan’s
inability to implement her commitments as evidenced by
the terrorist attacks from Pakistan on the Indian Embassy
in Kabul in July 2008 and on Mumbai in November 2008
effectively suspended the dialogue process.

India’s efforts to cultivate stronger bonds with countries
of the Latin American and Caribbean region have borne
impressive results in recent years, with cross-sectoral
dialogue at various levels and a framework of
institutionalized mechanisms for mutually beneficial
cooperation. India will work towards closer political ties
with the region and more intensified contacts. India’s
trade and economic interaction with the region has been
substantially enhanced, but there are still enormous
opportunities waiting to be explored and utilized.

The Mumbai attacks were universally condemned by the
international community. Overwhelming evidence was
presented to Pakistan and the world about the
involvement of Pakistan-based terrorists in these attacks.
Pakistan subsequently admitted for the first time that
Pakistani nationals had hatched the conspiracy behind
the attacks and carried them out. However, subsequent
actions by Pakistan were dilatory and obfuscatory, and
are yet to bring the perpetrators to justice or to dismantle
the infrastructure in Pakistan for terrorism against India.

Our cooperation with the countries in West Asia and the
Gulf region today reveal a contemporary nature and
include cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space
including the use of Indian launch vehicles. This region
is also home to nearly five million Indian expatriates who
have contributed significantly to the economic
development of both India and the Gulf region.

The year 2008 also witnessed large scale military
operations in Sri Lanka eliminating the LTTE’s
conventional military capability resulting in a major
humanitarian crisis. India responded to the immediate
humanitarian crisis by sending relief supplies and medical
assistance to civilians and Internally Displaced Persons
(IDPs). A 62-member Field Hospital was deployed in
Pulmoddai to treat civilians seriously affected by the
hostilities. India also continued to stay engaged with Sri
Lanka in support of a negotiated political settlement to
the ethnic problem. As the situation in Sri Lanka enters
a new phase, India will work for a peaceful settlement of
the issues within the framework of a united Sri Lanka
acceptable to all communities including particularly the
Tamils.

India views cooperation with ASEAN, and the countries
in the Asia-Pacific, as an important dimension of its
diplomacy in the 21st century as reflected in India’s “Look
East Policy”.
During the year India significantly expanded its network
of economic and technical cooperation. India is ready to
play a significant role in recently established forums such
as IRC (India-Russia-China), BRIC (Brazil-Russia-IndiaChina) and IBSA (India-Brazil-South Africa). India
continues to engage with groupings such as ASEM, East
Asia Summit, BIMSTEC, Mekong-Ganga Cooperation,
the G-15, and the G-8.

The other major challenge during the year was the
deteriorating international economic situation. As the
international financial crisis became an economic crisis
with recession in major Western economies and markets,
the supportive international environment for India’s
growth changed rapidly. Despite this the Indian economy

With its strong commitment to multilateralism India has
worked to strengthen the United Nations. India has
supported proposals for the reform of the UNSC and
revitalization of the UNGA. India would like to see global
ii

Introduction and Synopsis

grew by 6.7% in 2008-09, and continues to be a factor of
growth and stability in the world economy. The prospect,
however, remains for a difficult international environment
for some time to come. India participated actively in
international efforts to address the crisis, such as the G20, to see that the concerns of developing countries were
addressed. In these efforts we tried to ensure that credit
flows to developing countries were restored, that the
benefits of economic stimulus were widely spread, and
that measures to tackle the crisis were not protectionist,
restricting the free flow of goods, services and persons.
India also sought to ensure that international decisionmaking on global economic issues is democratized to
reflect present realities.

with Bangladesh on a broad spectrum of bilateral issues
during the year. EAM Shri Pranab Mukherjee visited
Bangladesh in February 2009, after the Awami League
led Grand Alliance won an overwhelming majority in the
general elections of December 2008 and formed the
government under the premiership of Sheikh Hasina. The
other high level visits included visits of Bangladesh Army
Chief, Gen. Moeen from 24 February – 1 March 2008,
MoS for Commerce and Power Jairam Ramesh to Dhaka
in October 2008 and Chief of Army Staff, Gen. Deepak
Kapoor.
India took several initiatives, many unilaterally, to bring
the two countries closer. They included restarting of the
passenger train service “Maitree Express” between Kolkata
and Dhaka after 43 years. India gave substantial assistance
to Bangladesh to overcome damages caused by natural
disasters like cyclone. India started providing duty free
access to exports from LDCs in the SAARC including
Bangladesh from 1 January 2008 (except some items on
India’s sensitive list). India has undertaken a project to
construct Kalabhaban for the Department of Theatre and
Music, University of Dhaka. As a move to check the
activities of Indian Insurgent Groups (IIGs) on
Bangladeshi soil, the two sides revived the Joint Working
Group.

As the year ended, it was evident that cooperative global
solutions are required to the major international issues
which will affect India’s future, such as the world economic
crisis, international terrorism, general and nuclear
disarmament, energy security, food security, and
sustainable development. As a responsible power, India
remains an active and involved participant in the
international effort to work out these solutions and will
contribute to their success.

Neighbours
Afghanistan: Notwithstanding a significant deterioration
in the security situation, impinging directly on us with
the attack on the Indian Embassy in Kabul in July 2008,
we remained at the forefront of international efforts to
assist Afghanistan in building a stable democratic and
pluralistic society. The Zaranz-Delaram road giving
Afghanistan access to the sea was formally inaugurated
by EAM Shri Pranab Mukherjee and President Karzai on
22nd January, 2009. In the implementation of its pledged
commitments progress has been made in a range of areas–
education, health, power, infrastructure, humanitarian
assistance, and capacity building. The implementation of
the scheme of ICCR Scholarships and ITEC training
programmes for Afghan nationals and the execution of
community based, small development projects in the fields
of agriculture, rural development, sanitation, vocational
training, etc. is also progressing satisfactorily and plays a
significant role in demonstrating, at a popular level, the
close and friendly relations between the two countries.
India continued to contribute for the Afghan
Reconstruction Trust Fund and pledged a sum of US $ 1
million to the UNDP election fund. We have also pledged
an additional US $ 450 million (over the US$ 750 million
earlier committed) to effectively meet the requirements
of our ongoing and future projects. President Karzai visited
India in August 2008 and again in January, 2009

Bhutan: India and Bhutan continued to share uniquely
warm and cordial relations, which were further deepened
during the year through regular high level interactions.
The year also witnessed the coronation of the 5th King of
Bhutan. PM Dr. Manmohan Singh visited Bhutan from
16-17 May, 2008 during which he addressed the first
session of the democratically elected Parliament. During
the visit, PM announced that India will double the target
of hydropower development in Bhutan to 10,000 MW
for export to India by 2020; Government of India’s
assistance for construction of the first rail link between
India and Bhutan, and establishment of the prestigious
Nehru-Wangchuck scholarships for Bhutanese students.
Prime Minister of Bhutan, Lyonchhen Jigmi Y. Thinley,
paid a State Visit to India from 14-17 July, 2008 and again
visited India from 12-14 November, 2008 to participate
in the 2nd BIMSTEC Summit in New Delhi. President
of India Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil accompanied by
EAM Shri Pranab Mukherjee paid a State Visit to Bhutan
from 5-8 November, 2008 as Chief Guest at the formal
coronation of His Majesty Jigme Khesar Namgyel
Wangchuck, the King of Bhutan.
Bhutan celebrated 2008 as the Golden Jubilee Year of the
visit of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru to Bhutan in 1958. A
Parliamentary delegation from Bhutan visited India during
February 2009 and had interaction with their counterparts

Bangladesh : India continued to constructively engage
iii

Annual Report 2008-2009

Tehran from 28-30 July 2008 to attend the 15th NAM
Ministerial Conference and thereafter for the India-Iran
XVth Joint Commission meeting from 31st October – 2
November, 2008. The VIth Annual Foreign Office
Consultations at the level of Foreign Secretary were held
in New Delhi from 17-18 December 2008.

in India. We are committed to extending full support to
Bhutan for the consolidation of Democratic
Constitutional Monarchy in Bhutan.
China: This has been an important year for India-China
relations. Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh paid an
official visit to the People’s Republic of China from 13-15
January 2008. The leaders of India and China resolved
to develop the Strategic & Cooperative Partnership for
Peace and Prosperity between the two countries. They
also reiterated their firm commitment to resolving all
outstanding differences through peaceful negotiations,
while ensuring that such differences are not allowed to
affect the positive development of bilateral relations. The
two Prime Ministers signed “A Shared Vision for the 21st
Century” which reflects the aspirations of the two
countries to cooperate with each other on areas of mutual
interest on regional and multilateral affairs.

Maldives : Bilateral relations between India and Maldives
continued to be close and friendly. Both the countries
remained engaged in further strengthening their friendly
relations through high level exchanges and implementing
various developmental projects. The newly elected
President Mr Mohamed Nasheed paid a State visit to India
from 23-25 December 2008, during which an agreement
on Standby Credit facility of US$100 million to Maldives
and an Air Services Agreement were signed between the
two countries. MoS for Commerce, Shri Jairam Ramesh
visited Maldives from 29-31 January 2008. In January and
February 2009 Defence Minister and Minister of Health
and Family of Maldives visited India to enhance
cooperation in security related issues and health
respectively.

The Foreign Ministers of India and China also exchanged
visits in June 2008 and September 2008 respectively. The
new Consulates General in Guangzhou and in Kolkata
were formally inaugurated during these visits. Bilateral
trade in the calendar year 2008 reached US$ 51.8 billion,
which is close to the target of US$ 60 billion by 2010 that
has been set by the two Prime Ministers. Cooperation
and exchanges in the area of defence relations also
continued with the holding of the 2nd Joint Military
Exercises and the 2nd Annual Defence Dialogue in India
in December 2008. Functional exchanges on economic
and trade issues, civil aviation, youth affairs and in other
areas have continued to grow.
The Special
Representatives of the two countries met in September
2008 for the 12th round of discussions on the India-China
Boundary Question. India provided humanitarian relief
assistance worth US$ 5 million to China in the aftermath
of the devastating earthquake that struck Sichuan
province in May 2008. The two countries have also
consulted with each other on important global issues
including the international financial crisis and climate
change.

Myanmar: Relations with Myanmar continued to develop
further during the period and become truly multifaceted.
India was one of the first countries to rush emergency
relief assistance to Myanmar in the aftermath of Cyclone
Nargis in May 2008. PM of Myanmar Thein Sein visited
India for the BIMSTEC Summit in November 2008 and
Vice President of India Dr M Hamid Ansari visited
Myanmar from 5-8 February 2009.
During Vice President’s visit agreements for setting up an
Industrial Training Centre by HMIT (I) & a Centre for
English Language Training were signed. Engagement in
the economic and commercial sphere strengthened
considerably. The Bilateral Investment Promotion &
Protection Agreement (BIPPA) was signed. The opening
of a new trade point at Nagaland border with Myanmar
was agreed to. Institutional mechanisms to check the
activities of Indian Insurgent Groups in Myanmar were
developed. India also remained committed to provide
assistance in developing infrastructure within Myanmar,
including the Kaladan Multimodel Transit Transport
Project, and strengthen cooperation in oil and natural
gas exploration, power sector, manufacturing, etc.

Iran : The momentum in India-Iran bilateral relations
was maintained in 2008-09 through regular exchanges of
delegations in different fields as also by high level visits.
The impetus provided by high level discussions have
contributed to enhanced bilateral cooperation in energy,
trade & commerce, investment, culture and transit related
issues as well as cooperation in regional and international
issues of mutual interest. A shared commitment to
strengthening bilateral relations and working for peace
and stability in the region has been reiterated at the
highest levels by both governments. The President of Iran
Dr. Mahomud Ahmadinejad paid a visit to New Delhi on
29 April 2008. EAM Shri Pranab Mukherjee visited

Nepal: India extended all possible support to the
Government and people of Nepal in consolidating the
peaceful democratic transition. India stands ready to assist
Nepal’s transition to a democratic, stable, peaceful and
prosperous State. The year witnessed several high level
bilateral visits. Prime Minister Rt. Hon. Pushpa Kamal
Dahal ‘Prachanda’s first official visit abroad to India from
September 14-18, 2008 provided broad political direction
iv

Introduction and Synopsis

to forge a 21st century relationship with India. During
the visit, the Prime Minister held talks with PM Prachanda
and conveyed our Commitment to support Nepal’s
democratic and economic transformation. Drafting a new
constitution and conclusion of the peace process are
priorities for the Government of Nepal. We expressed
out commitment to assist Government of Nepal in these
tasks. As agreed by both sides, several high level bilateral
consultation mechanisms were also reactivated.

were involved in the terrorist attacks on Mumbai. Pakistan
also sought further information and material relating to
the investigation. EAM Shri Pranab Mukherjee termed
this a positive development in a suo moto statement on
13 February in Parliament. On 13 March 2009, the
Government of India provided detailed responses and
material to the Pakistan High Commissioner in New Delhi
to all 30 questions raised by Pakistan which was
acknowledged by Pakistan Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

Promotion of investor-friendly business environment in
Nepal would help in realization of the potential for major
expansion of Indian investment in key areas like
hydropower, agriculture, tourism and infrastructure in
Nepal for mutual benefit.

Despite the above developments and despite high-level
statements from Pakistan promising cooperation regarding
the Mumbai attack, in terms of actual action taken the
response has been disappointing. As a result, there has
been a sharp deterioration in bilateral relations.

EAM Shri Pranab Mukherjee visited Nepal in November
2008 to discuss issues of mutual interest. Foreign Secretary
visited Nepal from February 17-18, 2009 to follow up on
the agreements reached during PM Prachanda’s visit to
India and EAM’s visit to Nepal.

Responding to the announcement of the new US strategy
for Afghanistan and Pakistan, MEA spokesperson on 30
March 2009 welcomed the very “clear expression of will
to carry through the struggle against extremism in
Afghanistan and its roots in Pakistan” and expressed
India’s “readiness to play a constructive role as a
responsible power in defeating extremism of all kinds.”

Pakistan: The Composite Dialogue Process with Pakistan
entered its 5th round in 2008-09. The Dialogue had been
premised since its resumption in 2004 ,on the commitment
made on 6 January 2004, that Pakistan would not permit
territory under its control to be used to support terrorism
in any form. Notwithstanding some achievements during
the year in segments of the Composite Dialogue Process,
terrorism and non-implementation of the 6 January 2004
commitments by Pakistan has eroded the fundamental
premise of the Dialogue process. Terrorist attacks in India
and on the Indian Embassy in Kabul in July 2008, increase
in ceasefire violations and continued infiltration across the
LoC placed a strain on the dialogue process in particular
and India-Pakistan relations in general. The terrorist attack
on Mumbai on 26 November 2008 and concrete evidence
of the involvement of elements in Pakistan in the attack
led to a pause in the dialogue process.

Sri Lanka: In Sri Lanka, the military conflict in the North
escalated in 2008 leading to a major humanitarian crisis
and the eventual military defeat of the LTTE. The
situation in the North and the plight of Tamil civilians
displaced and affected by the conflict were important
issues in the bilateral discourse between India and Sri
Lanka. EAM visited Colombo on January 27, 2009 and
held discussions with President Mahinda Rajapaksa. This
was preceded by Foreign Secretary Shivshankar Menon’s
visit to Sri Lanka on 16-17 January, 2009.
In response to the emerging humanitarian crisis in Sri
Lanka, India sent large-scale emergency relief assistance
including family packs for IDPs, medicines and setting up
of a 62-member Emergency Field Hospital in Northern
Sri Lanka. India also remained engaged with Sri Lanka in
support of a peacefully negotiated political settlement
within a united Sri Lanka.

After the Mumbai attack, the Ministry undertook several
steps both bilaterally with Pakistan and at international
fora to obtain Pakistan’s cooperation in bringing the
Pakistan-based perpetrators to justice and to ensure that
such acts do not recur. As a result, the United Nations
Al-Qaeda and Taliban Sanctions Committee listed
individual entities based in Pakistan including leaders of
the Lashkar-e-Taiba under Security Council Resolution
1267. The Jamat-ud-Daawa was also listed as an alias of
the Lashkar-e-Taiba. On 12 February 2009, Indian High
Commissioner in Islamabad was formally informed of
Pakistan’s response to the dossier that India had made
available on 5 January linking the terrorist attacks on
Mumbai to perpetrators in Pakistan. In their response,
Pakistani authorities admitted that elements in Pakistan

Bilateral exchanges continued to strengthen during this
period. Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh and EAM
Shri Pranab Mukherjee visited Sri Lanka for the 15th
SAARC Summit held from 2-3 August, 2008. Trade and
investment linkages were further consolidated. India
remained Sri Lanka’s largest trading partner in 2008,
bilateral trade worth US$ 3.27 billion. India also emerged
as the second largest investor in Sri Lanka in 2008.

South East Asia and the Pacific
India continued to pursue closer relations with South East
Asia and the Pacific region during the year as envisioned
in its ‘Look East Policy’. With some countries in the region,
v

Annual Report 2008-2009

we stepped up relations to the strategic level, while
diversifying and strengthening relations with others.
Regular exchange of high level visits at bilateral level and
interactions at regional and multilateral fora contributed
to a higher degree of engagement among leaders in the
region to help develop renewed dynamism in India’s
relations with these countries. In the last five years, Prime
Ministers, Presidents and Ministers of several countries
in the region visited India. Our leaders also visited various
countries in the region. These visits and signing of several
framework agreements have significantly contributed
to India’s growing relations with countries in the
region.

Declaration on Security Cooperation. The 2nd Strategic
Dialogue between the Foreign Ministers was held in
August 2008 when the Foreign Minister of Japan visited
India. Ministerial level dialogues were also held on
economic and trade matters and on energy.
India was the largest recipient of Japanese Official
Development Assistance (Yen 236.047 billion or Rs
11,802.4 crores approximately) in FY 2008-09. Steady
progress was made on the flagship projects jointly initiated
by the two countries. On the Western Dedicated Freight
Corridor Project, the Japanese side has agreed to provide
financial assistance of approximately 450 billion Yen as a
loan for the Phase-I, and have expressed their
commitment to work with India for early finalization of
the assistance for the entire Western Freight Corridor. On
the Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor initiative, the two
sides have held meetings of the Joint Task Force to finalize
the contours of the project. We have an annual calendar
for defence exchanges. The two sides have also continued
to discuss a Comprehensive Economic Partnership
Agreement, with the objective of concluding a mutually
beneficial and high quality agreement. Both sides are also
engaged in discussions on Japanese assistance for a new
IIT at Hyderabad. Defence and functional exchanges have
also emerged as an important area for bilateral
cooperation.

The bilateral trade and investment between India and
countries in ASEAN have considerably increased,
touching about US$ 40 billion in 2007 – 08. India ASEAN Free Trade Agreement (FTA) in Goods has been
successfully negotiated and is ready for signature. With
the implementation of India-ASEAN FTA, the trade with
ASEAN countries will cross the target of US$ 50 billion
by 2010. Meanwhile, bilateral FTA is being negotiated
with several countries in the region, the conclusion of
which would significantly enhance the two-way trade.
The trade with Australia also crossed US$ 10 billion.
For the socio-economic development of countries in the
region, India continued to provide assistance to
Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam and Philippines in the form of
grants, soft loans and credit lines and training courses
under ITEC Scheme. As a Dialogue Partner of the Pacific
Islands Forum (PIF) countries, India has been engaging
with Pacific Island countries by providing regional
assistance in capacity building and social and economic
programmes and sustainable development. In response,
India succeeded in eliciting support from majority of the
countries in the region on issues of India’s interest, such
as India’s candidature for UN Security Council
membership, Commonwealth, civil nuclear cooperation
etc.

ROK: Our relations with the Republic of Korea have
steadily grown. Former President A.P.J. Abdul Kalam
attended the Inauguration Ceremony of the new President
of the Republic of Korea, Lee Myung-bak. Prime Minister
Dr. Manmohan Singh met the new President in the
margins of the G-8 Summit Meeting in Japan in July 2008.
The two countries are negotiating a Comprehensive
Economic Partnership Agreement, that they hope to
conclude in FY 2009-10. During the year 2008-09
important cooperation also took place in other areas.
Mongolia: Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh met the
President of Mongolia in the margins of the 7th ASEM
Summit Meeting in Beijing in October 2008. The Defence
Minister of Mongolia visited India in February 2009.
Bilateral cooperation on economic and trade matters,
defence, education, culture and in the training of
Mongolians under the ITEC programme have continued
to develop during the year. India also provided Mongolia
with 5000 MT each of rice and sugar as humanitarian
assistance in view of our very friendly relations with that
country.

India’s growing profile has attracted countries in the South
East Asia and Pacific region to foster closer engagement
at the regional and multilateral fora such as ASEAN, EAS,
BIMSTEC, MGC and ARF.

East Asia
Japan: India-Japan relations, which have expanded and
broadened in recent years, continue to undergo a
significant and qualitative shift. Prime Minister Dr.
Manmohan Singh paid an official visit to Japan on 22-23
October 2008 for the Annual India- Japan Summit
Meeting. The two Prime Ministers signed a Joint
Statement on the Advancement of the Strategic & Global
Partnership between India and Japan and a Joint

DPRK: Relations between India and DPRK continue to
be cordial with a focus on humanitarian assistance
and exchanges in the areas of culture, sports and
education.
vi

Introduction and Synopsis

Eurasia

from 16 - 18 February for DEFEXPO India 2008 in New
Delhi. He met the Defence Minister on 16 February to
discuss bilateral defence co-operation. Indian army chief
General Deepak Kapoor visited Belarus from 12 - 15
March, 2008. Foreign Minister of the Kyrgyz Republic,
Mr. Ednan Karabaev visited India from 4-6 February, 2008
to review bilateral relations and discuss regional issues of
mutual interest. He met the Ministers of External Affairs,
Commerce & Industry, Human Resource Development
and Culture & Tourism.

India maintained friendly and cordial relations with
Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, Central Asian and Caucasian
countries during the year through visits, conclusion of
bilateral agreements, periodic bilateral and multilateral
engagements, cooperation programmes, cultural events
and other initiatives. Some of the important bilateral
engagements during the year included the State visits of
the President of the Russian Federation Mr. Dmitry A.
Medvedev to India in December 2008, the President of
Kazakhstan Mr. Nursultan Nazarbayev as Chief Guest at
the Republic Day celebrations 2009 and visit of the Vice
President of India to Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan in
April 2008.

During 2008, Vice President (VP) Shri M. Hamid Ansari’s
visit to Kazakhstan from 6 - 10 April, 2008 gave a major
boost to India-Kazakhstan relations. During his visit, VP
met with the President and Prime Minister of Kazakhstan
and addressed the Senate. Kazakhstan President Mr.
Nursultan Nazarbayev paid a State visit to India from 23
- 26 January 2009 and was the Chief Guest at the Republic
Day celebrations - the first time that a leader from a
Central Asian country was accorded this honour. With
another important Central Asian Country, Uzbekistan,
our relations progressed with holding of Foreign Office
consultations in New Delhi on 1st August 2008, and
meeting of the 8th Session of the India-Uzbekistan InterGovernmental Commission on trade, economic, scientific
and cultural cooperation in September 2008. The Uzbek
Minister of Economy Mr. B. Khodjaev had visited New
Delhi from 16 - 17 September 2008 for the 8th Session of
the IGC.

India and Russia continue to further consolidate their
strategic partnership. Co-operation in defence, space and
nuclear energy has intensified. During President
Medvedev’s visit to India from 4-5 December 2008 for
the annual bilateral Summit, 9 important agreements were
signed apart from a Joint Declaration. The agreements
include an Inter-Governmental Agreement on
Cooperation in the construction of additional nuclear
power plant units at Kudankulam site as well as in the
construction of Russian designed nuclear power plants at
new sites, and a MoU between ISRO and Russian Federal
Space Agency on joint activities in the field of human
space flight programme. From the Russian side, Defence
Minister Mr. Anatoly Serdyukov visited India from 28-30
September 2008, Foreign Minister Mr. Sergey Lavrov
visited on 20 October, and Deputy Prime Minister of
Russia, Mr. Alexander Zhukov, visited India to co-chair
the 14 th Session of the India-Russia IGC on Trade,
Economic, Scientific, Technological and Cultural
Cooperation. The year 2008 was celebrated as “Year of
Russia” in India with almost 140 events organised in
different cities of India, and similarly, the year 2009 is
being celebrated as the “Year of India” in Russia.

The Gulf , West Asia and North Africa
India maintained its historical and traditionally cordial
relations and cooperation with the countries in the Gulf
region. Gulf countries together provide 70% of our total
crude oil requirement and about 4.5 million Indians live
and work in the region, remitting more than US$ 10 billion
annually. The year witnessed several high level visits which
underlined the importance of the region in our
relationship. The most important was PM Dr. Manmohan
Singh’s visit to Qatar and Oman in November 2008 which
opened new areas for bilateral cooperation. In Qatar, PM
signed two documents relating to defence cooperation and
security as well as law enforcement matters. In Oman,
an MoU on manpower and another for establishing IndiaOman Joint Investment Fund were signed. EAM Shri
Pranab Mukherjee accompanied by MoS Shri E. Ahamed
and Secretary (East) paid an official visit to Muscat from
13-14 January 2008. During the visit, EAM called on
Deputy PM for Council of Ministers and Mr. Yousef bin
Alwai bin Abdullah, Minister responsible for Foreign
Affairs of Oman.

Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of
Turkmenistan, Mr. Rashid Meredov led a high level
delegation to India from 20 - 22 January 2008. Mr.
Meredov co-chaired the 2 nd Session of the IndiaTurkmenistan Intergovernmental Commission for Trade,
Economic, Scientific and Technological Co-operation
along with for MoS for External Affairs, Shri E. Ahamed.
During the visit Mr. Meredov called on Vice President
and PM and also met the EAM Shri Pranab Mukherjee.
Vice-President Shri M. Hamid Ansari paid an official visit
to Turkmenistan from 4-6 April 2008 and that was his
first foreign visit abroad as Vice President. Minister of
Petroleum and Natural Gas Shri Murli Deora visited
Turkmenistan in November 2008. Defence Minister of
Belarus Colonel General Leonid Maltsev visited India

Dr. Majeed Mohsin Al Alawi Labour, Minister of Bahrain,
visited India on 25 April 2008 and discussed with Minister
vii

Annual Report 2008-2009

of Overseas Indian Affairs, the MoU on Labour and
Manpower Development. Dr. Fatima Bint Al Balooshi,
Minister of Social Development, Bahrain, visited India
from 17-21 August 2008 and held talks with the Minister
of Textiles and Minister of State for Women & Child
Development among others.
MoS Shri E. Ahamed visited Kuwait from 29-31 January
2008. During the visit, MoS called on the Kuwaiti Prime
Minister. A wide range of bilateral and regional issues,
including the revised format for Labour Contract to be
signed between the Kuwaiti Employer and Indian Worker
were discussed in his meetings with the Deputy PM /
Foreign Minister and Minister of Social Affairs in Labour.
The year, marked by several high-level visits, witnessed
strengthened bilateral relations with Saudi Arabia. Saudi
Foreign Minister Prince Saud Al Faisal visited India twice
in 2008, in February when he called on PM Dr. Manmohan
Singh and EAM Shri Pranab Mukherjee and on 26
December when he met Vice President, EAM and NSA.
EAM paid a two-day visit to Saudi Arabia from 19-20
April 2008 and called on Saudi King Abdullah bin Abdul
Aziz Al Saud and Governor of Riyadh Prince Salman bin
Abdul Aziz Al Saud. MoS Shri E. Ahamed visited Saudi
Arabia on 17 April 2008 and signed the Haj agreement
with Saudi Haj Minister Dr. Fouad Al-Farsy. Finance
Minister along with Petroleum and Natural Gas Minister
attended the Oil Summit, held in Jeddah on 22 June 2008
at the behest of Saudi King Abdullah.
The year 2008 also was the consolidation in the friendly
bilateral ties between India and UAE. HE Shaikha Lubna
Al Qasimi, Minister of Foreign Trade, visited India on 25
April and was awarded “Woman Achiever of the Year”
by FICCI. The 1st ever India-UAE Joint Air Forces exercise
took place in September 2008 in Abu Dhabi. EAM visited
UAE in May 2008 and met both the Foreign Minister
and Crown Prince.
India’s engagement with West Asia and North Africa
was cemented through a series of high level interactions
that included State visits to India by President Bashar
Al-Assad of Syria, President Mohammed Hosny Mubarak
of Egypt and President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian
National Authority. India’s dialogue with Egypt was also
taken forward during an official visit by EAM to that
country in July 2008. India’s steadfast support for the
Palestinian cause was underlined during the State visit of
President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian National
Authority (PNA) during which, in the presence of the
Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh, President Abbas
laid the foundation stone of the Palestinian Embassy
building in New Delhi, a gift of the Government and

people of India, and construction of which is nearing
completion. Implementation of PM’s offer of $10 million
as budgetary support to the PNA was completed during
the year.
India strongly condemned the Israeli incursion into the
Gaza Strip that began in December 2008. India’s varied
relations with the Arab world were institutionalized
through a Memorandum of Cooperation with the League
of Arab States signed in December 2008 during the visit
of the Secretary General of the League, H.E. Mr. Amre
Moussa to New Delhi.
India contributed towards development of Iraq’s human
resources by providing 100 slots to Iraq under Indian
Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) programme
to train its officials in various training and professional
institutions all over India. IOC provided training in India
to 228 Iraqi oil officials. On February 26, 2009, President
Jalal Talabani of Iraq transited through India and tried to
encourage our participation in the reconstruction and
development of Iraq, especially in the power sector. During
the meeting with Secretary (East), he expressed a keen
desire for encouraging Indian companies and personally
assured fullest support to them in Iraq.

Africa
The first India-Africa Forum Summit held in New Delhi
from 8-9 April 2008 built upon the foundations of the
historical relationship that has existed between the two,
and created a roadmap for a structured interaction,
engagement and cooperation in coming years. The
Summit renewed India’s commitment to Africa. The two
historic documents, the Delhi Declaration and the India
Africa Framework of Cooperation were adopted at the end
of the Summit. The Delhi Declaration is a political
document that covers issues of bilateral, regional and
international interests to India and Africa, including our
common positions on UN reforms, climate change, WTO
and international terrorism, etc. The India Africa
Framework for Cooperation spells out the agreed areas of
cooperation. Prime Minister announced a substantial
increase in the existing lines of credit to Africa to US $
5.4 billion over the next five years, and a separate grant
of US $ 500 million for projects in the areas of capacity
building and human resource development. The Heads
of State/Government from Africa who attended the India
Africa Forum Summit included Mr. Jakaya Mrisho
Kikwete, President of Tanzania, Prof. Alpha Oumar
Konare, Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange, President of Congo, Mr. John
Agyekum Kufuor, President of Ghana, Mr. Abdoulaye
Wade, President of Senegal, Mr. Thabo Mbeki, President
of South Africa, Mr. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President
viii

Introduction and Synopsis

Europe

of Uganda, Mr. Tertius Zongo, Prime Minister of Burkina
Faso and Mr. Meles Zenawi, Prime Minister of Ethiopia.

PM Gordon Brown of UK visited India to attend the 4th
India UK Summit which took place in New Delhi from
20 - 21 January 2008. Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan
Singh met Mr. Gordon Brown again in London on the
sidelines of the G-20 Summit on 1 April 2009. Mr.
Nicholas Sarkozy, President of France, accompanied by a
high level Ministerial and business delegation, visited India
from 25 - 26 January 2008 and was the Chief Guest at the
Republic Day parade. Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan
Singh visited Paris for the India-France Bilateral Summit
on 30 September 2008. Both PM and President Nicolas
Sarkozy reaffirmed the Strategic Partnership between
India and France and their commitment to further
strengthen cooperation in core areas such as civil nuclear
cooperation, space and defence. Germany continued to
be the India’s largest trading partner within the EU. Dr.
Frank Walter Steinmeier, German Federal Chancellor and
Minister of Foreign Affairs, visited India, from 19 - 21
November 2008. Recently, scientific and technological
cooperation has emerged as one of the key elements in
the Indo-German interaction. Bilateral visits between
India and Spain at the ministerial level continued during
the period, the most notable being the visits by Indian
Ministers of Finance, Health and Family Welfare and
Petroleum and Natural Gas, to Spain. India continued to
strengthen bilateral relations with Italy at different levels.
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh met PM Mr. Silvio
Berlusconi on 24 October 2008 on the sidelines of the
ASEM Summit in Beijing.

There were several other high-level visits from Africa
including Ethiopian Prime Minister, Meles Zenawi, Mr.
Paul Kagame, President of Rwanda and Dr Boni Yayi,
President of the Republic of Benin. Regular exchanges
continued at the ministerial and official levels.
India extended several lines of credit to African countries
for specific infrastructure development projects. Both the
TEAM-9 and ECOWAS have fully utilized the lines of
credit extended to them for projects in different sectors,
ranging from agriculture, health, rural electrification,
transport and power, which are in the various stages of
implementation. Our ongoing political and economic
engagement with the Africa Union Commission continued
to strengthen, as also our institutional cooperation with
regional organisations such as COMESA, SADC, ECCAS
and EAC. The Aid to Africa budget of the Ministry was
used for other cooperation programmes.
India increased ITEC slots for African countries from 279
to 575, while the Indian Council for Cultural Relations,
in collaboration with MEA, increased the number of
scholarships from 21 to 66.
Two successful India-Africa Project Partnership Conclaves
were organised by the CII with the support of the Ministry
during the year, the first in Dar-es-Salaam on 28 August
2008 and the second in New Delhi from 22-24 March
2009. FICCI also organised the India-Africa Business
Partnership Summit in New Delhi on 19-20 January. All
these events witnessed a high-level of participation from
Indian and African businesses.

India has traditionally enjoyed warm, friendly and close
relations with the Nordic countries as well as those of
Central and Eastern Europe. Efforts to diversify and
deepen India’s friendly relations with these countries were
pursued assiduously. The potential for high technology
manufacturing in India, cooperation in petroleum, nonconventional energy, bio-technology, nano-technology
and engineering, together with areas like deep-sea fishing
and food processing raised new possibilities for
collaboration. Ministerial and official interactions with
these countries continued. Mr. Kostas Karamanlis, Prime
Minister of the Hellenic Republic visited India from 10 13 January 2008. During his visit, he called on the
President, Vice President and met the Prime Minister,
EAM and Leader of Opposition in Lok Sabha. Mr. Ferenc
Gyurcsany, Prime Minister of Hungary visited India from
16 - 19 January 2008. During his visit, he called on the
President, and met the Prime Minister, UPA Chairperson,
Leader of Opposition in Lok Sabha, Ministers of External
Affairs, Petroleum & Gas and Commerce & Industry. From
Sweden, Trade Minister, Public Health Minister, Minister
for Migration and Asylum Policy and Crown Prince visited

All these initiatives have significantly enhanced India’s
engagement with countries in Sub-Saharan Africa and
have come at a time of increasing private sector
engagement in Africa. Two-way trade has increased from
US $ 5.5 billion in 2001-02 to around US $ 36 billion in
2008-09 representing an almost seven-fold increase in as
many years. Bilateral investment is approximately US $
17 billion.
India announced the opening of resident Missions in Mali
and Niger. The Gambia, Gabon and Madagascar opened
their Missions in New Delhi and Mali announced its
intentions to open one soon.
Government of India’s prestigious Pan-African e-Network
Project was formally inaugurated on 26 February 2009 by
the External Affairs Minister Shri Pranab Mukherjee in
New Delhi for eleven countries, out of the 35 countries
that have signed the agreement to join the Project.
ix

Annual Report 2008-2009

were held in New Delhi on 08 September and 23 May
2008, respectively.

India during the period. The Standing Committee on
Foreign Affairs from the Swedish Parliament paid an
official visit to India in January 2009. Bilateral visits
between India and the Czech Republic included the visit
by MoS [AS] Shri Anand Sharma and Commerce &
Industry Minister Shri Kamal Nath and from the Czech
side, the visit by their Industry and Trade Minister and
the Chief of the General Staff of Czech Armed Forces.
Former President of India Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam visited
Finland in April 2008 to attend a seminar there and
President of Finland Mrs. Tarja Halonen visited India from
5 - 7 February 2009 to attend the Delhi Sustainable
Development Summit. With Poland, there were regular
visits at various levels. General Deepak Kapoor, Chief of
Army Staff, paid a goodwill visit to Poland in March 2008.
Following the visit of Anders Fogh Rasmussen, Prime
Minister of Denmark, to India from 4 - 8 February 2008,
bilateral relations between the two countries were further
strengthened. There was increased interaction between
India and Turkey during 2008-09. The Prime Minister of
Turkey Recep Tayyip Erdogan paid an official visit to India
from 21 - 24 November 2008.

The EU is India’s largest trading partner. Bilateral trade
crossed Euro 55 billion in 2007 and is targeted this to
reach Euro 100 billion in 2013. India and Europe have
been witnessing a very dynamic investment relationship.

The Americas
The year 2008 was marked by an intensification of the
bilateral engagement between India and the USA. The
signing of the Indo-US civil nuclear Agreement in
Washington on 10 October 2008 was a culmination of
the civil nuclear energy initiative announced during the
visit of Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh to the USA
in July 2005. India successfully concluded an India-specific
Safeguards Agreement with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) on 1 August 2008 which paved
the way for the USA to approach the 45-nation Nuclear
Suppliers Group (NSG) for an adjustment of the NSG
guidelines to enable its members to enter into civil nuclear
cooperation and trade with India. The formal signing of
the Agreement by External Affairs Minister, and his US
counterpart Secretary of State, Dr Condoleeza Rice took
place on 10 October 2008 in Washington. The agreement
is a symbol of the transformed nature of the bilateral
dialogue and has added strategic content to the
relationship. It has also opened up vast opportunities for
bilateral, economic and high technology engagement.

EU: India and the EU (European Union) are indispensable
poles in the emerging multi-polar structures. Exchange
of high level visits between India and Europe were
maintained and summit-level interactions took place.
India’s engagement with EU intensified and diversified in
fields such as defense & security, nuclear and space, trade
and investment, energy, food security, climate change,
science and technology and culture, education. Special
envoys were sent to all the EU countries seeking support
for waiver in the NSG for Civil Nuclear Cooperation with
USA. Following the Mumbai terrorist attacks, leaders of
EU and member States sent messages and made telephone
calls condemning the attacks, conveying condolences for
the victims and reaffirming solidarity in the fight against
terrorism. Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh visited
Marseille, France, for the 9th India-EU Summit on 29
September 2008. PM had discussions with EU/French
President Nicolas Sarkozy and European Commission
President Jose Manuel Barroso. The Summit, inter alia,
reviewed India-EU Joint Action Plan of 2005 and issued
a revised plan extending the Strategic Partnership to new
areas. It also issued a Joint Work Programme (JWP) for
Indo-EU Cooperation in Energy, Clean Development and
Climate Change. PM also attended the India-EU Business
Summit titled, ‘New Synergies for Partnership’ which was
held on 30 September in Paris. The 19th India-EU Troika
Foreign Ministerial Meeting was held on 30 May 2008 in
New Delhi and the India-EU Strategic Dialogue was held
on 05 December in New Delhi. In addition, 4th Round of
the India-EU Energy Panel Meeting and the 11th Meeting
of the India-EU Joint Working Group on Consular Issues

While economic and commercial ties, defense cooperation
and people to people contacts were other priority areas of
focus in the bilateral agenda, Indo-US consultations on
global issues of common concern and the dialogues, work
plans and implementation groups for bilateral initiatives
in energy, education, science and technology, health,
space, agriculture among others, continued to add depth
and strengthen the Indo-US linkages.
Several high-level visits took place during the period. PM
Dr. Manmohan Singh visited Washington in September
2008. In his meeting with President Bush the two leaders
reviewed the entire gamut of bilateral relations and
expressed satisfaction on the achievements and progress
made on the bilateral agenda that was set out in the Joint
Statements of July 2005, issued during PM’s visit to
Washington and of March 2006, issued during the visit of
President Bush to India.
US Secretary of State Dr. Condoleeza Rice visited New
Delhi in October 2008 and held discussions with EAM
Shri Pranab Mukherjee. The latter visited Washington
DC from 24-25 March 2008. He met his counterpart and
also called on President George Bush. He interacted with
a select group of scholars at the Carnegie Foundation, a
x

Introduction and Synopsis

Washington based think tank. PM also visited
Washington in November 2008 to attend the G-20
Summit.

company (PDVSA) of Venezuela and ONGC Videsh for
oil production and development activities in the San
Cristobal oilfield in eastern Venezuela, acquisition of the
rights of Encana Corporation of Canada in 10 offshore
blocks in Brazil by the BPRL-Videocon JV, waiver of
commercial debt and interest to the tune of Rs.128 crores
owed by Cuba to India and sale of 7 advanced Light
(Dhruv) helicopters by HAL to Ecuador was among the
important milestones in our economic/commercial
relations with LAC countries.

The Obama Administration sent its first delegation to
India from February 15-24, 2009, to mark the 50 th
anniversary of American Civil Rights leader Dr. Martin
Luther King Jr’s visit to India to study Mahatma Gandhi’s
teachings. The delegation included Dr. King’s eldest son,
Dr. Martin Luther King III. Ambassador Richard
Holbrooke, US Special Representative for Afghanistan
and Pakistan, visited India from 15-16 February. He called
on EAM Shri Pranab Mukherjee, NSA and FS on 16
February, and discussed the situation in Afghanistan and
Pakistan with them.

United Nations and International
Organisations
India continued to play an active role in the United
Nations (UN) focussing on the ongoing process of
reforming the UN Organization with a view to enhancing
its representative nature and its credibility, and therefore,
its effectiveness. In collaboration with other member states
India continued to work for reform of the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council and to revitalize
the General Assembly.

India’s relations with Canada were substantively
reinvigorated during the period with the Canadian
Government under Prime Minister Stephen Harper
continuing to consider relations with India a foreign policy
priority. Canada’s Foreign Minister, Mr. Maxime Bernier
visited India from 10-12 January 2008. Canada’s Deputy
Minister for Citizenship and Immigration, Mr. Richard B
Fadden visited India from 12-18 January 2008. India and
Canada opened a new chapter in their relations when
Canada supported India’s Safeguard Agreement with the
IAEA and it also joined the NSG’s consensus decision to
allow nuclear trade with India.

The period under review was marked by several high-level
visits. Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh led the Indian
delegation to the 63rd Session of General Assembly in
September 2008. In his address to the UNGA on
September 27, 2008, PM underlined the need for progress
on core elements of the agenda for reform of the UN. He
also stressed for the need for coordinated action by the
international community in dealing with the crisis in the
world financial system and global food and energy crisis.
In the context of the fact that 2008 marked the mid-point
of international efforts to achieve the developmental
targets set by the Millennium Development Goals, PM
emphasized the indivisible nature of global prosperity and
welfare. PM also referred to terrorism, exhorting the world
to strengthen international cooperation in this regard and
reaffirmed the need for the early conclusion of a
Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism
(CCIT).

Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC)
In the light of existing commonalities with regard to
bilateral and multilateral issues and mutual economic
interests, India’s engagement with LAC countries
intensified during the period under reference. Crosssectoral linkages were facilitated through regular dialogue
at the political and official level and also through
exchange of business delegations, experts and professionals
from both sides. Contacts at the institutionalized level
were maintained through Joint Commission Ministerial
meetings and Foreign Office Consultations. As many as
21 agreements and MoUs were signed during this time.
Indian companies stepped up their presence in sectors
such as oil and hydrocarbons, ICT, mining,
pharmaceuticals, agriculture, auto industries, new &
renewable energy and in the services sector. As part of
our Development Partnership and South-South
cooperation initiatives, Line of Credit assistance to the
tune of US $ 160 million was announced for LAC
countries and disaster relief to the tune of US $ 2.125
million was disbursed. IT Centres were also set up in
three LAC countries and a total of 382 ITEC scholarships
were announced and utilized by LAC candidates. The
signing of a JV agreement between the national oil

External Affairs Minister visited New York from 28
September to 2 October 2008 and participated in the 63rd
Session of the UN General Assembly. Finance Minister
visited the UN as PM’s special representative for
participating in the High Level Event on Midterm Review
of the Millennium Development Goals (MDG) held on
25 September 2008.
UN Secretary General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, visited India
from 30 - 31 October 2008 and delivered the Rajiv Gandhi
Commemorative Speech on 31 October 2008. He visited
India again on 4-6 February 2009 to participate in the
Delhi Sustainable Development Summit.
xi

Annual Report 2008-2009

India worked actively to ensure that development remains
at the core of the United Nations agenda, particularly
against the backdrop of the global financial meltdown,
together with upheavals in the food and energy markets.
In this regard, the need for developed countries to fulfil
their commitments to provide enhanced aid, greater
market access, debt relief and technology transfer to
developing countries was re-emphasized. India also
pushed for proportionate voice and participation of the
developing countries towards ensuring a greater
developmental focus in the international regimes on trade,
finance and economic bodies.

Govt. of BRIC countries. Conclusion of the negotiations
on the agreement on “Trade in Goods” under the
Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement
(CECA) between India and ASEAN was considered yet
another milestone in India’s “Look East” policy.
Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation
(ITEC) Programme and & Development
Partnership (DP)
The Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC)
Programme is the flagship programme of India’s technical
and economic cooperation efforts. In keeping with India’s
growing economic strength and international role, efforts
were made to enhance and expand India’s technical
cooperation and development assistance to partner
countries with emphasis on capacity building, transfer of
technology and sharing of experiences. This involved 158
developing countries including 139 countries under ITEC
in Asia, Africa, Central Asia, East Europe, Latin America
and 19 countries under SCAAP (Special Commonwealth
African Assistance Programme) in Africa. Around 5000
professionals, in Government and other sectors from 158
developing countries attended more than 200 courses
conducted by institutions in India, both Government and
in the private sector, under the civilian and defence
training programmes. Special courses were organized for
Africa, IOR-ARC, CIS, Afghanistan, Lao PDR, Yemen
in various fields like management, WTO issues, labour,
audit, etc. Indian experts were deputed to advise and
assist in diverse areas such as information technology,
auditing, legal expertise, pharmacology, statistics and
demography, public administration, textile and
agriculture. Many projects were undertaken during the
year in the field of information technology, small and
medium enterprises, civil construction and vocational
training in different parts of the world. Humanitarian
assistance was also extended to countries affected by
earthquake, cyclones, floods, etc.

India also continued to its active engagement with the
Non-Alignment Movement and the Commonwealth.
EAM led the Indian delegation to the 15 th NAM
Ministerial Meeting in Tehran during 27-30 July 2008.
Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, former High Commissioner of India
to the United Kingdom, who was elected as the Secretary
General of the Commonwealth in November 2007,
assumed office on 1 April 2008 and visited India on 1622 October, 2008 and 4-11 February, 2009.

Multilateral Economic Relations
Agendas of the multilateral fora, during the period, were
generally under the shadow of international financial
turmoil, high food prices and volatile energy prices. India
continued its active engagement with ASEM (AsiaEurope Meeting), BIMSTEC (Bay of Bengal Initiative for
Multi Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation),
BRIC (Brazil, Russia, India and China-May 2008), G-805, G-20, IBSA (India, Brazil and South Africa), IORARC (Indian Ocean Rim Association for Regional
Cooperation), ACD (Asia Cooperation Dialogue) etc
where it presented its perspective on financial crisis and
other critical issues such as food, security, energy security,
climate change and sustainable development. The first
IOR-ARC Film Festival was held in New Delhi in
February-March 2008 as part of Indian initiatives
announced at the 7th IOR-ARC Council of Ministers
(COM) meeting held in Tehran in March 2007.

Investment and Technology Promotion (ITP)
Economic Diplomacy continued to occupy an important
place in India’s foreign policy, acquiring a sharper focus
in an increasingly interdependent and interconnected
world. The Ministry, through the ITP Division, was
actively engaged in the promotion and facilitation of
foreign investment and trade. It participated in policy
meetings of Foreign Investment Promotion Board and
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion, as well
as other policy meetings concerning reforms and
liberalization of the economy and simplification of
investment procedures. ITP Division supplemented the
overall efforts of the Government to boost FDI inflow
into India, by reaching out to the investor community

Secretary (ER) led the Indian delegation to the
preparatory meeting of BRIC Deputy Foreign Ministers
held in Rio de Janeiro from 10-11 March 2008 to prepare
the roadmap for the first formal meeting of BRIC Foreign
Ministers meeting in Russia in May 2008.
India hosted the Second BIMSTEC Summit
(13/11/2008), and the Third IBSA Summit in New Delhi
during the period. Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh
led the Indian delegations to the ASEM Summit in Beijing
(24/10/2008), the G-20 Summit in Washington
(15/11/2008), and informal interaction of Heads of State/
xii

Introduction and Synopsis

and organizing and funding promotional events in
partnership with the private sector, apex business
chambers and our Missions abroad. The cause of foreign
investments was further supported by projecting the
country’s image as an investment friendly destination
through special publications such as the “India - Dynamic
Business Partner: Investor Friendly Destination” etc and
ITP Division’s website: www.indiainbusiness.nic.in.
Development aid, including grants and Lines of Credit
(LoC), to developing countries in Latin America, Africa
and Asia formed an important component of our
Economic Diplomacy. While helping Indian companies
get project contracts and orders for supply of goods in
these developing countries, the LoCs have helped in
infrastructure development in these regions thereby
creating considerable goodwill for the country. During
2008-09, 17 LoCs worth US$ 744 million to 16 developing
countries were approved.
Given the importance of energy security for India’s
development, a separate Energy Security Division was
established in March 2009 to coordinate with Energy
Ministries and Indian Missions abroad. The Division
worked closely with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural
Gas in organizing the India-CIS Roundtable on
Hydrocarbons in November 2008 and Petrotech 2009,
hosted/co-hosted seminars on India’s energy options,
commissioned studies on energy surplus countries and
regions, was actively involved in energy security related
seminars/conferences organized by other Ministries and
Chamber of Commerce and Industry and extended
assistance to Indian companies dealing with overseas
energy collaborations and opportunities. It also took
the initiative to set up a Working Group on Energy with
senior representatives of oil and infrastructure PSUs.

Policy Planning and Research
The PP&R Division maintained close interaction with
institutions and individuals specializing in policy research
and analysis and extended financial assistance to various
academic institutions/think-tanks located in different
parts of the country for holding conferences, seminars,
preparation of research papers, exchange of scholars on
issues related to India’s external relations and security with
a view to derive invaluable inputs for the planning,
formulation and implementation of our foreign policy.
Policy Planning and Research Division continued issuing
Monthly Summary for the Cabinet. The division also
continued to edit and publish the Annual Report of the
Ministry. The Report serves as a compendium of India’s
interaction with the rest of the world in the political,

economic, and cultural fields, including the views of the
government on various facets of international relations.
The situation room which functions under this division
was used as a 24 hours operational control room during
the Mumbai crisis from 27 November – 1 December 2008.
A boundary cell has been established to provide
cartographic advice and technical support on border
related matters to Territorial Divisions. It handled work
related to examination of maps depicting India’s external
boundaries in co-ordination with the Survey of India. It
has started building data base for boundary strip maps
covering the external boundary of India.

Protocol
Reflecting India’s active engagement with the world, there
were 62 incoming visits during 2008 at the level of Head
of State, Vice President, Head of Government, and
Foreign Minister; and 27 outgoing visits at these levels
during the year. Three Summits were held in Delhi- the
India-Africa Forum Summit in April 2008; the 3rd IndiaBrazil-South Africa (IBSA) Dialogue Forum Summit in
October 2008; and the Bay of Bengal Initiative for MultiSectoral Technological and Economic Cooperation
(BIMSTEC) Summit in November 2008.

Consular, Passport and Visa Services
During the year 3 new Passport Offices were opened at
Amritsar, Dehradun, and Coimbatore. All 37 Passport
Offices have been computerized and issue machineprinted and machine readable passports.
A total of 53.15 lakh passports were issued in 2008-09,
an increase of approximately 6.5% % over the
corresponding figure in 2007-08. The total revenue
generated from all Passport Offices also increased to Rs.
606 crores, an increase of approximately 5.5 % over 200708.
The Ministry has been taking a number of measures to
make the processing and issue of passports simpler and
quicker for the comfort and convenience of the public.
District Passport Cells (DPCs) have been opened at the
district level to increase the efficiently of the receiving
and verification process. Online submission of passport
applications has been introduced in all Passport Offices.
During 2008, Also facilitation Counters and Help Desks
have also been set up to assist applicants and also to attend
to grievances/complaints expeditiously.
The Passport Seva Project launched by the Government
of India is expected to result in the issue of new passports
within three days after police verification and of all other
xiii

Annual Report 2008-2009

passport services in one day. The Pilot Project is expected
to begin at Chandigarh and Bangalore by July-August,
2009. It will be implemented fully to cover the entire
country in 2010.
The Ministry has successfully implemented the project
for centralized printing of Machine Readable Passports
(MRPs) at CPV Division, New Delhi in respect of 140
Indian Missions/Posts abroad.
All diplomatic and official passports are now being issued
as e-passports as part of the pilot project. Based on the
experience gained from the pilot project, it is proposed to
start issuance of e-passports in the ordinary category by
end 2009. During 2008, visa-waiver agreements were
signed with Egypt, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua,
South Africa and Turkey.
Extradition treaties were signed with Brazil, Australia, Iran
and Egypt. The attestation and apostille of the documents
was also started at branch secretariat offices of the Ministry
at Chennai, Hyderabad, Kolkata and Guwahati with effect
from 15 June 2008. During the year, 1,70,000 personal
and educational documents and 1,71,000 commercial
documents were attested by the Ministry. In addition to
this, 80,000 documents were apostilled for use abroad in
the member countries.

Administration
There are currently 171 resident Indian Missions and Posts
abroad. During the year, a resident Indian Mission was
opened in Iceland, while three new Missions are to be
opened in the near future in Niger, Mali, and Guatemala.
In order to address the Ministry’s acute constraints of
personnel in the face of India’s growing diplomatic
responsibilities, a ten-year plan has been developed to
induct 514 additional positions in the Ministry in a phased
manner.
Several steps were taken to streamline rules, regulations,
and procedures and to improve housekeeping in the
Ministry. Construction work for the future Headquarters
of the Ministry of External Affairs, i.e. Jawahar Lal Nehru
Bhawan, and transit accommodation at Canning Lane,
New Delhi continued apace. A residential complex for
officers of the Ministry, building of the Headquarters of
the Afro-Asian Legal Consultative Committee, and
residence of its Secretary General, in Chanakyapuri, New
Delhi, and the Regional Office of ICCR in Kolkata were
completed. Purchase and construction of properties for
Indian Missions abroad was further accelerated to reduce
expenditure on rents. Projects under construction abroad
include chancery/residences projects at Kabul, Beijing,
Tokyo, Kathmandu, London and Singapore.

Coordination
Coordination Division issued a total of 2539 political
clearances for foreign visits of Governors, Speaker of the
Lok Sabha, Deputy Chairman of Rajya Sabha, Union
Ministers, Ministers in the State Governments, Members
of Parliament, Members of State Legislative Assemblies,
Members of the Judiciary, government officials, thereby
registering an increase of about 21%. The division also
handled 971 clearances for foreign non-scheduled flights;
an year-on-year increase of 13% during April – November
2008.
Coordination Division assisted the Ministry of Defense
in interaction with the Ministry and the Indian Missions/
Posts abroad during DEFEXPO India – 2008, organized
by the Ministry of Defense in February 2008 and for the
Aero India- 2009 exhibition in February 2009 at Bangalore.

External Publicity
The main activities of the Division were focused on
dissemination of information on India’s relations with its
immediate neighbours as also with major countries of the
world. The Division launched the first phase of the Media
Monitoring Project for all users at Headquarters. This is
aimed at streamlining the monitoring of media sources
for the Ministry. The Project monitors Print, Web and
Internet based media in a systematic manner and provides
5 daily products to users on a real time basis.
The Division used the opportunities provided by visits of
the President of Iran, Mr. Ahamadnejad; President of
Syria, Dr. Bashar Al-Assad; President of Egypt, Mr. Hosny
Mubarak; Prime Minister of Nepal, Mr. Pushpa Kamal
Dahal “Prachanda”; Prime Minister of Bhutan, Mr.
Lyonchen Jigmi Y. Thinley and the President of the
Russian Federation, Mr. Anatoly Medvedev to articulate
India’s position on important bilateral, regional and
international issues. The Division also arranged joint press
interaction with the visiting dignitaries during these visits.
Special briefings by the official spokesperson and other
senior officials of the Ministry were also held regularly on
important international issues of concern to India.
Media delegations on President’s visit to Brazil, Medico,
Chile, Vietnam and Indonesia; Prime Minister’s visits to
Bhutan, Japan (G-8 summit), Sri Lanka (15th SAARC
summit), USA and France (UNGA and Civil Nuclear
Cooperation Agreement), China, Oman and Qatar
(bilateral); Vice President’s visits to Kazakhstan and
Turkmenistan and; the External Affairs Minister’s visits
to Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, Russia, Australia, Egypt and
USA were facilitated by XP Division. EAM, Foreign
Secretary and other senior officials of the Ministry
addressed special media briefings on important issues of
xiv

Introduction and Synopsis

concern. Interviews with the Prime Minister, External
Affairs Minister, Ministers of State for External Affairs
and other dignitaries were arranged with Indian and
international newspapers and TV organizations.

A MoU providing institutional framework of cooperation
between FSI and its counterpart institute in Ukraine was
signed. Delegations from Bangladesh, Romania and China
visited FSI. The Second Meeting of Deans of Diplomatic
Institutes of IBSA (India-Brazil-South Africa) countries
was held at FSI in September, 2008. A Seminar on the
subject of “India-Brazil-South Africa Cooperation:
Challenges and Opportunities” was also held on this
occasion.

Public Diplomacy
PD Division, in order to fulfil its mandate of outreach
activities inside and outside India, and audio-visual and
print publicity to effectively project India’s Foreign Policy
to the wider public, works in collaboration with
researchers, think tanks, civil society, media and industry,
within India and abroad.

Cultural Relations
The primary objective of the Indian Council of Cultural
Relations (ICCR) is to establish, revive and strengthen
cultural relations and mutual understanding between
India and other countries. The Council’s flagship project,
the Rabindranath Tagore Centre (RTC) was inaugurated
on 1 June, 2008 by Shri Pranab Mukherjee, former
Minister for External Affairs. ICCR also commenced
implementation of its ‘6-Point Expansion Plan’, for which
it has been allocated Rs. 75 crores.

The Division organized a number of seminars and
conferences to effectively project India’s foreign policy,
and to support Track Two interaction with other countries.
A large number of Indian and foreign academics,
researchers, senior officials, representatives of industry and
the media were involved in the events organized by the
Division. Among the major activities of the Division were
conferences on our relations with Nepal, Afghanistan,
Kazakhstan, Pakistan and Ethiopia. The Division also
organized conferences on varied themes such as the fallout
of the cold war, development of North-East, terrorism and
climate change. With a view to familiarize policy and
opinion makers from other countries with modern India
and our concerns and interests, the Division hosted visits
of delegations from the UK, Mauritius, South Africa,
Tajikistan and Taiwan, as well as a delegation of PIO
journalists from 16 countries.

The Council organized large-scale cultural events with
foreign and Indian troupes, on the sidelines of major
Summits, such as the India-Africa Summit, IBSA Summit,
Arab League Meeting etc. It also coordinated the South
Asia Cultural Festival and held cultural programmes for
VVIP visitors. A number of Festivals were held, such as
Sufi Music Festival in Srinagar, Malhaar Festival and
Festival of Indian Classical Dance by foreign artists
residing in India. An important highlight was the ‘Year of
Russia in India’ which included a series of high-profile
cultural performances. In addition, 50 cultural troupes
from different countries were hosted by the Council, with
performances held in Delhi and other cities. The Council
also provided financial support to NGOs and cultural
institutions to jointly organize cultural activities. The
Council hosted 19 eminent visitors from different
countries under the Distinguished Visitors Programme,

The Division commissioned documentaries projecting our
interests as also Indian culture and heritage. Some of the
documentaries commissioned by the Division were
screened at international festivals and awarded special
prizes/special mention. The Division’s flagship magazine
‘India Perspectives’ covering a variety of subjects
completed twenty years; an anniversary issue and two
Special Issues on Indian Publishing and Indian Cinema
were brought out.

The 21 Indian Cultural Centres abroad continued to
vigorously promote India’s ‘Soft Power’. The expanded
Cultural Wing of the Indian Embassy in Beijing became
functional in the year and preparations were made to open
new Cultural Centres in Bangkok, Kuala Lumpur, Tokyo
and Dhaka.

Foreign Service Institute (FSI)
The Foreign Service Institute conducted training
programmes for the IFS Probationers, Diplomatic
Correspondents, Police officers, Cabinet Secretariat
officers, and other officers of the Ministry of External
Affairs and other Ministries/ Departments. Special courses
for officials from Southern Sudan, for ASEAN Diplomats
and for Diplomats from Norway as well as Professional
Courses for Foreign Diplomats (PCFD) were held. The
Foreign Defence officers attending the 48th Course at
National Defence College visited FSI and a lecture was
arranged for them.

The Council organized a series of cultural Festivals abroad
in Syria, Egypt, Netherlands, Argentina and Hungary,
which included diverse and varied cultural programmes.
The ‘Year of India in Russia’ was inaugurated by President,
ICCR on 31 March, 2009 in Moscow. The Council
sponsored 93 cultural delegations which visited 73
countries and also sponsored a number of outstanding
artistes abroad and provided travel grants. The Council
xv

Annual Report 2008-2009

continued to manage 21 long-term and 12 short-term
Chairs in Indian Studies in various foreign Universities.
An important focus area of ICCR has been facilitating
admission of foreign students in Indian Universities. In
2008-09, ICCR administered scholarships for approx. 3200
foreign students under various schemes. This included
1778 new scholarships, including 500 scholarships for
Afghan students.
The Council opened two new Regional Offices at Cuttack
and Shillong during the year to enhance its reach to
North-east and eastern India. The Council also organized
major exhibitions showcasing Indian and foreign art and
sculpture; disseminated six journals in five different
languages and also assisted various organizations/Institutes
in organizing 24 International Conferences in India.
President of India presented the Jawaharlal Nehru Award
for International Understanding for 1995 to President of
the Arab Republic of Egypt, H.E. Mr. Mohamed Hosny
Mubarak on 18th November 2008. The Maulana Abul
Kalam Memorial Lecture 2009 was delivered by Mr.
Martin Luther King III on the subject “A New Nonviolent
Revolution”.

Indian Council of World Affairs
Indian Council of World Affairs (ICWA) continued to
develop as a think-tank and an important platform for
discussions on foreign affairs in India. ICWA signed 6
MoUs for bilateral cooperation, viz, with Centre for
Strategic Studies (CSS) of Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, New Zealand Institute of International
Affairs (NIIA) Wellington, Australian Institute of
International Affairs (AIIA) Melbourne, The Emirates
Centre for Strategic Studies and Research (ECSSR) Abu
Dhabi , Asia Centre; Bangalore, Centre for Research in

Rural and Industrial Development (CRRID) Chandigarh.
Council sponsored a Joint Study between India-Central
Asia Foundation (ICAF), ICWA and Department of
International Relations, Al-Farabi Kazakh National
University, Almaty, Kazakhstan on “Contemporary
Process of Political Modernizing: Experience of Central
Asian States and India”. The Council organized 7 lectures,
9 Seminars/Conferences, 6 bilateral dialogues & 14
background briefings, book release/panel discussions.
ICWA Library continues to be used by a large no of
scholars and students.

E- G & Information Technology
During the year, computerization of passport & visa
services at Moscow, Doha, Washington, San Francisco,
Chicago and Houston was completed. Outsourcing of
passport services at Jeddah was completed. Outsourcing
of passport/visa services at London, Moscow, Dubai, Abu
Dhabi, Jeddah, Riyadh, Kuwait, Kuala Lumpur and
Singapore has been completed during the year.

Research & Information System for
Developing Countries (RIS)
RIS, as an autonomous policy think-tank, conducted
policy research on international economic issues and
provided analytical support in preparations for major
Summit meetings and other important negotiations such
as East Asia Summit, IBSA Summit, SAARC and
BIMSTEC Summits, WTO negotiations, Track-II Study
Group of CEPEA, among others. It continued to hold
policy dialogue on the relevance and the way forward for
an Asian Economic Community in collaboration with
leading policy think-tanks in Asia, and has networked with
policy think-tanks in other countries to bring policy
coherence and capacity building on international
economic issues and development cooperation.

xvi

India’s Neighbours

Afghanistan

1

also invited Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh for a
State visit to Afghanistan.

Bilateral Relations
Close and friendly relations were maintained with the
Government of Afghanistan. Our developmental and
reconstruction assistance programme in Afghanistan is
widely appreciated by all sections of the Afghan people.
Notwithstanding serious deterioration in the security
situation, India has remained at the forefront of the
international effort to assist the Government and people
of Afghanistan in building a stable, democratic, and
pluralist society. The deterioration of the security situation
in Afghanistan impinged directly on India after the attack
on the Embassy of India on 7 July, 2008.

India’s Minister of Panchayati Raj, Shri Mani Shankar
Aiyer visited Afghanistan in May 2008. During the visit,
an MoU on local governance was signed between the two
countries. The Chief Election Commissioner Shri N
Gopalaswami, visited Afghanistan in April 2008. During
the visit an MoU on cooperation between two Election
Commissions was signed.
Terrorist attack on the Embassy: A suicide bomber
attacked our Embassy in Kabul on the morning of 7 July,
2008 in which five Embassy personnel were killed. About
60 Afghan nationals were also killed. The attack on Indian
Embassy was amongst the worst of the terrorist strikes in
Afghanistan. Investigations of the Government of
Afghanistan as also our own evidence that the attack was
planned and executed by elements based in a Pakistan
make it a dangerous and unacceptable situation.

The President of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan His
Excellency Hamid Karzai paid a State visit to India from
August 3-5, 2008. President Karzai’s visit took place
shortly after the terrorist attack on the Indian Embassy in
Kabul on the seventh of July 2008. India and Afghanistan
expressed their determination to fight terrorism unitedly
and with all the forces at their command. Prime Minister,
Dr. Manmohan Singh conveyed that all of India’s
commitments to Afghanistan would be fully met. To this
end, the Government of India pledged an additional US$
450 million (over US$ 750 million announced so far) to
effectively meet the requirement of our ongoing and
forthcoming projects.

India’s assistance to Afghanistan
India remained at the forefront of the international effort
in Afghanistan to aid and assist its government and people
in the process of national reconstruction, and establishing
a stable, democratic, and pluralistic polity. The Minister
of State for External Affairs led the Indian delegation to
the International Conference in support of Afghanistan
held in Paris in June 2008. India continued to actively
participate in various multilateral meetings to co-ordinate
developmental assistance to Afghanistan including,
interalia, meetings of the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board. India also participated in December
2008 in the Paris Ministerial Meeting on Regional
Cooperation between Afghanistan and its neighbours.

President Karzai again paid a working visit to India from
11-12 January, 2009 to express Afghanistan’s solidarity
with the Government and people of India in the aftermath
of the Mumbai terrorist attack. In a Joint Press Statement
issued after the visit, President Karzai and PM called for
the full compliance with bilateral, multilateral and
international obligations of States to prevent terrorism in
any manner originating from territories under their
control. PM also conveyed that in order to help the
fraternal people of Afghanistan in tiding over their current
food crisis, India would gift Afghanistan 250,000 metric
tonnes of wheat. A request from the Government of
Afghanistan to increase the number of education and
technical scholarships for Afghan nationals to study/
undergo courses in India was agreed to. President Karzai

Despite the terrorist attack on Indian Embassy on 7 July,
2008 and continued security threat to the Embassy,
Consulates, projects and personnel, India’s commitment
to Afghanistan’s reconstruction and development has
remained unwavering. PM announced a further pledge of
US $450 million during President Karzai’s visit to India
in September 2008, taking the total Indian pledge for
Afghanistan to US $1.2 billion for the India’s extensive
developmental assistance programme. The Union Cabinet
1

Annual Report 2008-2009

in November 2008 also approved the construction of
Afghanistan’s new Parliament building, a symbol of the
common commitment of both countries to pluralism and
democracy. The project has since commenced.

Education and Capacity Building
Both the ICCR administered Indian Scholarships scheme
and technical training programmes under ITEC were
effectively implemented. Out of the 500 ICCR
Scholarships offered to Afghanistan in the current year,
493 scholarships have been utilized by Afghan candidates
for pursuing higher education in various universities in
India. Through 500 annual short-term technical training
programmes to Afghanistan under the ITEC, India
continued to contribute significantly in human resource
development of Afghan professionals in the fields that
included IT; communication; English language
proficiency; human resource planning; geo-informatics
and human resource planning and development; textile
mills management; development journalism;
empowerment of women; promotion of micro enterprises,
etc.

Projects completed
A major infrastructure project for construction of 218 km
road from Zaranj to Delaram was successfully completed
despite daunting logistical and security challenges. The
road was jointly inaugurated by the President of
Afghanistan and the External Affairs Minister on 22nd
January 2009.
Significant progress was made in execution of another
major infrastructural project - the construction of a 220
KV Transmission Line from Pul-e-Khumri to Kabul
together with sub-station in Chimtala which will wheel
power from Uzbekistan to Kabul (completion expected
by April 2009).

The Skills Development Project of Confederation of the
Indian Industries (CII) proposing to train 1,000 Afghans
in construction related skills and setting up of a Women’s
Vocational Training Centre at Bagh-e-Zanana in Kabul
by Self Employed Women’s Association (SEWA) to train
1,000 Afghan women in garment making, fruit processing
and horticulture were inaugurated in June 2008. Since
2002, around 3150 Afghans have got trained/studied in
India under the various Government sponsored training
programmes.

New Schemes
During President Karzai’s visit to India in January 2009
India had announced a grant of 250,000 metric tonnes of
wheat in order to help the fraternal people of Afghanistan
in tiding over their current food crisis.
An MoU on Local Governance was signed between the
two countries in May 2008.
An MoU on cooperation between Election Commissions
of the two countries was signed on 22nd April 2008. India
also contributed a sum of US $ 1 million to the UN Trust
Fund for the Afghanistan Elections.

Small Developments Projects
Implementation of the community-based, small
development projects scheme in the fields of agriculture,
rural development, education, health, vocational training,
etc. continued satisfactorily. Under phase-I (2006-08), 50
such proposals had been approved and are being executed.

Major Projects under implementation
Work on the construction of Salma Dam Power Project
(42 MW) in Herat province, continued.
Humanitarian assistance: The on-going school feeding
programme of distribution of protein fortified biscuits
through World Food Programme as part of Government
of India’s commitment to provide one million tonne of
wheat to Afghanistan as humanitarian assistance
continued. Indian biscuits are now supplied to about 2
million school children on school days and cover 32 out
of 34 provinces in Afghanistan. India donated ten
ambulances to the Ministry of Public Health in April 2008.
Supply of 30,000 Desk-cum-Benches to schools in
Jalalabad Province commenced in November 2008.

Under phase-II (2008-2010), 50 other projects have been
Identified for implementation.
India continued to contribute US$ 200,000 annually for
the Afghan Reconstruction Trust Fund.
India Culture Centre
Despite the terrorist attack on Indian Embassy, the
activities of India Culture Centre (ICC) in Kabul including
classical music and yoga classes by Indian teachers and
other cultural activities continued.

Medical services and medicines through five Indian
Medical Missions (IMMs) in Kabul, Kandahar, Jalalabad,
Mazar-e-Sharif and Herat and the reconstruction of Indira
Gandhi Institute for Child Health in Kabul in various
phases continued.

Bangladesh
India continued to constructively engage the caretaker
Government in Bangladesh on a broad spectrum of
bilateral issues while reiterating its expectation of a free,
2

President of Afghanistan, Hamid Karzai meeting with the Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh,
in New Delhi on 4 August, 2008.

Prime Minister of Bhutan, Lyonchen Jigmi Y. Thinley meeting with the Union Minister of External Affairs,
Shri Pranab Mukherjee, in New Delhi on 16 July, 2008.

3

Annual Report 2008-2009

fair, credible elections leading to full restoration of
democracy in Bangladesh. In a momentous occasion ,the
two countries restarted the passenger train service
“Maitree” between Kolkata and Dhaka after 43 years on
14 April, 2008.

The two sides reviewed the bilateral air services agreement
in New Delhi from 11-13 February, 2008 and increased
the flights to select destinations operated by designated
carriers of both countries to 61 per week.
In line with India’s policy of boosting connectivity in the
SAARC region to facilitate bilateral trade and movement
of people, India continued to pursue proposals for
strengthening transport and trade infrastructure between
the two countries. The Tenth Meeting of the Standing
Committee under the bilateral protocol on Inland water
Transit and Trade was held in Dhaka from 26-27 May,
2008.

The Bangladesh Foreign Secretary visited India for the
annual Foreign Office Consultations on 17 July, 2008
during which substantive discussions were held on all
aspects of bilateral relations, including security, trade,
transit and connectivity issues
India continued to emphasize its security concerns to
Bangladesh, especially the use of Bangladeshi territory by
Indian Insurgency Groups (IIGs) and by terrorists of other
nationalities. The two sides revived the Joint Working
Group to discuss operational matters related to security
issues and held a meeting in New Delhi from 29-30 May,
2008. This was followed by the bilateral Home Secretarylevel talks in Dhaka from 29-31 August, 2008.

In keeping with India’s close and friendly ties with
Bangladesh, India provided Bangladesh bilateral aid and
assistance to help overcome damage caused by natural
disasters. India’s assistance included supply of 1000 MT
of skimmed milk powder and 40,000 MT of rice. India
has also undertaken a project to construct 2,800 core
shelters, toilets and 22 tubewells for rehabilitation of 11
cyclone-affected villages in Bangladesh and another
project to construct Kala Bhawan for the Department of
Theatre and Music, University of Dhaka.

The two countries continued to discuss operational
matters related to border management through the biannual DG-level border coordination conferences of the
respective border security forces, which were held from
11-12 April, 2008 in New Delhi and from 20-25 August,
2008 in Dhaka. The bilateral sub-group on border/trade
infrastructure held its first meeting from 6-7 August, 2008
in Dhaka.

Pursuant to announcement made by Prime Minister, Dr.
Manmohan Singh at the 14th SAARC Summit in New
Delhi, India started providing duty free access to exports
from LDCs in the SAARC region, including Bangladesh,
on 1 January, 2008, except some items on India’s sensitive
list. The 2007 bilateral MoU with Bangladesh on dutyfree imports into India from Bangladesh of up to 8 million
pieces of apparel articles in a calendar year also came into
effect in April 2008.

Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Minister for External Affairs paid
a visit to Dhaka on 9 February, 2009. This was the first
high-level visit from India after new Government under
Her Excellency Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina took over
office following General Elections in Bangladesh on 29
December, 2008. During the visit, EAM met several
leaders of the newly elected Government, including Prime
Minister, Foreign Minister, Home Minister, Commerce
Minister and the Industries Minister and discussed a range
of bilateral issues, including those related to security,
connectivity, trade and investment and people-to-people
contacts. Two Agreements, namely (i) Trade Agreement
and (ii) Bilateral Investment Promotion and Protection
Agreement (BIPPA) were signed. EAM unveiled a model
of 2800 core shelters that Government of India would be
constructing in 11 Bangladeshi villages affected by cyclone
‘Sidr’ and also unveiled a Plaque for the construction of
Kalabhaban at the Dhaka University.

The Minister of State for Commerce and Industry, Shri
Jairam Ramesh visited Dhaka from 31 October to 2
November, 2008 to participate in the Golden Jubilee
celebrations of Dhaka Chamber of Commerce& Industry.
During the visit, he discussed various bilateral economic
and trade issues with his counterparts.

Shri Somnath Chatterjee, Speaker, Lok Sabha visited
Dhaka from 21-23 February, 2009. Speaker addressed the
Members of Bangladesh Parliament at the opening
ceremony of ‘Parliamentary Orientation Program for
Ninth Jatiya Sangsad’ and met several leaders in
Bangladesh.

During the year, the two sides also held technical level
talks on maritime boundary in Dhaka from 15-27
September, 2008, after a gap of over 25 years.
Chief of Army Staff, Gen. Deepak Kapoor visited
Bangladesh from 28 July to 1 August 2008 during which
various steps to strengthen defence cooperation between
the two countries were discussed.

4

India’s Neighbours

Bhutan

the hydropower projects in Bhutan to Thimphu from 4-7
December, 2008 on the invitation of the Minister of
Economic Affairs of Bhutan. Foreign Secretary
subsequently visited Bhutan from 14-15 February, 2009
and discussed a wide gamut of bilateral issues especially
those relating to development assistance and hydropower
cooperation between the two countries.

India and Bhutan continue to share uniquely warm and
cordial relations characterized by close consultations,
maturity, complete trust and mutual understanding. These
relations were further deepened during the course of the
year that coincided with the Golden Jubilee of the visit of
Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru to Bhutan in 1958, Coronation
of the Fifth King of Bhutan and the 100th Anniversary of
the Wangchuck dynasty. In keeping with the tradition of
regular visits and exchange of views at the highest levels
between the two countries, there were high level visits
that led to consolidation of our economic and political
relations.

The Prime Minister of Bhutan, Lyonchen Jigmi Y. Thinley,
paid a State visit to India from 14-17 July, 2008 after his
election as the first democratically elected Prime Minister
of Bhutan. Prime Minister Thinley again visited India from
12-14 November, 2008 to participate in the Second
BIMSTEC Summit in New Delhi. A delegation led by
the Speaker of the National Assembly of Bhutan, Lyonpo
Jigme Tshultim, also visited India from 25 August to 5
September, 2008 while the Bhutanese Minister of Health,
Lyonpo Zangley Dukpa, visited India from 11-18
September, 2008 to strengthen bilateral cooperation
between the two countries in the health sector. The
Attorney General of Bhutan subsequently visited India
from 15-21 December, 2008 for a study tour.

President, Smt. Pratibhadevi Singh Patil accompanied by
the External Affairs Minister, Shri Pranab Mukherjee and
Chairperson of UPA, Smt. Sonia Gandhi paid a State visit
to Bhutan from 5-8 November, 2008 on the invitation of
the Royal Government of Bhutan to attend the formal
coronation of His Majesty Jigme Khesar Namgyel
Wangchuck, the King of Bhutan. Government of India
sponsored various live musical shows, football matches
etc. as part of the celebrations for the Coronation
ceremony of the King of Bhutan.

India continued to be the largest trade and development
partner of Bhutan. The implementation of the India
assisted projects agreed under Bhutan’s Ninth Plan
progressed satisfactorily. Some of the important ones that
were completed include Semtokha Dzong, Thimphu and
Mongar Regional Referral Hospitals, Youth Centre,
RENEW Centre and Exhibition Hall for the National
Museum. The two Governments also agreed various
projects under the GoI assistance for the Tenth Plan of
Bhutan. GoI agreed to double its assistance to Bhutan
under the Tenth Plan over the Ninth Plan to Rs 3400
crores. Government of India also signed an MoU with
Royal Government of Bhutan in March 2009 for grant of
Rs. 300 crores Standby Credit Facility to Royal
Government of Bhutan to assist the latter meet its Rupee
liquidity shortages. Cooperation in Security and Border
Management continued between the State Governments
of Assam and West Bengal and the Royal Government of
Bhutan. India remained committed to providing assistance
to Bhutan during its transition to a Democratic
Constitutional Monarchy.

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh visited Bhutan from
16-17 May, 2008 as the first foreign dignitary to visit
Bhutan after it became a Democratic Constitutional
Monarchy in April 2008, he called on the King of Bhutan
and the former King besides having productive discussions
with regard to intensifying bilateral cooperation especially
in the hydropower sector. Besides formally inaugurating
the Tala Hydroelectric Project and laying the foundation
stone of the Punatsangchhu-I Hydroelectric Project, PM
announced the revision of the target of exporting
hydropower from Bhutan to India from 5,000 MW (as per
the Agreement of 2006) to 10,000 MW by 2020. He also
announced the GoI’s economic assistance package of Rs.
10,000 crores for the next five years to be used both as
GoI’s assistance to Bhutan’s Tenth Five Year Plan as also
for development of mega projects for hydropower and
infrastructure. PM also committed the GoI’s assistance
towards construction of the first rail link between India
and Bhutan – the Golden Jubilee Rail Line connecting
Hashimara in India to Phuentsholing in Bhutan, the
establishment of the prestigious Nehru-Wangchuck
scholarship for meritorious Bhutanese students to study in
reputed educational institutions in India and the
establishment of a Medical College in Thimphu.

The First Meeting of the Empowered Joint Group on
Hydropower Development in Bhutan was held in New
Delhi on 17 March, 2009 to discuss issues relating to
development of 10,000 MW of hydropower in Bhutan for
export to India by 2020 as per the commitment given by
our Prime Minister to Bhutan during his last visit to the
country in May 2008. The Protocol to the 2006 Agreement

Minister of Power, Shri Sushil Kumar Shinde, led a
delegation of officials from the Indian PSUs involved in
5

Annual Report 2008-2009

on Hydropower Cooperation between India and Bhutan
to formalize the aforesaid commitment of GoI was signed
between the two sides in New Delhi on 16 March, 2009.

recommendations on this and on other matters of mutual
concern. The Third India-China Financial Dialogue was
held in New Delhi on 16 January, 2009.

China

Defence cooperation has contributed to enhancement of
mutual trust and cooperation. Both sides held the second
joint military exercise in India (Belgaum) from 4-14
December, 2008 and also held the Second Annual
Defence Dialogue at upgraded level (Secretary/DCGS)
in India on 15 December, 2008. Chief of PLA Navy visited
India from 1-5 November 2008. Indian Chief of Air Staff
visited Zhuhai for the Air Show and bilateral meetings
from 2-6 November, 2008.

This has been an important year for our bilateral ties.
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh visited China from
13-15 January, 2008. PM held official talks with Premier
Wen Jiabao and had meetings with Chinese President Hu
Jintao and Chairman of the Standing Committee of the
National People’s Congress of China, Wu Bangguo. Both
sides issued ‘A Shared Vision for the 21st Century’ between
India and China and also signed ten other documents
covering cooperation in various fields. The Prime Minister
again met with Chinese President Hu Jintao on 8 July,
2008 in Sapporo on the sidelines of the G-8 summit and
on 25 October, 2008 in Beijing on the margins of the
ASEM Summit. PM also met with Chinese premier Wen
Jiabao on 24 September, 2008 at New York on the sidelines
of the UNGA session.

Following the terror attacks on Mumbai from 26-28
November, 2008, Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao and Foreign
Minister Yang Jiechi conveyed messages of condolences.
In a telephone conversation with EAM on 25 December,
2008, Chinese Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi said that
China strongly condemned the attacks, and reiterated his
country’s firm opposition to terrorism of all forms.’

Following Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh’s visit,
the momentum of high-level exchanges was maintained.
External Affairs Minister visited China from 4-7 June,
2008. He called on the Chinese Vice President Xi Jinping
and had talks with Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi. An MoU
for Provision of Hydrological Information of the
Brahmaputra River in Flood Season by China to India
was signed. EAM also inaugurated the new Consulate
General of India in Guangzhou. Chinese Foreign Minister
Mr. Yang Jiechi visited India from 7-9 September, 2008.
He inaugurated the new Chinese Consulate General in
Kolkata, had talks with External Affairs Minister and also
called on the Prime Minister.

The 12th round of Special Representatives talks on the
Boundary Question were held in Beijing from 18-19
September, 2008. The next round will be held in Delhi.
Government announced US$ 5 million in relief assistance
for the earthquake which struck Sichuan Province in May
2008. Nine Indian Air Force aircrafts delivered tents,
sleeping bags, blankets and medicines and other relief
material between 18 May and 8 June, 2008.
The First round of Consular Talks between India and
China took place on 3 March, 2008 in New Delhi. An
Memorandum of Understanding on Air Service Matters
between India and China was signed in New Delhi on 20
March, 2008 whereby it was agreed that the designated
airlines of India could operate beyond China to San
Francisco with full Fifth Freedom Rights. The third
meeting of the India-China Joint Working Group on
Counter-terrorism was held in New Delhi from 9-10 July,
2008. The Second India-China Joint Working Group on
Agriculture Cooperation and Workshop on Rural
Development were held in New Delhi from 14-18 October,
2008.

According to the Economic Survey released in February
2008 China is now India’s largest trading partner. Bilateral
trade in 2007 was US$ 38.96 billion. According to Chinese
Customs statistics, in the year 2008, bilateral trade reached
US$ 51.8 billion, with India’s trade deficit standing at US$
11.2 billion. The growth in the trade deficit with China is a
matter of concern to Government, and this issue was flagged
by both PM and EAM during their visits to China. Chinese
Premier told PM that they have noted this concern and
are working to address it. A Corporate Purchasing Mission
led by Chinese Vice Minister of Commerce visited India
from 9-12 October, 2008 and concluded 22 MoUs on trade
that seeks to enhance Indian exports by US$ 390 million a
year. The two PMs also mandated their Ministers of
Commerce to examine the Feasibility Study on the benefits
of a Regional Trading Arrangement (RTA) at the Eighth
Meeting of the Joint Economic Group and to make

The second meeting of the India-China Expert Level
Mechanism on Trans-Border Rivers was held in New Delhi
from 10-12 April, 2008. Both sides signed the Work
Regulations of the Expert Level Mechanism; initialed the
draft MoU between the two Ministries of Water Resources
upon the provision of hydrological information of
Brahmaputra River in flood season by China to India; and
signed the Implementation Plan between the Bureau of
6

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh and the other Heads of State at the opening ceremony of the Seventh ASEM Summit
at the Great Hall of the People, in Beijing, China on 24 October, 2008.

President of Maldives, Mohamed Nasheed meeting the Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh ,
in New Delhi on 24 December, 2008.

7

Annual Report 2008-2009

2004 between the Ministry of External Affairs and
the International Liaison Department of the
Communist Party of China (MEA-ILD programme),
Assam Chief Minister, Shri Tarun Gogoi visited
China in the third week of May 2008 while Mr. Yu
Zhengsheng, Party Secretary of Shanghai and
Member of the Politburo of the Chinese Communist
Party visited India from 16-22 October, 2008. Assam
Chief Minister, Shri Tarun Gogoi also attended the
opening ceremony of the Beijing Olympic in August,
2008.

Hydrology and Water Resources of the Tibet Autonomous
Region and the Central Water Commission upon provision
of hydrological information of Sutlej River by China to
India. The MoU between the two Ministries of Water
Resources upon the provision of hydrological information
of Brahmaputra River in flood season by China to India
was signed during EAM’s visit to China from 4-7 June,
2008.
Border trade across Nathu La, Lipulekh Pass and Shipki
La was affected during the year because of temporary
restrictions imposed by the Chinese authorities in
connection with the Beijing Olympics and Paraolympics.
Six batches of the Kailash Mansarovar Yatra in 2008 also
had to be cancelled due to the imposition of restrictions
by China.

The Third Indian Youth Delegation led by Shri S K
Arora, Secretary (Youth Affairs) visited China from
29 June to 8 July 2008. The Third Chinese Youth
Delegation led by Mr. Wang Hongyan, Vice
President of the All China Youth Federation visited
India from 10-19 November, 2008.

Both countries have also interacted constructively on
regional and international issues. Both sides have seen
and agreed to work on their convergence of interests on
issues such as world trade, food and energy security,
climate change concerns, global financial crisis etc. Highlevel meetings on the sidelines of regional and multilateral
conferences have become a highlight of the relationship.
Both sides also interact at various regional forums like
the East Asia Summit, ASEM, SCO, SAARC as observers
and as members.

Mr. Qin Guangrong, Governor of Yunnan Province
visited India from 7-15 November, 2008. Mr. Li
Zhanshu, Governor of Heilongjiang Province visited
India from 20-24 November, 2008. A Six-member
delegation led by H.E. Feng Shuping, Vice
Chairperson of the Standing Committee of the
National People’s Congress of China visited India
from 18-22 October, 2008.
Mr. He Yafei, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs of
China visited India on 5 January, 2009.

Other notable functional exchanges during the year
included the following:

According to the Economic Survey 2008, China is now
India’s largest trading partner. Bilateral trade in 2007 was
US$ 38.96 billion. According to the Chinese sources,
India’s trade deficit stands at US$ 8.32 billion. This issue
has been a matter of concern and has been flagged by
both PM and EAM during their visits.

Union Minister for Tourism and Culture, Ms.
Ambika Soni visited China from 6- 8 April, 2008;
Minister of State for Finance, Shri Pawan Kumar
Bansal visited China in May to participate in the
‘2nd High Level India-China Financial Conference’
organized by China Society for Finance and Banking,
Indian Banks Association and ICEC Council; Chief
Minister of Delhi, Smt. Sheila Dixit visited China
in May; Minister of State in Prime Minister’s Office,
Shri Prithviraj Chavan visited Beijing on 29 July,
2008; Minister of State for Youth Affairs and Sports,
Dr. M.S. Gill attended the opening ceremony of the
Beijing Olympics in August, 2008; Minister for
Urban Development, Shri S Jaipal Reddy undertook
a bilateral visit in September; and Minister of State
in charge of Housing and Poverty Alleviation, Ms.
Kumari Selja visited China from 2-10 November,
2008 during which she attended the World Urban
Forum meeting and also held bilateral discussions
with Chinese counterparts.

Defense cooperation has contributed to enhancement of
mutual trust and cooperation with chief of PLA Navy
visiting India from 1-5 November, 2008 and Indian Chief
of Air Staff visiting Zhuhai for an air show.

Maldives
The bilateral relations between India and the Maldives
continued to be close, friendly. Both the countries
remained engaged in further strengthening this
relationship through high-level exchanges and
implementing various developmental projects in mutually
identified areas. Foreign Secretary Shivshankar Menon
visited Maldives from 27-29 January, 2008 to hold bilateral
discussions with Maldivian authorities. He called on
President of Maldives. He also met Foreign Minister of

Under the exchange programme institutionalized in
8

India’s Neighbours

Maldives paid a State Visit to India at the invitation of
President of India from 23-25 December, 2008. During
his visit, President Nasheed called on President of India
on 24 December, 2008. The Vice-President of India,
External Affairs Minister, Chairperson of UPA and the
Leader of the Opposition in Lok Sabha called on President
Nasheed.

Maldives, besides meeting other senior Government
officials.
Minister of State for Commerce, Jairam Ramesh led an
Indian delegation to Maldives from 29-31 January, 2008.
During his meetings with Maldivian dignitaries, the
Minister discussed ways and means to enhance bilateral
relations and economic cooperation between India and
the Maldives.

Two agreements – Agreement on Standby Credit Facility
of US$ 100 million to Maldives and an Air Services
Agreement, were signed between the two countries on
24 December, 2008.

President of the Republic of Maldives, Maumoon Abdul
Gayoom paid a State Visit to India from 6-12 February,
2008. During his visit, President Gayoom met the
President, Vice-President, Prime Minister, External Affairs
Minister and Raksha Mantri. An Agreement on
Cooperation in the fields of Science & Technology was
signed on 11 February, 2008. Both the countries also
agreed to sign a new MoU on the Indira Gandhi Memorial
Hospital, Male and set up an India-Maldives Foundation.
The Maldives President also received the Sustainable
Development Leadership Award conferred on him by
TERI on 7 February, 2008.

Mr. Ahmed Naseem, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Maldives visited India from 8-10
January, 2009.
Mr. Ameen Faisal, Minister of Defence and National
Security of Maldives visited India from 1-5 February, 2009,
to discuss cooperation in the Defence Sector.
Dr. Aminath Jameel, Minister of Health and Family of
the Republic of Maldives visited India from 22-26
February, 2009. During her visit, Dr. Jameel met the Union
Minister of Health and Family Welfare on 26 February,
2009 and discussed matter of mutual interest covering
public healthcare. She also met the Minister of State
(Independent Charge) for Women and Child
Development.

Mr. Abdulla Shahid, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Maldives visited India from 19-20 September
2008. Two MoUs - one concerning the manpower
requirements of Indira Gandhi Memorial Hospital
(IGMH), Male and the other relating to the establishment
of India-Maldives Foundation were signed on 19
September, 2008.

Dr. Mustafa Lutfi, Minister of Education of the Republic
of Maldives visited New Delhi from 24-28 February, 2009
for attending the Asia-Pacific Sub-Regional Preparatory
Conference for the World Conference on Higher
Education organized by the Ministry of Human Resource
Development in New Delhi from 25-26 February, 2009.

Maldives made an important stride in its history with the
ratification of the new Constitution of Maldives on 7
August, 2008 paving the way of holding first multi-party
Presidential elections in Maldives. Mr. Mohamed
Nasheed, the Presidential candidate of the Maldivian
Democratic Party (MDP), won the election by securing
54.21% of votes as against 45.79% of votes secured by
the incumbent President Maumoon Abdul Gayoom. Vice
President represented India at his inaugural Ceremony
on 11 November, 2008.

Myanmar
India-Myanmar relations are rooted in shared social,
cultural, religious and historical ties. Both countries have
a long land border of nearly 1650 km. Four north-eastern
states viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Manipur and
Mizoram border Myanmar. Myanmar also has a large
population of Indian origin estimated at 2.5 million. Geostrategic factors make it important for India and Myanmar
to have a close relationship.

Dr. Ahmed Shaheed, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Maldives, paid an official Visit to India from
30 November to 2 December, 2008. This was the first
high-level visit to India from Maldives after the new
Government came to power in Maldives. Dr. Shaheed met
the External Affairs Minister and Union Home Minister
on 2 December, 2008.

India-Myanmar relations are reflective of the two
countries’ common desire to cooperate with each other
in order to promote peace and tranquillity along their
border, achieve sustained economic development, foster
people-to-people interaction and work towards achieving
common goals in the sub-regional, regional and
international contexts. Recent years have seen a steady

India continued to provide training facilities to Maldivian
nationals in areas of both civil and defence related
areas.
Mr. Mohamed Nasheed, President of the Republic of
9

Annual Report 2008-2009

growth of exchanges in a variety of sectors, resulting in
the deepening and widening of bilateral ties.

collection of technical data & training to Myanmarese
experts for delimitation of Myanmar’s continental shelf.

The 14th National Level Meeting (NLM) at the level of
Home Secretary/ Deputy Home Minister was held in New
Delhi from 7-10 March, 2008. During the visit, U Nyan
Win called on Prime Minister on 2 January, 2008. He also
met EAM and Vice President on 2 January, 2008.

India remains committed to provide assistance in
developing infrastructure within Myanmar. A number of
projects are under implementation between the two sides
including Kaladan Multi-Modal Transit Transport Project,
Trilateral Highway Project, maintenance and resurfacing
of Tamu-Kalewa-Kalemyo Road and upgradation of RhiTidim and Rhi-Falam Roads.

Myanmar Minister of Foreign Affairs U Nyan Win visited
India from 31 December to 4 January, 2008. H.E. U Kyaw
Thu, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs visited India as
a Special Envoy of Prime Minister from 23-26 January,
2008. Vice Senior General Maung Aye visited India from
2-6 April, 2008. PM Thein Sein and FM U Nyan Win
visited India for the BIMSTEC Summit in November
2008. From Indian side, Minister of State for Commerce
and Industry visited Myanmar in April, June and October
2008.

The Framework Agreement on the Kaladan Multi-Modal
Transit Transport Project, a Protocol on Facilitation of
Transit Transport and a Protocol on Maintenance and
Administration and Double Taxation Avoidance
Agreement were signed between India and Myanmar
during the visit of Vice Senior General Maung Aye, Vice
Chairman, SPDC in April 2008. During the visit of
Minister of State for Commerce and Power, Shri Jairam
Ramesh, to Myanmar from 22-25 June, 2008 the Bilateral
Investment Promotion and Protection Agreement
(BIPPA) was signed.

Foreign Secretary, Shri Shivshankar Menon visited
Myanmar in February, 2008 at the invitation of Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs H.E. U Kyaw Thu. The
discussions during the visit covered a wide range of
bilateral issues, including security and border issues, trade
and economic cooperation and cooperation in crossborder developmental projects, IT, Energy, Power and
Education & Training. Foreign Secretary visited Myanmar
again in November 2008 for foreign office consultation.

As regards bilateral trade, Myanmar’s exports to India
during 2007-08 were US$ 984.48 million, whereas India’s
exports to Myanmar for the same period stood at US$
189.95 million The Third Meeting of the Joint Trade
Committee (JTC) was held in Myanmar from 13-15
October, 2008 in which both Countries agreed to upgrade
border trade to normal trade at the border points MorehTamu and Zowkhathar-Rhi, the opening of a new border
trade point at Avangkhung in the sate of Nagaland in
India and Robermi in Myanmar and to expand the list of
commodities under the Indo-Myanmar Border Trade
Agreement from 22 to 40 items. A business delegation
from Myanmar visited New Delhi from 11-14 November,
2008 to participate in BIMSTEC Business meeting. A
Government-to-Government agreement to ensure steady
export of pulses from Myanmar to India was reached in
November 2008.

India seeks to obtain Myanmar’s cooperation on a
sustained basis to check the activities of Indian Insurgent
Groups (IIGs) in Myanmar. For this purpose, institutional
mechanisms have been developed. These include annual
Foreign Office Consultations (FOC); annual National
Level Meeting (NLM); Sectoral Level Meetings (SLM)
and the bi-annual Army Border Liaison Meetings.
Myanmar vowed at the highest level not to allow its
territory to be used by any organizations that harm
neighbouring countries including India.

India and Myanmar are also emerging as partners in the
field of energy, IT and power. In September 2008, a MoU
was signed between NHPC (India), Ltd. and Ministry of
Power (1) of Myanmar for developing the Tamanthi
Hydro-Power Project in the Chindwin river in Myanmar.
C-DAC has set up an India Myanmar Centre for
Development of IT Skill (IMCEITS), which was
inaugurated by Prime Minister of Myanmar, General Thein
Sein, on 16 October, 2008.

A five-member delegation led by Myanmar Deputy
Minister for Home Affairs Brig. Gen. Phone Swe visited
India to attend the 14th NLM between India and Myanmar
held in New Delhi from 7-10 March, 2008. Security
related issues, drug trafficking, border management issues,
border trade and cross border projects were discussed at
the meeting. The ninth round of Foreign Office
Consultations (FOC) between India and Myanmar were
held in Yangon from 22-23 November, 2008.

India was one of the first countries to rush emergency
relief assistance to Myanmar in the aftermath of Cyclone
Nargis in May 2008. Two Indian Naval ships and eight

The cooperation and exchanges in the defence sector
continued. Government of India provided assistance in
10

India’s Neighbours

Indian Air force aircrafts delivered immediate relief
material, including food grains and medical supplies to
Myanmar. Two self-sustained medical teams were in the
affected areas for more than two weeks. In the
rehabilitation phase, supply of corrugated steel sheets for
providing roofing, replacement of 16 damaged
transformers, delivery of 500 solar torches & lanterns,
installing 20 biomass gasifiers, and 1.8 lakh bottles of IV
fluids were undertaken by India. Cash assistance of US$
200,000 (approximately Rs. 85 lakhs) for the
reconstruction of the Shwedagon Pagoda complex in
Yangon was also handed over to Myanmar.

which CPN (Maoist) emerged as the single largest party.
Nepal was declared a Federal Democratic Republic by the
Constituent Assembly in its first sitting on 28 May, 2008.
Through amendments to the interim constitution, the
posts of President and Vice-President were created. Dr.
Ram Baran Yadav from Nepali Congress and Mr.
Parmananda Jha from Madhesi Janadhikar Forum were
sworn-in as the President and Vice President of Nepal on
23 July, 2008. A coalition government led by Prime
Minister and CPN (Maoist) Chairman Pushpa Kamal
Dahal, also known as ‘Prachanda’ with support from UML,
Madhesi Janadhikar Forum and other smaller political
parties was formed in August 2008.

Under the India-Myanmar Cultural Exchange programme,
an Indian Puppet Theatre Group visited Myanmar and
presented puppet shows in Yangon and in Mandalay in
November.

Following the formation of a new elected government in
Nepal, there had been a regular exchange of high-level
visits between the two countries. Prime Minister of Nepal
visited India on an Official visit from 14-18 September,
2008 and again from 11-14 November, 2008 to participate
in the BIMSTEC Summit. In accordance with the
decisions taken during visit of Prime Minister of Nepal in
September 2008, bilateral mechanisms in various sectors
were re-activated. The Government also provided
assistance of Rs. 20 crores for flood relief, committed to
rebuild the segments of the East-West Highway damaged
in the Kosi floods and Rs. 150 crores credit for POL
supplies to the Government of Nepal. Foreign Minister
of Nepal visited India in August 2008 to participate in
the BIMSTEC Ministerial Meeting.

Dr. M. Hamid Ansari, Vice President of India visited
Myanmar from 5-8 February, 2009. During the visit he
called on H.E. Senior General Than Shwe and Vice Senior
General Maung Aye. He visited Nay Pyi Taw, Yangon and
Mandalay. His discussions covered a range of issues
including security, roads, trade, IT, power, agriculture, oil
and natural gas, education, training and developmental
projects. Agreements for setting up an Industrial Training
Centre by HMT(I) and a Centre for English Language
Training were signed. The Optic Fibre Link between
Moreh and Mandalay was commissioned. Vice President
also inaugurated the Entrepreneurial Development Centre
in Yangon.

In the first high-level visit from India after the declaration
of Nepal as a Federal Democratic Republic, External
Affairs Minister Shri Pranab Mukherjee visited Nepal from
24-26 November, 2008 at the invitation of Foreign
Minister of Nepal. He also extended an invitation to the
President of Nepal to visit India at an early mutually
convenient date. Minister for Commerce and Supplies of
Nepal visited India in January 2009 to participate in the
Petrotech International Oil and Gas Conference and to
meet his counterparts.

The Tenth India- Myanmar Foreign Office Consultations
were held in New Delhi from 5-6 March, 2009. The Indian
side was led by Foreign Secretary Shri Shivshankar Menon
and the Myanmar side by Deputy Foreign Minister, U
Maung Myint. The discussions covered a wide range of
bilateral issues.

Nepal
India extended all possible support to the Government
and people of Nepal in consolidating the peaceful
democratic transition and in its developmental efforts.
The Government remained engaged with the Government
of Nepal with a view to strengthen the multi-faceted ties
and wide-ranging cooperation with Nepal. India stands
ready to assist in every possible way, Nepal’s transition to
a democratic, stable, peaceful and prosperous State.

Cooperation in water resources sector with Nepal made
further progress. On the Multi-Purpose Projects, it was
decided to set up the Pancheshwar Development
Authority for the Pancheshwar Project and to complete
the Joint Project investigations for the Sun Kosi Sapta
Kosi Project at the earliest.
India continued to contribute to the development efforts
of Government of Nepal by undertaking development
projects in the areas of infrastructure, education, health,
rural and community development. The MoU for the

The ongoing democratic transition in Nepal passed several
key milestones during the year. Elections to the
Constituent Assembly were held on 10 April, 2008 in
11

Annual Report 2008-2009

Small Development Project Scheme was further renewed
for a period of three years. Strengthening of border
infrastructure along the India-Nepal border was high on
the Government’s priority. Projects related to
development of Integrated Check-Posts, road and rail
connectivity between the two countries were under
various stages of implementation. Cooperation in the area
of development of human resources, training and capacity
building of Nepali institutions was strengthened further.

Terrorism
Notwithstanding the considerable progress made in the
initial months after the launch of the Fifth Round of the
Composite Dialogue, the issue of terrorism continued to
strain the dialogue process and thereafter led to a pause
in it. Prime Minister Gilani promised India’s Prime
Minister in their meeting in Colombo on 2 August, 2008
on the sidelines of SAARC Summit that he would conduct
an independent investigation into the attack on our
Embassy in Kabul on 7 July, 2008. In the meeting between
Prime Minister and President Zardari in New York on 24
September, 2008, it was further agreed that a special
session of the Joint Anti-Terrorism Mechanism (JATM)
would be held to discuss matters of mutual concern
including the bombing of the Indian Embassy in Kabul.
This special meeting of JATM was held on 24 October,
2008, and the information on leads on the attack on the
Embassy was shared with Pakistan. There has been no
response from Pakistan on our concerns and information
shared with reference to the Kabul attack.

Pakistan
Composite Dialogue Discussions
The Composite Dialogue covering eight subjects namely
Peace and Security including Confidence Building
Measures (CBMs), Jammu & Kashmir; Terrorism and
Drug trafficking; Friendly Exchanges; Economic and
Commercial Cooperation; Tulbul Navigation Project; Sir
Creek and Siachen was resumed in 2004 to deepen and
expand bilateral relations. This followed an assurance
conveyed by the then President of Pakistan on 6 January,
2004 that Pakistan would not permit territory under its
control to support terrorism in any manner. The Fourth
Round of the Composite Dialogue was reviewed in the
meeting of Foreign Secretaries in May 2008 and the Fifth
Round of the Composite Dialogue was launched by the
External Affairs Minister and Pakistan Foreign Minister
on 21 May, 2008. During this meeting, an Agreement on
Consular Access was also signed.

Terrorist attack on Mumbai on 26 November, 2008:
On 1 December, 2008, Pakistan was informed that the
terrorist attack on Mumbai was carried out by elements
from Pakistan. On 22 December, 2008, a letter written by
the arrested terrorist and addressed to Pakistan High
Commission was handed over. On 5 January, 2009, India
handed over to the Pakistan High Commissioner in New
Delhi material linking the Mumbai attack of 26-29
November, 2008 to elements in Pakistan. This material
included: Material from the interrogation of arrested
terrorist; the Pakistani national who is in police custody;
Details of the terrorists’ communication links with
elements in Pakistan during the Mumbai attack;
Recovered weapons and equipment and other articles;
and data retrieved from recovered GPS and satellite phone
instruments used by the terrorists. The evidence was also
presented to the international community. Pakistan is yet
to respond to the evidence presented to it and
notwithstanding the high level statements promising
cooperation, in terms of actual action taken, its response
has been disappointing.

Transport links established in the previous rounds of the
dialogue continued to operate successfully, facilitating the
movement of people and boosting bilateral trade. CrossLoC trade by movement of trucks commenced on 21
October, 2008 on Srinagar-Muzafarrabad and PoonchRawalkot routes. Triple entry permits for LoC Crossings
were introduced with effect from 1 October, 2008.
Frequency of Srinagar-Muzaffarabad and PoonchRawalkot bus services increased from fortnightly to weekly
with effect from 21 August, 2008 and 25 August, 2008
respectively. An MoU was signed on 15 February, 2008 to
upgrade the Air Services Agreement between India and
Pakistan by increasing the frequencies per week from 12
to 28, the designated airlines from one to three and adding
Islamabad and Chennai to the existing four points of call
viz. Mumbai, Delhi, Karachi, and Lahore. In July 2008,
India included M/s Jet Lite and M/s Deccan Aviation
Limited in the list of designated airlines for air services to
Pakistan. In the first meeting of the India-Pakistan
Standing Committee on Bus Services held on 21 February,
2008 it was decided to increase the frequency of DelhiLahore bus service from two to three trips per week.

Diplomatic efforts after the terrorist attack on
Mumbai on 26 November, 2008
In the wake of the terrorist attack, Prime Minister said in
the Lok Sabha that the international community needed
to be galvanized into dealing sternly and effectively with
the epicenter of terrorism, which is located in Pakistan.
Effective steps were to be taken to bring those responsible
for the Mumbai attacks to justice and to ensure such acts
of terrorism do not recur. In pursuance of these, major
12

Prime Minister of Nepal, Pushpa Kamal Dahal ‘Prachanda’ calling on the Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh,
in New Delhi on 12 November, 2008.

President of Sri Lanka, Mahinda Rajapaksa meeting the Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh,
in New Delhi on 13 November, 2008.

13

Annual Report 2008-2009

diplomatic steps were taken bilaterally and internationally.
As a consequence, the United Nations, Al Qaeda and
Talibans Sanctions Committee listed under Security
Council Resolution 1267, individuals and entities based
in Pakistan including leaders of the Lashkar-e-Tayyiba.
The Jamat-ud-Dawa was also listed as an alias of the LeT.
To present the full details of the terrorist attacks and also
the well-founded evidence linking the attacks to elements
in Pakistan, detailed briefings for all resident Heads of
Missions based in India were organised in the Ministry of
External Affairs. Our Heads of Mission abroad similarly
briefed their Governments of accreditation. In addition,
the External Affairs Minister wrote to his counterparts in
all countries forwarding detailed dossiers on the terrorist
attacks and with the evidence incriminating elements in
Pakistan.

commencement of Cross-LoC trade on the SrinagarMuzaffarabad and Poonch-Rawalakot roads on 21
October, 2008. It was also agreed that Modalities for the
opening of the Skardu-Kargil route will be discussed soon.
External Affairs Minister’s interactions
External Affairs Minister visited Pakistan from 20-21 May,
2008. The visit was in the wake of the installation of a
new democratic dispensation in Pakistan following the
victory of the PPP in the General Election. During this
meeting the fourth round of Composite Dialogue was
concluded and the fifth round launched. Mr. Shah
Mahmood Qureshi, Foreign Minister of Pakistan visited
New Delhi on 27 June, 2008. Foreign Minister Qureshi
visited New Delhi again from 26-29 November, 2008. In
this meeting the Ministers noted that the substantial
achievements have already been made in the Fifth Round
of Composite Dialogue such as the opening of cross-LoC
trade, the agreement in principle to open the WagahAttari route for all permissible items of trade, the opening
of Khokrapar-Munabao rail link for trade in cargo,
discussion on modalities of the Kargil-Skardu link, etc.

High Level Meetings
Prime Minister’s Meeting with Pakistan Prime Minister
The Prime Minister met the Prime Minister of Pakistan
Mr. Yousuf Raza Gilani in Colombo on 2 August, 2008 on
the sidelines of SAARC Summit and also in Beijing on 24
October, 2008 on the sidelines of ASEM Summit. In the
meeting with the Pakistan PM on 2 August, 2008 in
Colombo, Prime Minister expressed our concerns about
events which have had an impact on our bilateral
relations: the attack on our Embassy in Kabul, the ceasefire
violations and continued attempts at infiltration across
the Line of Control. Both Prime Ministers expressed the
determination that two countries need to overcome these
events and to move back on the track of improving
relations. Prime Minister Gilani also promised that he
would conduct an independent investigation into the
attack on our Embassy.

Humanitarian Issues
A significant number of Indian prisoners, fishermen and
boats are in Pakistani custody. Pakistan too has concerns
about its nationals in jails in India. The first meeting of
India-Pakistan Judicial Committee on Prisoners was
held on 26 February, 2008. The Committee made
recommendations to the two Governments, which interalia include immediate release of and consular access to
fishermen and exchange of consolidated list of nationals
in each others’ jails on 31 March, 2008. The Committee
visited jails in Pakistan in June 2008 and jails in India in
August 2008 and made several recommendations.

Prime Minister’s meeting with Pakistan President
Prime Minister met President of Pakistan Mr. Asif Zardari
on the sidelines of UNGA meeting in New York on 24
September, 2008. In this meeting, the commitment of
Pakistan to its assurance contained in the 6 January, 2004
Joint Press Statement was reiterated by President of
Pakistan. It was agreed that both countries would schedule
meetings of the Fifth Round of the Composite Dialogue
in the next three months; the ceasefire should be
stabilized; a special meeting of the Joint Anti-Terror
Mechanism would be held in October 2008 to address
mutual concerns including the bombing of the Indian
Embassy in Kabul; the expansion of people-to-people
contacts, trade, commerce and economic cooperation by
opening of the Wagah-Attari road link and KhokraparMunabao rail route to all permissible items of trade;

Commerce and Trade
India attaches importance to bilateral economic and
commercial cooperation including transit trade with
Pakistan as a part of the overall normalisation of relations.
Total bilateral trade was of the order of US$ 2.12 billion
in the year 2007-2008, 27% more than in 2006-2007 (US
$1.67 billion). In the period April-December 2008 total
trade however was of the order of US$ 1.3 billion.
Pakistan’s export to India in this period was however 30%
higher (US$293 million) as compared to 2007-08 as a
whole (US$ 211 million). Unofficial trade through third
countries is also of significance which increases the
transaction costs for end users in Pakistan. While India
has accorded MFN status to Pakistan, Pakistan continues
to restrict items of import from India to a positive list. On
SAFTA, Pakistan has refused to extend the negotiated
14

India’s Neighbours

tariff concessions to items outside the positive list to India
thereby negating the letter and spirit of SAFTA as exports
are limited only to items on the positive list.

India reiterated the belief that there was no military
solution to the conflict and the way forward lies in a
peacefully negotiated political settlement acceptable to
all the communities within the framework of a united Sri
Lanka. This should include, among other things, a credible
and genuine devolution package and implementation of
the 13th Amendment to the Sri Lankan Constitution.

Pakistan announced a new Trade Policy on 19 July, 2008
and added 139 more items to be added in the Positive
List. Incremental expansion to the Positive List is the
preferred policy in Pakistan as the means to expand
bilateral trade rather than address issue of MFN status
frontally.

As a gesture of goodwill, India has extended humanitarian
relief assistance to civilians and Internally Displaced
Persons in the northern part of Sri Lanka. Three
instalments of relief material have been dispatched so far.
In the first instalment, 80,000 family packs of relief
material mobilised by the State Government of Tamil
Nadu were distributed in the affected areas in December
2008 by the ICRC office in Sri Lanka. The second and
third instalment comprising of medicines were handed
over to Sri Lanka in the first three months of 2009. Further,
in March 2009, India has sent a 52-member emergency
medical unit with hospital to North Eastern Sri Lanka to
cater to the urgent medical requirement of civilians
coming out of the conflict zone.

Other Issues
India extended a flood relief assistance of Rs.1.3 Crores
to the government of North West Frontier Province for
the relief supplies in September 2008 following severe
floods in the Province.

Sri Lanka
India’s bilateral engagement with Sri Lanka maintained
the positive momentum of the previous year. Exchange
of visits at the highest political level contributed to the
strengthening of bilateral relations. Prime Minister Dr.
Manmohan Singh met President Mahinda Rajapaksa
during the 15th SAARC Summit in Colombo on 2 & 3
August, 2008. The Summit was preceded by the meeting
of the SAARC Council of Ministers, during which
Minister of External Affairs Mr. Pranab Mukherjee met
with his Sri Lankan counterpart, Mr. Rohitha
Bogollagama. Foreign Minister Rohitha Bogollagama had
visited India on 16 June 2008 to deliver invitation for the
SAARC Summit in Colombo. The two Foreign Ministers
again met in New Delhi on 26 August, 2008 on the
sidelines of the Tenth BIMSTEC Ministerial Meeting and
in New York on 1 October, 2008 on the sidelines of the
UNGA. External Affairs Minister Mr. Pranab Mukherjee
visited Sri Lanka on 27 January, 2009 and held discussions
with President Mahinda Rajapaksa. This was preceded
by Foreign Secretary Shivshankar Menon’s visit to Sri
Lanka from 16-17 January, 2009.

India and Sri Lanka have also reached an understanding
on fishing arrangements under which both sides agreed
to put in place practical arrangements to deal with
bonafide fishermen crossing the International Maritime
Boundary Line from either country. This was agreed to
during the visit of Sri Lankan Member of Parliament and
Special Envoy of the President, Basil Rajapaksa, to New
Delhi on 26 October 2008.
Bilateral economic and trade ties continued to expand
during the period under review. India is Sri Lanka’s largest
trade partner, accounting for 16.8% or 1/6th of the total
trade turnover of Sri Lanka. Total trade in 2008 stood at
US $3.265 billion. With FDI approvals of over US$ 500
million, India is also the fourth largest investor in Sri
Lanka. Bharti Airtel, which was allowed entry as the fourth
mobile operator in Sri Lanka, has begun operations. India
has also extended a $100 million Line of Credit for the
upgradation of the Colombo-Matara railway line by
RITES-IRCON.

The security situation in Sri Lanka, especially the conflict
in the North and the resultant plight of civilians and
Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs), remained important
issues in the bilateral dialogue between India and Sri
Lanka. External Affairs Minister reiterated India’s concern
at the deteriorating humanitarian situation during his visit
in January 2009 and emphasized the need for a pause to
enable civilians to move to safety. He underlined the need
to ensure the safety and security of the civilians, to respect
and expand safe zones, and to minimise the effects of the
conflict on civilians.

The two countries have concluded their negotiations on
a Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement
(CEPA), which is expected to further widen and deepen
our trade and economic engagement. An Agreement on
Cooperation in Science & Technology was signed between
India and Sri Lanka in New Delhi in October 2008 which
provides for seminars, workshops and exchange of visits
by scientists and researchers. A Mutual Recognition
15

Annual Report 2008-2009

Agreement and another agreement on cooperation among
tea research institutions were signed by the Tea Boards of
India and Sri Lanka in September 2008. Earlier, in May
2008, the Sri Lankan Roads Development Authority
(RDA) and the Indian National Highways Authority of
India (NHAI) signed an MoU on Cooperation.

Another project to create facilities for vocational training
at Puttalam is near completion.
In the education sector, India continued to push the
initiative to upgrade the educational infrastructure of
schools in the Central Province, including teachers’
training, setting up of computer labs, the Mahatma Gandhi
scholarship scheme for A-level students and 20
scholarships to Indian Origin Tamils to undertake four
year degree courses in Gandhigram Rural University in
India. India also contributed to the Ceylon Workers
Education Trust that gives scholarships to children of
estate workers every year.

Development assistance to Sri Lanka is another significant
plank of India’s bilateral engagement with Sri Lanka.
Projects include financial assistance to set up 20 Nenasalas
(e-learning kiosks), providing fishermen in the Eastern
Province, who were affected by the ethnic conflict, with
fishing boats and nets, and grant of ten buses to augment
the infrastructure of the newly set up government in the
Eastern Province. During the year, India also implemented
a project under which 41 English teachers from Sri Lanka
were sent for training to Hyderabad as teacher trainers.

On the cultural side, an exhibition of photographs of
Buddhist art and heritage by the noted photographer,
Benoy Behl was organized in Matara. The exhibition will
also go to other cities.

16

South East Asia and the Pacific

Australia

2

with the State Governments of New South Wales and
Western Australia. External Affairs Minister Shri Pranab
Mukherjee visited Canberra for the bilateral Foreign
Ministers’ Framework Dialogue on 23 June, 2008. An
Extradition Treaty and a Treaty on Mutual Legal
Assistance in Criminal Matters were signed during the
visit. Minister of State for External Affairs E. Ahamed
also visited Sydney in August 2008.

I

ndia-Australia bilateral relations continued to develop
in various spheres and several high-level visits from both
sides took place during the year. This started with the
visit of Special Envoy of the Prime Minister, Shri Shyam
Saran to Australia in January 2008 for discussions with
Foreign Minister Mr. Stephen Smith in Perth. Trade
Minister of Australia, Mr. Simon Crean visited India from
15-19 January and discussed bilateral issues relating to
Trade, Commerce and Investment. During this visit, he
delivered a speech in CII Partnership Summit held from
16-18 January and also met RBI Governor and Ministers
of Agriculture, Finance, Mines, Commerce & Industry,
Science & Technology and the Deputy Chairman of
Planning Commission. Minister for Science & Technology
and Earth Sciences Shri Kapil Sibal visited Sydney,
Melbourne and Brisbane in February 2008 at the invitation
of Minister for Innovation, Science and Research Mr. Kim
Carr. Shri Sibal interacted with five Universities and seven
Research institutions. The subsequent meetings of the
Joint Science & Technology Committee and the Joint
Biotechnology Committee within three months of the visit
of Shri Sibal were indicative of the strong desire to
enhance our interaction with Australia in these sectors.
Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar, Minister of Development for
North Eastern Region visited Australia to participate in
the North East India Investment Opportunities Seminar
in Sydney from 30-31 March 2008.

From Australia, Foreign Minister Stephen Smith visited
India in September 2008. A Joint Working Group (JWG)
on Passports, Visa and Consular Matters was established
during the visit. A delegation led by Minister of Resources,
Energy and Tourism of Australia Mr. Martin Ferguson
visited India from 3-6 November, 2008. Action Plans for
co-operation were signed by the Australian side with the
Ministries of Mines, Coal, Power, Petroleum & Natural
Gas and New & Renewable Energy.
India-Australia bilateral trade during 2007-08 reached A$
10.9 billion, comprising of A$ 9.3 billion in Australian
exports to India and A$ 1.6 billion in exports from India
to Australia. India was Australia’s sixth largest export
destination. India was also the third largest source of
immigrants, the second largest source of skilled workers,
and the second largest source of overseas students for
Australia.

Brunei
Bilateral relations with Brunei Darussalam continued to
be cordial and friendly. Important areas of interactions
were political, defense and commercial.

The 11th meeting of the Joint Ministerial Commission,
co-chaired by Commerce and Industry Minister Shri
Kamal Nath and Australian Trade Minister Mr. Simon
Crean, took place in Melbourne on 20 May, 2008. The
Joint Business Council meeting anchored by FICCI and
the Australia-India Business Council; the second meeting
of the Joint Study Group on FTA feasibility study also
took place in Melbourne, on 21 May, 2008. Minister of
State for Civil Aviation Shri Praful Patel visited Sydney,
Melbourne and Canberra at the invitation of Australian
Minister for Infrastructure, Transport, Regional
Development and Local Government Mr. Anthony
Albanese. Minister of State for Steel Shri Jitin Prasada
visited Sydney and Perth in June 2008 for interactions

At the invitation of the President of India, Sultan of
Brunei, Haji Hassanal Bolkiah Mu'izzaddin Waddaulah
paid a four-day state visit to India from 20-23 May, 2008.
The visit took place after more than 15 years since his
last visit to India. The Sultan met various Indian leaders
and held discussions with Prime Minister on bilateral,
regional and international issues of mutual interest.
During the visit, the following MoUs/Agreements were
signed: (i) Agreement on Reciprocal Promotion and
Protection of Investments; (ii) MoU of Cooperation in
Information and Communication Technology; (iii) MoU
17

Annual Report 2008-2009

Preah Vihear Temple in Cambodia for its inscription on
World Heritage List of UNESCO. The temple was
successfully inscribed on World Heritage List of UNESCO.

on Cooperation in the fields of Culture, Arts and Sports;
(iv) MoU on the Establishment of Joint Trade Committee;
(v) Renewal of MoU on Cooperation in the Operation of
the Telemetry Tracking and Telecomm and Station for
Satellite and Launch Vehicles and for Cooperation in the
field of Space Research Science and Applications.

Bilateral trade has steadily grown during the year. To
promote increased exports from Cambodia to India,
Custom Notification has been issued in August 2008
extending Duty Free Tariff Preference Scheme to
Cambodia. Cambodia is an important partner in
combating terrorism, drug trafficking, illegal arms
smuggling and related crimes.

Two Indian Naval Ships, INS Gharial and INS Kulish
visited Maura Port in Brunei from 18-20 October, 2008
for a three day goodwill visit. The visit by the Indian Naval
ships was a part of increasing engagements between Indian
and Bruneian Armed Forces under expanding bilateral
ties spurred by the Sultan’s visit to India in May 2008.

Two Indian Navy Ships visited Cambodia during the year.
Under ITEC Scheme, Indian Army is continuing to train
Cambodian personnel in specialized de-mining operations
since 1995, and slots in peace-keeping training were also
offered. India gifted medical stores comprising ambulance
vans, equipment and supplies and medicines worth Rs.
2.5 crores, and engineering and artillery stores worth Rs.
1.025 crores to the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces.

Shri G.K. Pillai, Commerce Secretary led a delegation for
the ASEAN Senior Economic Ministers-India
Consultations held in Brunei from 5-7 August, 2008 and
concluded the negotiations on India-ASEAN FTA on
Trade in Goods.
The Dy. Minister of Communications, Dato Mohd Yusof
attended the ICT Forum organized by the Commonwealth
Telecommunications Organizations in Kochi from 15-18
April, 2008.

Cambodia has been consistently supportive of various
Indian initiatives and interests in regional and
international fora including our candidature for a
permanent seat on the UNSC. Cambodia has formally
communicated its support for our candidature for a nonpermanent seat on the United Nations Security Council
for the years 2011-12. In the context of our ‘Look East’
policy and the ASEAN, Cambodia is an important
interlocutor and a good partner.

A nine-member delegation from the Ministry of
Communication of Brunei Darussalam, headed by Dato
Eusoff Agakia, Deputy Minister at the Prime Minister’s
Office, paid a working visit to India from 7-11 April, 2008.

Cambodia
Fiji

Bilateral relations between India and Cambodia remained
cordial and friendly.

India continued its engagement with the interim
Government of the Republic of Fiji Islands led by the
Interim Prime Minister, Commodore Josaia Voreqe
Bainimarama. India focused on social and economic
assistance to Fiji while continuing its emphasis on the
need for Fiji to return to democratic system, and aiming
at promoting peace and harmony amongst major
communities for sustained economic development.

India continued its bilateral assistance to Cambodia
through grants and Lines of Credit. Several projects under
India’s assistance in the areas of hydro electric power,
irrigation, and restoration of temples are under
implementation. Other major assistance for installation
of hand pumps for drinking water supply in rural Cambodia
and establishment of Centre of Excellence in IT are being
processed. Prof. Saifuddin Soz, Minister of Water
Resources, visited Cambodia from 15-19 February and met
Mr. Lin Kean Hor, Minister of Water Resources &
Meteorology.

Mr. Mahendra Pal Chaudhry, Interim Minister for Finance,
National Planning and Sugar Industry and Public Utilities
visited India from 25 April to 2 May, 2008 during which,
he called on Prime Minister, and met with Minister for
Finance, Minister for Science and Technology & MoS for
Railways. Commissioner of Police Mr. Teleni visited India
from 24-28 June, 2008 and interacted with the Indian
officials in order to understand the structure, capacity and
functioning of Indian Police Force. Mr Francis Narayan,
Chairman, Fiji Islands Trade & Investment Bureau (FTIB)
led a trade and investment delegation to India from
20 September to 3 October, 2008 with focus on enhancing

A new Line of Credit of US$ 15 million for three mini
hydel projects was approved for Cambodia in June 2008,
which will be utilized for a transmission line between
Paling and Battambang in Cambodia.
As a part of our close cultural ties, India provided
assistance for preparation of a Management Plan for the
18

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh with Sultan Haji Hassanal Bolkiah Mu'izzaddin Waddaulah, of Brunei,
in New Delhi on 21 May, 2008.

19

Annual Report 2008-2009

cooperation in the field of Information and
Communication Technology.

Indonesian Minister of Health Siti Fadilah Supari visited
India in 2008. The Indonesian Trade Minister also visited
India in 2008. Minister of Commerce and Industry Shri
Kamal Nath visited Indonesia in April 2008 to attend
the ASEAN-India Economic Ministers’ meeting. A
delegation led by Minister of State for Environment and
Forests, Shri Namo Narain Meena visited Bali for COP
nine Meeting of Basel Convention in June 2008. Minister
of State for Labour and Employment Shri Oscar Fernandez
visited Bali to participate in the Second ASEM Labour
and Employment Ministers’ Conference in October 2008.
Secretary (East), MEA led an Indian delegation to
participate in ASEAN-India meeting in Bali in April 2008.

Indian experts from the Central Plantation Crops
Research Institute visited Fiji Islands from 26 June to 23
August, 2008 and assisted Fiji’s Coconut Industry
Development Authority and presented a blueprint for the
development of coconut industry in Fiji Islands. Indian
Culture Centre is offering classes in Indian classical music,
yoga and Hindi language. To assist Fiji’s recent
implementation of three-language formula, India donated
19,000 Hindi language books, thereby supplying study
materials in all the primary and secondary schools of Fiji.
India has also provided assistance in the form of sewing
machines for the economically backward women of Fiji.

During the year, there has been a rapid development of
our ties in all fields. The two countries have had regular
defence exchanges including exchange of high level visits,
ship visits, officers studying in Staff Colleges in either
country and joint coordinated patrols in the mouth of
the Malacca Straits. Chief of Army Staff visited Indonesia
in February 2009.

Indonesia
The year 2008-2009 witnessed continued close bilateral
relations with Indonesia. There has been regular exchange
of high-level visits and other delegation-level visits
between the two countries. This has further strengthened
the already close political, security, defence, commercial
and cultural contacts between India and Indonesia.

Indonesia is our third largest trading partner in ASEAN.
Bilateral trade was US$ 6.5 billion in 2007 and amounted
to US$ 5.8 billion in the first half of 2008. We have active
cultural exchanges leveraging the strong imprint of Indian
culture in Indonesian society. Various cultural activities
were organized throughout the year by our two Cultural
Centres established in Jakarta and Bali. During the year,
Indonesia was offered 75 training slots under ITEC, 38
training slots under TCS of Colombo Plan, 25 GCSS
scholarships slots and two Hindi one-year course
scholarships. The Mission celebrated ITEC Day on 14
November, 2008 in which 200 ITEC alumni participated.

President, Smt. Pratibhadevi Singh Patil paid State Visit
to Indonesia from 28 November to 1 December, 2008.
During the visit, the President visited Bali and Jakarta. In
Bali, the Governor of Bali called on the President. The
President visited the Taman Ayu Temple and addressed a
gathering of prominent citizens, cultural personalities and
members of the Indian community in Bali. In Jakarta, the
President held bilateral talks with President Yudhoyono
of Indonesia. During the discussions, the two leaders
expressed satisfaction at the development of bilateral
relations and resolved to carry the bilateral relationship
to a new level in consonance with the objectives of the
Strategic Partnership between India and Indonesia. After
the bilateral talks two MoUs - on Agricultural Cooperation
and Cooperation in Youth Affairs & Sports - were signed.
This was followed by Joint Press Statements by the two
Presidents. President also called on the Speaker of the
House of Representatives, the Chairman of the House of
Regional Representatives and the Chairman of the
People’s Consultative Assembly.

In the international arena, Indonesia holds positions
favourable to India on many of the issues of concern.
Indonesia strongly condemned the Mumbai terrorist
attacks and is deeply conscious of its own vulnerabilities
to terrorism as a pluralistic and archipelagic nation.
Indonesia favours a resolution of the Kashmir issue
through peaceful dialogue and broadly maintains a neutral
stance on India-Pakistan issues and records its reservations
on anti-India resolutions in the OIC. Indonesia, however,
enjoys warm relations with Pakistan and has been careful
not to alienate Pakistan in pursuing friendly relations with
India. Indonesia has been supportive of India’s ‘Look East
Policy’ and is currently the ASEAN Coordinator for India’s
Dialogue Partnership with the ASEAN. Indonesia was also
a strong advocate of India’s participation in the East Asia
Summit.

There have been regular Parliamentary contacts between
the two sides. A Parliamentary delegation of the
Indonesian House of Representatives from CommitteeIX (Health and Labour) visited India on a Study Tour
from 11-17 October, 2008. An Indonesian delegation of
the Parliamentary Friendship Group for India led by Mr.
Fahri Hamza visited India from 2-6 November, 2008.

The Economic Research Institute for ASEAN and East
20

President, Pratibha Devisingh Patil meeting the President of Republic of Indonesia, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono,
at Jakarta, Indonesia on 1 December, 2008.

President of Lao PDR, Choummaly Sayasone laying wreath at the Samadhi of Mahatma Gandhi at Rajghat,
in Delhi on 27 August, 2008.

21

Annual Report 2008-2009

on the decisions taken at the Fourth India-Malaysia Joint
Commission meeting. This was evident in marked forward
movement on issues relating to economic, commercial,
defense and consular spheres.

Asia (ERIA) was established in Jakarta on 3 June, 2008
to enhance economic integration in East Asia. Shri Ratan
Tata is India’s nominee on the ERIA Governing Board.
Indonesia held the first meeting of the Bali Democracy
Forum in December 2008. This is a new regional initiative
to promote democracy and good governance in the AsiaPacific region. Under the initiative of New Asian-African
Strategic Partnership (NAASP), Indonesia hosted a
Ministerial Conference on Capacity Building for Palestine
which was held in Jakarta from 14-15 July, 2008. The
Conference agreed to establish a follow-up mechanism
for the planning, implementation, monitoring and
evaluation of the capacity building programmes.

The Foreign Office Consultations between India and
Malaysia took place in New Delhi on 13 May, 2008 which
allowed both the sides to review the status of bilateral
relations. Both sides agreed to strengthen and deepen
engagement and cooperation, as well as exchange of
experiences between the two countries. The year was
marked by high level visits from both the sides and by a
number of important economic/commercial events
organized in Malaysia.

Lao PDR

The bilateral trade during the January-October 2008
period matches with the performance during 2007
performance. The two-way trade during the first ten
months (January-October) of 2008 has reached US $ 9.1
billion registering 34% growth over the corresponding
period in the preceding year. This compares favourably
with the two-way 2007 trade figure of US $ 8.14 billion
(Indian exports US $2.1 billion and imports US $6.03
billion) or about 24% growth over the previous year. The
bilateral trade is expected to touch US $ Ten billion by
the end of the current year, ahead of the target date of
2010. Significantly, India’s exports during January-October
2008 of US $2.7 billion marks a 58% over the
corresponding period during the last year.

The highlight of bilateral relations this year was the State
Visit of President of Lao PDR to India from 26-30 August,
2008. It was the first visit by a Lao President to India
after a gap of more than 30 years. During the visit, India
announced humanitarian assistance of US $ 1 million for
flood relief in Vientiane, and construction of Buddhist
College at Champassak, Lao PDR. Gifting of 50
parachutes for the 60th Anniversary of Lao Defense Forces
in 2009 was also announced. India’s commitment for
construction of neurological hospital, and Air Force
Academy in Lao PDR was reiterated. The two countries
signed a Line of Credit Agreement for US$ 33 million to
be utilized for three hydro- power projects. India also
increased the ITEC training slots from 60 at present to
80 and from 14 scholarships to 20 for Lao nationals to
study in India from this year.

One of the notable developments in 2008 is a decision of
the Malaysian Ministry of Transport to award IRCON a
major Railway Double Tracking Project worth over US $
1 billion.

A five-member delegation led by the Lao Vice Minister
of Education, Mrs. Sengduane Lachanthaboun visited
India from 23-27 June, 2008. The delegation had
interaction with the senior officials and different agencies
of the Ministry of Human Resource Development of India.

Based on the recommendations of a Joint Study Group,
India and Malaysia have started negotiations in February
2008 to work out a Comprehensive Economic
Cooperation Agreement (CECA) with a view to conclude
it in 2009. So far, two meetings of Trade Negotiating
Committee (TNC) were held, one in Kuala Lumpur in
February 2008 and the second in New Delhi in June/July
2008.

The first Indian Trade exhibition was held in Vientiane
from 14-17 November, 2008 and an Indian Puppet group
visited on the occasion. The Indian Air Force Suryakiran
Aerobatics team performed in Laos from 16-17 November,
2008. It was the first ever show of this magnitude in Laos.

Indian investments during first ten months of 2008
amounted to US $48.44 million. Announcements have
also been made by Indian companies namely Hyderabadbased Vivo Bio Tech Ltd to invest US $ 140 million,
Malladi Group US $300 million over the next 3 -5 years
and Ad labs to invest US $ 29 million. India’s Reliance
Capital Asset received an Islamic fund management
license from Malaysian Government in November 2008.
Malaysia is the 21st largest investor in India as per the
cumulative FDI approved since January, 1991 with more

Lao PDR supports India for a permanent seat in the
expanded Security Council as well as on nuclear issue.

Malaysia
The year saw significant progress in strengthening of
bilateral relations between India and Malaysia. Bilateral
relations gathered further momentum in various sectors
of our relations with Malaysia as both sides followed up
22

South East Asia and the Pacific

also for the range facility and allied support for firing its
air-to-ground weapons (under consideration).

than 210 FDI approvals, valued at US$ 1.84 billion.
Malaysian investments into India are also increasing in
recent years. Maxis plans to invest in India between US $
4 to 5 billion in 2009-10 and another company TMI US $
1.8 billion in 2009. If we include investments made
through Mauritius route, cumulative Malaysian
investments in India till date stands in excess of US$ 4.5
billion.

The Chief of Army Staff, General Deepak Kapoor, paid
an official visit to Malaysia from 4 -6 February, 2008 at
the invitation of his counterpart, Chief of Army, General
Muhammad Ismail. His main engagements included indepth discussions with General Ismail and call on the
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Defense, Mohd.
Najib. He also visited Southeast Asia Regional Centre
for Counter Terrorism and the Army Combat Training
Centre (PULADA). This was the first visit of our COAS
to Malaysia since 1999.

The Second Malaysia-India Economic Conference
(MIEC) 2008 was held in September 2008, which was
attended by over 600 businessmen from Malaysia and
India. The First Malaysia-India Strategic Dialogue under
the aegis of CII and Asian Strategic and Leadership
Institute (ASLI) of Malaysia were held in Kuala Lumpur
in September 2008. Ambassador Satinder Lamba, Special
Envoy of the Prime Minister led the Indian delegation.
This was the first important Track-II dialogue in recent
years held between the two countries, which
recommended the setting up an India-Malaysia
Foundation to provide a strategic depth to the bilateral
relationship. The First India-Malaysia CEOs Forum was
also held on the margins of the Strategic Dialogue.

Chief of the Air Staff, Air Chief Marshal F H Major made
an official visit to Malaysia from 17-21 August, 2008.
During the visit, the CAS called on Deputy Prime Minister
Mohd Najib and the Deputy Defence Minister Wira Abu
Seman as also the CDF, General Abdul Aziz, besides his
discussions with his counterpart, General Azizan bin
Ariffin, Chief of the Royal Malaysian Air Force. He also
visited two strategic airbases on the Eastern coast of
Malaya Peninsula: Kuantan (MiG-29 and F-18 Base) and
Gong Kedag (Su-30 MKM Base). At Gong Kedak, the
CAS met the IAF Training Team (deployed in Malaysia
for a period of two years to train RMAF personnel on
(Su-30MKM) personnel and their families. The CAS also
visited Aerospace Inspection, Repair and Overhaul Depot
(AIROD) and Aerospace Systems Technology Corps
(ASTC), the two companies responsible for maintenance
of aerospace assets in Malaysia.

India figures in as one of the focus countries for promoting
inbound tourism to Malaysia. The tourist inflow from India
has increased substantially over the years. During JanuaryNovember 2008, Indian tourists visiting Malaysia crossed
0.5 million mark, as compared to 0.28 million in 2007
and 0.18 million in 2006. Malaysia is the Tenth largest
source country for foreign tourists with a total of 0.113
million visiting India in 2007, accounting for 2.22% of
total foreign tourist inflows into India, marking an increase
of six per cent over the figures of 2006 (0.107 million).

Indian Navy and Coast Guard ships visited Malaysia as
part of their Overseas Deployment in Southeast/ East Asia.
The Malaysian ports visited included Lumut (by two Naval
ships) and Penang and Port Clang (by three Coast Guard
ships). Chief of Royal Malaysian Navy (RMN) visited
India to participate in Indian Ocean Naval Symposium
(IONS)-2008 from 13-18 February, 2008. He also visited
the defense exhibition, DefExpo-2008 in New Delhi.

Indo-Malaysia Defense Cooperation received a major
boost with highly successful visit of the Raksha Mantri,
A. K. Antony to Malaysia from 6-8 January, 2008, followed
by the visits by the Chiefs of Army and Air Staff in
February and August 2008 respectively. The enhanced
scope of cooperation included operationalisation of the
Service-specific staff talks for the Army and Air Force
(Navy-to-Navy staff talks had been activated earlier). The
high point in the defense cooperation was the signing and
implementation of the protocol on training of the Royal
Malaysian Air Force (RMAF) personnel for operation and
maintenance of the Su-30 MKM aircraft, by the Indian
Air Force (IAF) in India and in Malaysia. The technical
training was conducted in India from January to June
2008. For the ‘flying’ and ‘ground’ training in Malaysia, a
31 member IAF Training team has been deployed in
Malaysia for a period of two years, commencing February
2008. RMAF has also requested for logistic and spares’
support for the Su-30 MKM (being pursued by HAL), as

Indian Defense Minister, A. K. Antony visited Malaysia
on a three-day visit on 6 January, 2008. He was
accompanied by Defense Secretary Vijay Singh, Deputy
Chief of Army Staff Lt-Gen ZU Shah, Deputy Chief of Air
Staff Air Marshal Nok Browne and Vice-Admiral KN
Sushil.
Railway Minister Shri Lalu Prasad was in Kuala Lumpur
from 14-17 May, 2008, to witness the award of the RM
3.45 billion 100 km electrified double-tracking railway
from Seremban to Gemas in the Southern part of
Peninsular Malaysia to Indian Railway Construction Co
(IRCON).
23

Annual Report 2008-2009

Minister of Communications and Information Technology,
Shri A. Raja was in Kuala Lumpur for an official visit from
19-21 May, 2008, during which he addressed the
Ministerial Forum at the 16 th World Congress on
Information technology (WCIT 2008), and also attended
the First International Multilateral Partnership Against
Cyber-Terrorism (IMPACT) Ministerial Summit.

significance as it was the first ever visit of a New Zealand
Governor General to India as also the fact that Anand
Satyanand is of Indian heritage. The Governor General
met the President, the Prime Minister and various other
Indian leaders. He also met with state authorities in
Mumbai and Hyderabad.
The Commerce and Industry Minister, Shri Kamal Nath,
visited New Zealand from 21-24 May, 2008. During the
visit he held talks with his New Zealand counterpart Phil
Goff and Agricultural and Fishery Minister Jim Anderton.
A Joint Trade Committee meeting and Joint Business
Council Meeting were also held during the visit. The
Padma Vibhushan Award conferred on Sir Edmund Hillary
by the Government of India posthumously on Republic
Day, 2008 was handed over to Lady June Hillary, wife of
Sir Edmund by Shri Kamal Nath on 22 May, 2008.

Lok Sabha Speaker Shri Somnath Chatterjee led an Indian
delegation of six Members of Parliament and Speakers
from 26 State Assemblies, for the 54th Commonwealth
Parliamentary Association (CPA) in Kuala Lumpur from
1-9 August, 2008. Km. Selja, Minister of State
(Independent Charge) for Housing and Urban Poverty
Alleviation attended the CPA in her capacity as the
Commonwealth Women Parliamentarian (CWP)
Member. The General Assembly of the CPA elected Shri
Somnath Chatterjee, along with Shri Uday Pratap Singh,
Speaker from Bihar and Shri Tanka Bahadur Rai, Speaker
from Assam as Regional Representatives from India
Region, on the Executive Committee of the CPA.

Minister of Youth, Sports & Local Government, Shri Mani
Shankar Aiyar, visited New Zealand in April 2008.
Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri E. Ahamed
led the Indian delegation to the Pacific Islands Post-Forum
Dialogue Partners’ Meeting in Niue on 21 August, 2008.

Former President Abdul Kalam visited Malaysia from 2729 August, 2008 at the invitation of Prime Minister, Datuk
Seri Abdullah Ahmad Badawi to deliver the Khazanah
Global Lecture. The title of the lecture was “Dynamics of
Societal Transformations”. He delivered a lecture at
University Malaya (UM) and also gave a Lincoln Inn
Memorial Lecture on “Law and Development”. His other
engagements included, meeting corporate leaders at the
Carcosa Seri Negara and scientists and academicians at
Tenaga Nasional Berhad (TNB). He was also conferred
with an Honorary Doctorate from University Sains
Malaysia in Penang.

Shri Hardeep Singh Puri, Secretary (ER), visited New
Zealand on 11 August, 2008 as PM’s Special Envoy and
held meetings with Mr. Phil Goff, Minister for Defence,
Disarmament, Arms Control & Trade and senior officials
of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs & Trade in connection
with the US-India Civil Nuclear Agreement and the NSG
exemption.
An Memorandum of Understanding on cooperation
between the Indian Council for World Affairs and the
New Zealand Institute of International Affairs was signed
on 7 November, 2008.

Minister for Overseas Indian Affairs, Shri Vayalar Ravi
visited Malaysia from 11-13 October, 2008 and met
Malaysian Human Resources Minister Datuk Dr S.
Subramaniam. The Memorandum of Understanding on
the exchange of workers between both countries was
signed in New Delhi on 3 January, 2009.

Papua New Guinea (PNG)
India’s relations with Papua New Guinea (PG) are warm
and friendly. There is commonality of views on most global
issues.

New Zealand

Papua New Guinea has extended support for India’s
candidature to various international organizations and
UN. PNG is supportive of India’s candidature for a
permanent seat in the UN Security Council.

Shri Namo Narain Meena, MoS for Environment and
Forests attended the State Funeral of Sir Edmund Hillary
at Auckland on 22 January 2009. MoS for External Affairs,
Shri Anand Sharma signed the Condolence book on Sir
Edmund Hillary in New Zealand High Commission in New
Delhi on 15 January 2009.

PNG is keen for a tie up with IGNOU and also considering
India’s assistance for building and launching of an
educational satellite of their own for remote/inaccessible
areas to cover applications like tele-education, telemedicine, e-governance and general telecommunications.

Shri Anand Satyanand, the Governor- General
accompanied by Mrs Susan Satyanand paid a State Visit
to India from 8-14 September, 2008. The visit had a special
24

South East Asia and the Pacific

A CHEMEXCIL (Chemicals and Allied Products Export
Promotion Council) delegation visited Papua New Guinea
in April 2008.

Group on Agriculture was held in New Delhi on 21
August, 2008. Discussions for enhanced cooperation were
held on a wide range of subjects including dairy
development, oil palm production, rice genetics, bio-fuels,
processed food, bamboo and dry land agriculture. The
Tenth Meeting of the Joint Working Group on Trade and
Economic Relations was held in New Delhi from 21-22
November, 2008. A delegation from the Department of
Science and Technology visited Manila from 6-9 July, 2008
to participate in the Eighth ASEAN Science and
Technology Week. The delegation also participated in the
Sixth ASEAN-India Joint Working Group on S&T and
also had a bilateral discussion with the Philippines’
Secretary for Science and Technology, Ms. Estrella
Alabastro.

Bilateral trade between India and PNG is growing steadily.
During the year 2006-07, it stood around US$290 million.
An Indian company has signed an MoU with a major oil
company, Oil Search Ltd. for establishing a urea fertilizer
plant in Papua New Guinea. Besides, Indian companies
are in touch with Papua New Guinea for cooperation in
the natural gas sector.
Under the ITEC Programme, Government of India has
offered 20 slots to Papua New Guinea for short-term
training courses in India. These are well-utilized and
appreciated by the respective Governments. Another four
slots are offered to Papua New Guinea for such training
courses under the TCS of Colombo Plan of the Ministry
Finance.

There has been a steady increase in bilateral trade and
investment links. Total trade increased from $ 749.34
million in 2006-07 to $ 823.29 million in 2007-08. In 200708, Indian exports were valued at $ 618.65 million and
India’s imports were valued at $ 204.64 million. In the
area of investment, several Indian IT companies began
operating out of the Philippines. Similarly, Filipino
companies have been investing in India in sectors like
real estate, food processing, financial services and IT.

India has offered a grant-in-aid of US$ 100,000 to Papua
New Guinea under GoI’s Regional Assistance Initiative
for Pacific Island Countries.

Philippines
Following a series of recent high level visits from both
sides (President Dr. Abdul Kalam visited Philippines in
February 2006, Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh
visited in January 2007 for the ASEAN-India and East
Asia Summit and President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo paid
a state visit to India in October 2007), bilateral relations
between India and the Philippines have gained both in
strength and purpose, and various institutional
mechanisms have been put in place to carry these forward.
This is also evident in the increased trade and investment
flows between the two countries.

In the course of the year, several business delegations from
India visited the Philippines. A delegation from CAPEXIL
visited the Philippines from 2-5 April, 2008 and
participated in a Buyer-Seller Meet. A business delegation
led by FICCI visited Philippines for the Seventh Meeting
of the Joint Business Council held on 21 October 2008.
A five-member delegation from the Department of
Commerce visited Philippines in October 2008 for the
Meeting of the ASEAN-India Trade Negotiating
Committee.

Shri N. Ravi, Secretary (East) visited Manila in July 2008
as Special Envoy and had a meeting with Secretary for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Alberto Romulo. Minister for Urban
Development, Shri S. Jaipal Reddy visited Manila from
7-10 September 2008. He was the keynote speaker at a
transportation forum organized by the Asian Development
Bank. Shri Reddy also called on Mr. Leandro Mendoza,
Secretary, Department of Transport and Communications
and had meetings with the Light Rail Transport Authority
and the Metro Manila Development Authority.

Two Indian naval ships visited Manila from 17-21 April,
2008 as part of the overseas deployment of the Eastern
Fleet of the Indian Navy. From the Philippines, the Naval
Chief, Rear Admiral Rogelio Calunsag paid an official visit
to India in May 2008 and visited Kolkata, Visakhapatnam
and New Delhi.
The Philippines is one of the largest beneficiaries of ITEC
and Colombo Plan Training with more than 90%
utilization of allotted seats in recent years. During the
current year 2008-09, 23 out of 25 slots under ITEC and
23 out of 35 slots under Colombo Plan have been utilized.

Various Joint Working Group Meetings took place during
the year. A two-member delegation from the Department
of Tourism visited Philippines for the First Joint Working
Group Meeting on Tourism held in Manila on 4 July, 2008.
The first meeting of the India-Philippines Joint Working

Following the signing of an MoU on Exemption of Visa
Requirements on Diplomatic and Official passport holders
during President Arroyo’s visit to India in October 2007,
25

Annual Report 2008-2009

political presence from the Singapore government. A
business conference was jointly inaugurated on 4 April
2008 by Commerce and Industry Minister Shri Kamal
Nath and Singapore Minister of Youth, Community
Development & Sports, Mr. Vivian Balakrishnan. The
culture and tourism segment was launched as “Incredible
India@60” by Minister of Culture and Tourism, Smt.
Ambika Soni jointly with her Singaporean counterpart,
Minister for Information, Communication & Art, Mr. Lee
Boon Yang on 5 April, 2008. Artists from the East Zone
Cultural Centre and craft persons supported by the
UNDP’s rural tourism initiative participated in the
celebration.

visa requirements were lifted during the year. All
diplomatic and official passport holders can now get their
visas on arrival at the airport for a period of 30-day
stay.
There has been a steady increase in Filipinos travelling to
India for business, tourism and employment. In the
calendar year 2007, 12,297 visas were issued. 11,356 visas
were issued during the period January to 5 November,
2008.
The Indian community in the Philippines continues to grow
with the influx of large number of professional managers
and IT specialists. In recent years, there has also been a
large influx of Indian students enrolling in medical colleges
and private pilot training schools in the Philippines.

PBD Singapore, an international conference aimed at
reaching out to the Indian Diaspora within Asia-Pacific
region and beyond was held in Singapore from 9-11
October, 2008. Modelled after the “Pravasi Bharatiya
Divas”, the conference was jointly organized by the
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs, CII and Singapore
Indian Chamber of Commerce & Industry (SICCI) with
the support of the Governments of India and Singapore.
More than 700 delegates from 20 countries attended the
Conference. The Conference was attended by Singapore’s
President, Prime Minister, Senior Minister and Minister
Mentor reflecting the importance attached by Singapore’s
leaders to the conference. The Indian delegation was led
by the Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs, Shri Vayalar
Ravi.

Singapore
The qualitative transformation in India-Singapore
bilateral relations in recent years has been underpinned
by strong economic and commercial ties. The two way
bilateral trade reached US$ 10.38 billion during the period
from April to September 2008 while the total trade for
FY 2007-08 was US$ 17.46 billion. Singapore has emerged
as the second largest source of FDI inflows amounting to
US$ 5.8 billion from April 2000 to July 2008. As part of
the efforts to further consolidate the bilateral relations,
the First India-Singapore Strategic Dialogue and first
meeting of the Joint Ministerial Committee were held in
the course of the year. Apart from continued high level
visits, holding of “Pravasi Bharatiya Divas” Singapore and
celebration of India@60 were the major highlights of
growing bilateral interactions between the two countries.

At the Sixth ASEAN Economic Ministers-India
Consultations on 28 August, 2008, Ministers announced
the conclusion of the ASEAN-India Free Trade
Agreement negotiations for trade in goods. The heads of
the India-Singapore CEO’s Forum- Ratan Tata and Koh
Boon Hwee of DBS Bank met on 29 August, 2008 to
discuss modalities for the meeting of the Forum. The Civil
Aviation Authority of Singapore signed a Memorandum
of Cooperation (MoC) with the Airports Authority of
India to promote mutual cooperation in civil aviation in
May 2008.

The India-Singapore Joint Ministerial Committee (JMC)
held its first meeting in New Delhi on 22 April, 2008.
The meeting was co-chaired by External Affairs Minister
Shri Pranab Mukherjee and Singapore’s Minister of
Foreign Affairs Mr. George Yeo. The Senior Officials’
meeting on 21 April, 2008 preceded the Ministerial
Meeting. The JMC would serve as the mechanism to
review overall bilateral relations between the two
countries. The first meeting of India-Singapore Strategic
Dialogue (ISSD) was held from 5-7 May, 2008 in
Singapore. The Indian delegation was led by Ambassador
S.K Lambah. Discussions took place over five sessions
devoted to bilateral relations, regional and international
issues of common concern.

In the field of defence cooperation, India and Singapore
concluded on 12 August, 2008 an MoU for joint exercises
and training between the respective armed forces. The
MoU was signed by the Defence Secretaries of the two
countries in New Delhi. The Fifth India-Singapore
Defence Policy Dialogue was held in Singapore from 7-8
October, 2008. The Third India Singapore Defence Tech
Steering Committee meeting was held in Singapore from
17-18 April, 2008. The annual Staff Talks between each
of the three services were also held. The Singapore Armed
Forces and Indian Army conducted a bilateral armour

Singapore became the second city after New York to
witness the India@60 celebrations jointly organized by
GoI and CII. The programme focused on business,
tourism, and culture. The celebrations saw a strong
26

South East Asia and the Pacific

and other industries. The Kerala State Industrial
Development Corporation held an interactive session with
the visiting Singapore delegation during their visit to
Kerala.

exercise, code name Bold Kurukshetra, from 25 March to
5 May, 2008 in central India.
Shri K. G. Balakrishnan, Chief Justice of India visited
Singapore from 6 - 9 October, 2008 to deliver the “Annual
Lecture for the year 2008” at the Singapore Academy of
Law. Former President Dr. Abdul Kalam visited Singapore
from 26-27 August, 2008 to open the third campus of the
Global Indian International School and accept an
honorary doctorate from the Nanyang Technological
University. Commerce and Industry Minister Shri Kamal
Nath visited Singapore in August 2008 to attend the
ASEAN-India Economic Ministers meeting. Union
Railway Minister Shri Laloo Prasad visited Singapore from
11-14 May, 2008 to deliver an address at INSEAD on
“Turnaround of the Indian Railways”. Shri Kapil Sibal,
Minister for Science & Technology and Earth Sciences
visited Singapore in October 2008 to participate in “PBD
Singapore”. He also visited Singapore from 4-6 November,
2008 to deliver a keynote address on “Changing our way
of life” at the Singapore Energy Conference. Shri Anand
Sharma, MoS for EA led the Indian delegation to the 41st
ASEAN Ministers Meeting and the 15th ARF Meeting
from 22-24 July, 2008. Other important visits from India
were: Dr.Montek Singh Ahluwalia, Deputy Chairman of
Planning Commission (September 2008); Governor of
RBI, Dr.Y.Venugopal Reddy (May 2008); Rajya Raksha
Mantri Shri M.M.Pallam Raju for participation in Shangri
La Dialogue (May 2008), Lt. Governor of Delhi Shri
Tejender Khanna (August 2008); Kerala Minister for
Health and Social Welfare, Mrs. P. K. Sreemathi Teacher
(November 2008); MoS for Water Supply and Sanitation,
Govt. of Maharashtra Shri Ranjit Kamble and Union
Secretary for Urban Development Dr. M. Ramachandran,
among others, for participation in Singapore International
Water Week, from 23-26 June, 2008.

As on 31 October, 2008, Mission has provided 78,703
consular services including 44,200 visa services and 14,370
passport services. Mission had outsourced the visa services
since September 2007 and passport services were
outsourced in December 2008.

Thailand
India-Thailand relations are multifaceted and have grown
substantially in diverse fields in recent years, and are
poised to expand further in coming years.
Prime Minister Surayud’s State visit to India in June 2007
was a result of the desire of two sides for greater engagement.
Various high level bilateral meetings have taken place since
then. A comprehensive institutional framework has also been
put in place through numerous sector specific agreements.
Princess Maha Chakri Siridhorn paid an official visit to
India in March 2008.
High level visits at various levels from both sides have
been taking place regularly. Smt Ambika Soni, Minister
of Tourism & Culture visited Bangkok in January 2008 to
participate in the India-ASEAN Tourism Ministers
meeting. The Deputy Minister of Industry, H.E. Mr.
Piyabutr Cholvijarn led another high level Thai business
delegation to three North Eastern States, viz., Assam,
Sikkim and Arunachal Pradesh in January 2008.
Bilateral trade has crossed US$ 5 billion mark. There is
immense potential for sustained growth in investment
flows between the two countries. Recently, the Tatas,
through Tata Steel and Tata Motors have started operating
in Thailand. FDI inflow from Thailand into India has been
US$ 41 million during April 2000-August 2007. The major
Thai companies that have invested in India are C P
Aquaculture Ltd., Ital Thai Development Pcl., Krung Thai
Bank Pcl., Charoen Pokphand Private Limited, Stanley
Electric Engineering India Pvt. Ltd., Thai Summit Neel
Auto Pvt. Ltd. and Thai Airways International Pcl.
Approved Indian investments in Thailand from 20012006 amounted to US$ 268.8 million. The major Indian
companies Aditya Birla Group, Thai Baroda Industries,
Usha Siam Steel Industries, Ranbaxy Laboratories, Lupin
Laboratories, Indo-Rama Group, Infotech, Satyam
Computers, NIIT, Tata Steel (Thailand) and Tata Motors.

From Singapore side, Minister of Trade and Industry Mr.
Lim Hng Kiang paid an official visit to India from 23-24
June, 2008. In his meeting with Commerce and Industry
Minister Shri Kamal Nath, Mr. Lim presented a draft
roadmap for the next phase of India-Singapore economic
cooperation and the two sides agreed, among others, to
double bilateral trade to S$ 48 billion by 2012. Singapore’s
Senior Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Dr. Balaji
Sadasivan led a business mission to Gujarat, Tamil Nadu
and Kerala from 17-23 June, 2008. The business mission
was organized by the Singapore Indian Chamber of
Commerce & Industry together with International
Enterprise Singapore and Singapore Gujarati Society. In
Gujarat, the Singaporean delegation met the Gujarat
Chief Minister and evinced keen interest in infrastructure
projects, real estate, ports, pharma, oil and gas, petrochem

The first meeting of the Joint Working Group, set up under
27

Annual Report 2008-2009

concern. President visited Ho Chi Minh City and Hanoi.
A Joint Statement was issued during the visit. An MoU
between Vietnam Chamber of Commerce and Industry
and Indian Business Chamber was signed.

an MoU for Cooperation in the field of Education, was
held in January 2008 in Bangkok. An MoU on Air Services
between India and Thailand was signed in Bangkok in
March 2008. Bangkok is connected by air to nine
destinations in India. There are 106 weekly flights between
the two countries. India offers 106 training slots to
Thailand every year under various GoI programmes.
Indian nationals are eligible for visa on arrival in Thailand.
There is significant tourist traffic between the two
countries. In 2007, 5.3 lakh Indians visited Thailand and
about 40,000 Thais visited India. There are approximately
100,000 people of Indian origin in Thailand, many of them
having been in the country for several generations. The
Indian community is prosperous and well regarded.

Defence exchanges are continuing apace. Defence
Secretary of India visited Vietnam for the fourth round of
security dialogue in October 2008. Visit of two Indian
naval ships - INS Kora and INS Kirpan took place in April
2008.
A team of 12 Vietnamese journalists (both print and visual
media) led by an official from Press and Information
Department of Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MoFA) visited
India from 26 April to 2 May, 2008. The purpose was to
create publicity in Vietnam before the first anniversary of
strategic partnership on 7 July, 2008.

Timor Leste (TL)

The Indo-Vietnam bilateral trade has been making steady
progress over the years. The bilateral trade is expected to
cross US$ 3 billion in 2008.

As a contribution towards the Timor Leste’s efforts
towards nation-building, India has offered to TL support
and assistance, in particular in capacity building. India
extends training slots under the ITEC and GCSS
Scholarships to TL. For 2008-09, five ITEC training slots
and ten GCSS Scholarships were provided, though
utilization has been abnormally low due to the inability
of TL Government to spare their personnel for training.
India has extended a US$ 100,000 grant to Timor Leste
in 2008 for purchase of equipment and materials for
sustainable development.

Vietnam has consistently supported India’s candidature
for a Permanent Membership of the UN Security Council.
India has supported Vietnam’s candidature for a Non
Permanent Seat on the UNSC for the years 2008-09.

Pacific Islands Forum
India attended the 20 th Post-Forum Dialogue (PFD)
Partners Meeting in Niue on 21 August, 2008, after the
conclusion of the 39th Pacific Islands Forum (PIF) Summit
meeting there.

Ambassador Shri Biren Nanda presented his credentials
to President of Timor Leste Dr. Jose Ramos Horta in
October 2008.

During the PFD Partners Meeting, MoS(EA), E. Ahamed
emphasized that India’s focus was on the development of
human resources, bilateral assistance and greater
engagement on investment and trade so as to assist the
Pacific Island Countries in capacity-building and project
assistance based on their needs with a view to contribute
to these countries’ economic & social development.

Vietnam
Mr. Vu Dung, Deputy Foreign Minister of Vietnam visited
India from 3-4 January, 2008. He had meetings with
Secretary (East), Secretary (Commerce), Secretary
(Petroleum & Natural Gas) and Managing Director of
ONGC Videsh Ltd and discussed bilateral issues.

There was a thematic discussion on following issues of
interest to the region: (a) Climate Change, (b) Energy
Security, (c) Food Security, (d) Fisheries. Dialogue
Partners were given a chance to make interventions on
any of these themes. MoS Shri E. Ahamed spoke on
Climate Change.

Mr. Le Hong Anh, Minister of Public Security visited India
from 20-25 March, 2008. He met the Home Minister and
discussed issues on Bilateral Security Co-operation,
Training courses for Vietnamese Police Personnel and
setting up of a Cyber Forensic Lab in Vietnam with Indian
assistance. He called on the PM on 25 March, 2008.

The following ’Regional Assistance Initiative’ announced
by the Minister of State, E. Ahamed, at the PFD Partners
meeting for Pacific Islands Forum members, was well
received. In fact, it was the only concrete offer from the
PFD Partners. Under this initiative, over the coming year,
India will implement the following assistance package for
Pacific Islands Countries:

President, Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil paid a State Visit
to Vietnam from 24-28 November, 2008. During the visit,
she met the President of Vietnam, the General Secretary
of the Communist Party of Vietnam, Prime Minister of
Vietnam, and other Vietnamese leaders and discussed a
wide range of bilateral and international issues of mutual
28

South East Asia and the Pacific

1.

Grant-in-aid of US$ 100,000 each for the 14 eligible
Pacific Island Countries for the supply of equipment
and materials for social and economic programmes
and for sustainable development projects.

Islands also confirmed support for our candidature for the
UNSC non-permanent seat (2011-12). Solomon Islands
supported the candidature of Shri Kamalesh Sharma for
the post of Commonwealth Secretary General.

2.

Organization of a “Workshop on Capacity Building
for Strengthening India-Pacific Island Countries
Cooperation” for officials of Pacific Island Countries
by the TERI [The Energy & Resources Institute,
New Delhi] in Suva where the Pacific Island
Secretariat is located.

Under the ITEC Programme, Government of India has
offered five slots each to Solomon Islands and Vanuatu
for short-term training courses in India. These are wellutilized and appreciated by the respective Governments.

3.

Organization of a course for diplomats of the Pacific
Island Countries in the Foreign Service Institute in
New Delhi.

4.

Offer of continued training opportunities to all
Pacific Island Countries under India’s ITEC
programme.

5.

Grant of One scholarship for undergraduate or post
graduate studies to each Pacific Island country.

Niue: an amount of US$ 100,000 representing the grantin-aid announced in 2007, was disbursed in June 2008 for
projects on road improvement, village upliftment and
internet communication facility improvement.
Nauru: General elections were held in Nauru on 26 April,
2008. The elections produced a convincing victory for
President Marcus Stephen who was re-elected for the new
Parliament.
Republic of Palau and Republic of the Marshall Islands:
Government of India granted a sum of US$ 100,000 to
the Republic of Palau and the Republic of the Marshall
Islands for their projects for economic and social
development.

Commonwealth Secretary General (CSG), Kamalesh
Sharma, attended the 39th Pacific Island Forum Summit.
MoS(EA) and CSG met in Niue.
Solomon Islands and Vanuatu has extended support for
India’s candidature to various international organizations
and UN.

Fiji: An amount of US$ 26,900 was paid to the
Government of Fiji for its project to improve the economic
condition of women.

Solomon Islands are also supportive of India’s candidature
for a permanent seat in the UN Security Council. Solomon

29

3

East Asia

Japan

September, 2008, and Commerce & Industry Minister,
Shri Kamal Nath visited Japan on 21 October, 2008 for
the Second Japan-India Policy Dialogue. Minister for
Railways Shri Lalu Prasad visited Japan from 12-16
January, 2009. Defence Minister Shri A. K. Antony visited
Japan in late February 2009.

I

ndia-Japan relations have undergone a significant and
qualitative shift in recent years, propelled by the
successful regular summit level exchanges. Prime Minister
Koizumi and Prime Minister Abe visited India in April
2005 and August 2007 respectively. The Joint Statement
signed during Prime Minister’s visit in 2006 established
an India-Japan Strategic and Global Partnership. Prime
Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh visited Japan in December
2006 and from 22-23 October, 2008. The Prime Minister
held talks with Japanese PM Aso. He also met the
Emperor, Japanese Foreign Minister, Minister of Economy,
Trade and Industry and leaders of new Komeito party and
the Democratic Party of Japan. PM addressed a business
lunch by Keidanren, the apex chamber in Japan, at which
leading CEOs from major Japanese corporations were
present. The Second India-Japan Business Leaders’ Forum
was held and presented recommendations on
strengthening the India-Japan economic relationship, to
the two Prime Ministers. A Joint Statement on the
Advancement of the Strategic and Global Partnership
between India and Japan and a Joint Declaration on
Security Cooperation between India and Japan were
signed by the two Prime Ministers during this visit.

The India-Japan Energy Dialogue, co-chaired by Deputy
Chairman, Planning Commission of India and the Minister
of Economy, Trade and Industry of Japan, met for the third
round on 17 September, 2008 in Tokyo. The objective of
the Dialogue is to promote cooperation in the energy
sector in a comprehensive manner. A Joint Statement was
issued by the two Ministers on outlining areas for future
cooperation in electricity generation, energy efficiency,
coal, petroleum and natural gas and renewable energy.
The second meeting of the Japan-India Policy Dialogue
was held in Tokyo on 21 October, 2008 with the objective
of establishing broader and deeper economic relationship
between the two countries. The two sides led by Shri
Kamal Nath, Minister of Commerce & Industry and Mr.
Nikai Toshihiro, Japanese Minister of Economy, Trade and
Industry respectively reviewed the progress in talks
relating to the proposed bilateral Comprehensive
Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA), cooperation
at the global trade talks, promotion of the Delhi-Mumbai
Industrial Corridor, support for Indian SMEs, as well as
cooperation in the ASEAN and East Asian regions.

Japanese Foreign Minister, Masahiko Koumura also visited
India from 4-5 August, 2008 for second round of strategic
dialogue. From the Indian side, Minister for Science and
Technology, Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister for Commerce and
Industry, Shri Kamal Nath and Deputy Chairman
Planning Commission Dr. Montek Singh Ahluwalia visited
Japan. Defense and Security has emerged as an important
area of bilateral relations with the Chief of Naval Staff of
India visiting Japan from 19-24 August, 2008. President
of the Japanese Upper House of the Parliament (House
of Councillors) Mr. Satsuki Eda visited India from 1-3
July, 2008.

Foreign Secretary, Shri Shivshankar Menon visited Japan
on 6 October, 2008 for the annual Foreign Office
Consultations. During the visit, he also called on the
Japanese Foreign Minister, Masahiko Koumura.
A High-Level Strategic Economic Dialogue has been
established in order to develop an overarching dialogue
mechanism on all economic issues. The second meeting,
co-chaired by Finance Secretary and Deputy Foreign
Minister of Japan, was held in Tokyo on 24 July, 2008.

From the Indian side, Minister for Science and
Technology, Shri Kapil Sibal visited Japan from 5-7
October, 2008. Deputy Chairman Planning Commission,
Dr. Montek Singh Ahluwalia, visited Japan for the third
round of the Ministerial-level Energy Dialogue with the
Japanese Minister of Economy, Trade and Industry on 17

Bilateral economic relations have vast potential for
growth. During Prime Minister Abe’s visit, it was agreed
to work towards a trade target of US $ 20 billion by the
year 2010. After a period of stagnation, recent trade figures
30

East Asia

indicate healthy growth in bilateral trade. Two-way trade
in 2007-08, according to our Ministry of Commerce and
Industry statistics, was US$ 9.89 billion (exports at US $
3.5 and imports at US $ 6.3 billion), an increase of 37%
over previous year.

Palampura, Phulera, Rewari and Dadri. A Joint Task Force
(JTF), co-chaired by the Secretary, Department of
Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP) and Japanese Vice
Minister, Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI)
has been established to work out the details. During Prime
Minister’s visit, the two sides confirmed that they would
work together closely for the establishment of the Project
Development Fund for DMIC. During Prime Minister’s
visit a MoU between India Infrastructure Finance
Company Limited and Japan Bank for International
Cooperation and Delhi Mumbai Industrial Corridor
Development Corporation Limited was signed.

Japan presently ranks sixth largest in cumulative foreign
direct investment flows into India. Japanese companies
have made actual investment of US$ 3 billion between
1991 and March 2008, excluding FDI inflows received
for acquisition of existing shares, Reserve Bank of India’s
NRI Schemes, stock swapped and advance pending issue
of shares. Most direct Japanese investment in India is in
Automobile Industry (39%), Electrical Equipments (17%),
Trading (6%), Services Sectors (financial & non-financial)
(5%) and Telecommunications (3%). The year also
witnessed two high-profile acquisitions by Japanese
companies: Daiichi Sankyo’s purchase of 34.8% stake in
Ranbaxy Laboratories worth Rs. 215.6 billion or US$ 4.6
billion, and NTT DoCoMo’s acquisition of 26% stake in
Tata Teleservices valued at Rs. 13,070 crores or US$ 2.7
billion.

The bilateral Consultative Mechanism for High
Technology met for the third round in Tokyo on 13 June,
2008 with the objective of facilitating two-way high
technology trade and to address matters relating to their
respective export control systems. In June 2008, Japanese
Government de-listed seven Indian companies from its
End-User List reducing the total number of Indian entities
on the list to 26.
Japan joined the consensus at the IAEA and in the NSG
on giving a waiver to India from NSG guidelines in the
context of the India-US civil nuclear energy agreement.

For the last five years, India has been the largest recipient
of Japanese Official Development Assistance (ODA)
(Cumulative commitment of Japanese ODA loan to India
has reached Yen 2662.56 billion (Rs.101497 crores approx.
at the current exchange rate) on commitment basis till
March 2008. During Prime Minister’s visit, Notes were
exchanged to formalize the first batch of ODA of
approximately US$ 1 billion for the current financial year.

Defence and security has emerged as an important area
of bilateral relations. A calendar of events for 2008 was
finalized for promoting exchanges and cooperation in an
institutionalized framework. The annual Defence Policy
Dialogue at Secretary-level was held in April 2007 and
the second round in New Delhi in November, 2008. A
Squadron of three Japanese Maritime Self-Defence Force
ships visited Mumbai on a Goodwill mission in August
2008. Comprehensive Security Dialogue (CSD) and
Military to Military talks were held in Tokyo on 14
February, 2008. The Chief of Naval Staff of India visited
Japan from 19-24 August, 2008.

The two sides have also initiated negotiations for a
Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement
(CEPA) beginning January/February 2007. This dialogue
is led by the Commerce Secretary from the Indian side
and Deputy Foreign Minister from the Japanese side. Ten
rounds of talks have been held so far. Both sides have
agreed to complete negotiations in a two-year time frame.

Following the terror attacks on Mumbai in November
2008, a condolence message was received from Prime
Minister Taro Aso and a statement was made by Foreign
Minister Hirofumi Nakasone. Prime Minister Taro Aso
spoke to Prime Minister over telephone on 30 November
and re-confirmed Japan’s willingness to cooperate with
India on fighting terrorism.

Japan has conveyed its readiness to assist in the entire
Western Dedicated Freight Corridor project through
ODA/STEP loan assistance. During PM’s visit, both sides
agreed that the total volume of the ODA loan for the
first phase of the Western Corridor would be
approximately 450 billion Yen. The two Prime Ministers
also expressed their commitment to work together for early
finalization of Japanese assistance for the Western
Corridor.

Bilateral Civil Aviation Talks were held in Tokyo from
17-18 June, 2008. Significant progress was achieved in
expansion and liberalization of air traffic between India
and Japan. Flight frequencies have been doubled to 42
per week. After completion of Tokyo-Narita airport in
summer 2010, slots available to India would increase to
28 per week from eight at present. After the on-going

The proposal for the development of Delhi-Mumbai
Industrial Corridor (DMIC) was agreed during the visit
of Prime Minister to Japan in December 2006. The
alignment of the 1483 km DMIC is via Ahmedabad,
31

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

Tokyo-Haneda airport expansion is completed, Japan will
offer India additional 28 slots. fifth freedom frequencies
have been increased from 14 to 21 per week.

Bilateral cooperation and exchanges in the field of defence
between India and the ROK made significant progress.
The ROK Chief of Naval Operations visited India from
18-21 May, 2008 and our Chief of the Naval Staff visited
ROK from 24-28 August, 2008. GOC-in-C of Central
Command visited ROK from 17-19 September, 2008. The
Flag Officer Commanding in Chief, Eastern Naval
Command represented the Indian Navy at the Western
Pacific Naval Symposium and the International Fleet
Review in ROK from 5-10 October, 2008. Two Indian
Navy vessels participated in the Review. Two ROK naval
ships, with 625 personnel, paid a goodwill visit to the Port
of Cochin from 30 September-3 October, 2008.

Science and Technology cooperation is emerging as a key
element of the strategic partnership. Under the Science
and Technology Initiative, the two sides are working on
launching joint Research and Development Programme
in areas such as nanotechnology, life science and
information and communication technology; and
collaboration in the area of scientific deep sea drilling.
An MoU was signed in October 2008 in Tokyo during
Prime Minister’s visit, which would permit us to construct
a “beam line” at a Japanese facility, KEK in Tsukuba at
our own cost, for experiments in high-energy physics.

The Memorandum of Understanding signed between the
Indian and ROK Coast Guard is being successfully
implemented. The Director General, Indian Coast Guard
visited ROK from 27-29 August, 2008 and held high level
talks with the Korean Coast Guard. The third high level
meeting between the Indian Coast Guard and the Korean
Coast Guard was held in New Delhi on 15 December,
2008. Director General of Guard Bureau of the Korean
Coast Guard led the Korean delegation.

During Prime Minister Abe’s visit in August 2007, it was
decided that the two sides would initiate a Working Group
to study and explore possible collaboration in setting up a
new IIT. The Working Group’s second meeting was held
in New Delhi on 1 May, 2008. During PM’s visit in
October 2008, the JWG submitted a report to the two
Prime Ministers. Both sides confirmed their commitment
to collaborate in the establishment of a new IIT in
Hyderabad that will become a symbol of joint efforts in
promoting educational excellence in India, including
through financial support from Japan. Modalities are being
discussed by both sides.

The second meeting of the India-ROK Joint Committee
on Defence Industry and Logistic Cooperation was held
in New Delhi on 13 October, 2008. At the meeting the
two sides discussed various areas of cooperation in the
field of defence industry and logistics including Research
and Development.

Two way trade in 2007-2008 according to Ministry of
Commerce statistics has been US $9.89 billion, an increase
of 37% over previous year. Japan presently ranks sixth
largest in foreign direct investment flows into India. For
the last five years India has been the largest recipient of
Japanese official development assistance (ODA).

India and ROK have so far completed 12 rounds of talks
and made significant progress on the proposed
Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement
(CEPA) between the two countries. Both India and Korea
hope to conclude the CEPA within 2009.

Republic of Korea (ROK)
Our relations with the Republic of Korea have been
steadily growing and have become more diversified in the
recent years. Our political relations are excellent and there
is a growing convergence of views on regional political,
security and economic issues.

There has been remarkable growth in bilateral trade
between India and ROK in recent years. In the year 2007
it reached US$ 11.22 billion, surpassing the target that
was set for the year 2010. During the first half of 2008,
our bilateral trade with ROK has been over US$ 6 billion.
ROK is ranked Ninth in the Foreign Direct Investment
and is a major investment partner.

Former President Dr. A. P. J. Abdul Kalam attended the
swearing-in ceremony of the new President of the ROK
in February 2008 at the personal invitation of Presidentelect Mr. Lee Myung-bak.

ROK established a Tourism Promotion Office in New
Delhi in May 2008.

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh met President Lee
Myung-bak of the ROK in the margins of the G-8 Summit
at Sapporo, Japan on 8 July, 2008. The two leaders
exchanged views on bilateral relations and international
issues of mutual interest. President Lee personally invited
PM to visit ROK.

Mongolia
India and Mongolia have interacted directly and through
the medium of Buddhism over a period of 2000 years.
Relations between the two countries were elevated to a
“new level of partnership” during the visit of the
32

East Asia

Mongolian Prime Minister, Mr. N. Enkhbayar to Indiain
2004.

extended for five more years, up to 2012. The Rajiv
Gandhi Vocational Training Centre and the Atal Bihari
Vajpayee Centre for Excellence in Information and
Communications Technology which were set up with
Indian assistance in 1992 and 2002 respectively have been
functioning well.

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh had a meeting with
President N. Enkhbayar of Mongolia on the margins of
the Seventh ASEM Summit in Beijing in October 2008.
The two leaders reviewed the development of IndoMongolia bilateral relations and exchanged views on
international and regional issues of mutual interest. The
meeting was very warm and cordial.

At the request of the Mongolian Government,
Government India provided 5000 MT of Rice and 5000
MT of sugar as emergency food assistance to Mongolia in
May 2008.

India-Mongolia cooperation in the field of defence
progressed well during 2008. The Chief of the General
Staff of the Mongolian Armed Forces, Lt. Gen. Ts. Togoo
visited India in February 2008. The Fourth India-Mongolia
Joint Military Exercise, “Nomadic Elephant 2008” took
place in India from 17-30 November, 2008. India also
participated in “Khan Quest 2008”, the annual multinational peace keeping exercise in Mongolia from AugustSeptember 2008.

The Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh had a meeting
with President N .Enkhbayar of Mongolia on the margins
of the Seventh ASEM summit in Beijing in October 2008.
The two leaders reviewed the development of India
Mongolia bilateral relations and exchanged views on
international and regional issues of mutual interest.

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
(DPRK)

The regular interactions between the National Security
Councils (NSCs) of India and Mongolia continued during
the year. Mr. R. Bold, Director, General Intelligence
Agency of Mongolia visited India in February 2008. A
five member delegation from National Security Council
of India led by Chairman JIC, Shri H. Upadhyay visited
Ulaanbaatar in September 2008 and held discussions with
the National Security Council of Mongolia.

The relations between India and DPRK have traditionally
been and continue to be cordial with a focus on
humanitarian and human resource development
assistance. Exchanges in the area of culture, sports and
education continued to make progress.
Shri N. Ravi, Secretary in the Ministry of External Affairs,
visited Pyongyang from 27-28 May, 2008 for the fifth
round of annual Foreign Office Consultations with Mr.
Kim Yong Il, Vice Foreign Minister of DPR of Korea.

A three-member delegation led by the Director General,
Border Security Force (BSF) visited Mongolia in July 2008
to discuss with the Mongolian side matters of mutual
interest. A six member delegation led by Maj. Gen.
Baatartsogt Azad, Chairman, Border Protection General
Board of Mongolia visited India from 20-26 January, 2009
and held discussions with the BSF on strengthening
cooperation between the two sides.

Indian films participated in the 11 th Pyongyang
International Film Festival held from 17-26 September,
2008 and the Bengali film “Ek Nadir Galpo” (Tale of a
River) won the award for music at the festival.
Our assistance for development of human resources in
DPRK continued to expand. DPRK had been allotted 18
slots under ITEC Programme for the year 2008-09. We
have also offered two slots for English language courses
for training in Army Education Corps Training College
and Centre, Panchmarhi under the ITEC Programme to
DPRK. Five kgs of high quality Barley seeds were also
sent to DPRK under ITEC Programme in April 2008. India
and DPRK have continued cooperation at UN bodies and
other international organizations.

The second meeting of the India-Mongolia Joint Working
Group (JWG) on Defence Cooperation was held in New
Delhi from 5-6 February, 2009.
The Mongolian Defence Minister H.E. Mr. L. Bold visited
India from 10-12 February, 2009.
The India-Mongolia Joint School was inaugurated in 2003
under an MoU signed in 2002. The MoU has been

33

4

Eurasia

I

Kudankulam site as well as in the construction of Russian
designed nuclear power plants at new sites in the Republic
of India; a Memorandum of Understanding between ISRO
and Russian Federal Space Agency on joint activities in
the field of human space-flight programme; an Agreement
on cooperation between the Financial Intelligence Unit
of India and Russian Financial Monitoring Service; and a
Memorandum of Understanding between the Securities
& Exchange Board of India and Federal Financial Markets
Service of Russian Federation in relation to mutual
cooperation and information sharing.

ndia maintained and advanced friendly and cordial
relations with Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, Central Asian
and Caucasian countries during the year through visits,
conclusion of bilateral agreements, periodic bilateral and
multilateral engagements, cooperation programmes,
cultural events and other initiatives. Inter-governmental
meetings for reviewing and expanding cooperation in
diverse spheres were held with all the countries of this
region. 2008 was celebrated as the Year of Russia in India
and 2009 is being held as the Year of India in Russia. Some
of the important bilateral engagements during the year
included the State visits of the President of the Russian
Federation Mr. Dmitry A. Medvedev to India in December
2008, the President of Kazakhstan, Mr. Nursultan
Nazarbayev as Chief Guest at the Republic Day 2009 and
visit of the Vice President of India to Kazakhstan and
Turkmenistan in April 2008. India participated in the
meetings of India-Russia-China as well as Brazil-RussiaIndia-China Foreign Ministers held in Russia in May 2008
and, as Observer, in the Heads of State and Heads of
Government meetings of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization in August and October 2008 respectively.

In addition to above, following important bilateral visits
took place during the year:
Minister of Industry and Trade, Mr. Viktor
Khristenko visited India from 25-27 November, 2008
and inaugurated the Russian National Exhibition
in India.
Minister of Energy, Mr. Sergei Shmatko visited India
from 25-26 November, 2008 and participated in the
Indo-CIS Hydrocarbon Conference.
Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Shri Murli
Deora visited Moscow from 4-5 November, 2008 and
met the Russian Prime Minister, Mr. Vladimir Putin
and Russian Energy Minister, Mr. Sergei Shmatko.

Russia
During the year, India engaged actively with Russia at all
levels to further diversify and consolidate the bilateral
strategic partnership and ongoing multi-dimensional
cooperation in areas such as political dialogue, trade,
economy, energy, defence, science & technology and
culture. President of the Russian Federation, Mr. Dmitry
A. Medvedev paid a State visit to India from 4-5
December, 2008 for the bilateral annual summit. During
his visit, the Russian President met the President, the Vice
President, the Prime Minister and other Indian dignitaries.
Indian and Russian Presidents participated in the closing
ceremony of the ‘Year of Russia’ in India. A Joint
Declaration was signed by PM Dr. Manmohan Singh and
President Medvedev which outlines major directions of
bilateral cooperation and common positions on major
regional and international issues. Nine other documents
were signed during the visit including an interGovernmental Agreement on cooperation in the
construction of additional nuclear power plant units at

Secretary, Security Council of Russia, Mr. Nikolai
Patrushev visited India from 21-24 October, 2008
and met the National Security Adviser.
Foreign Minister, Mr. Sergey Lavrov, visited India
on 20 October, 2008 and met the External Affairs
Minister, Shri Pranab Mukherjee and the Prime
Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh.
Defence Minister of Russia, Mr. Anatoly Serdyukov
visited India from 28-30 September, 2008 for the
Eighth meeting of the India-Russia InterGovernmental Commission on Military-Technical
Cooperation, co-chaired by Minister of Defence of
India.
National Security Adviser, Shri M.K. Narayanan
visited Moscow on 13 August, 2008 and met the
Russian President and the Secretary of the Security
Council of the Russian Federation.
34

Union Minister of External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee meeting with the President of Russia, Dmitry A. Medvedev
in New Delhi on 5 December, 2008.

President Pratibha Devisingh Patil, Union Minister of External Affairs, Shri Pranab Mukherjee
at the ceremonial reception of President of the Republic of Kazakhstan, Nursultan Nazarbayev,
at Rashtrapati Bhavan, in New Delhi on 24 January, 2009.

35

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

Foreign Office Consultations between the Foreign
Secretary Mr. Shivshankar Menon and the Russian First
Deputy Foreign Minister Mr. Andrei Denisov took place
on 30 June, 2008 in Moscow. In addition, the two Foreign
Offices also held consultations on the following subjects:
India-Russia-China trilateral dialogue (February 2008,
Moscow); European Union (March 2008, Moscow);
consular issues (October 2008); Iran & Afghanistan
(November 2008, Moscow); international terrorism
(December 2008).

External Affairs Minister visited Yekaterinburg,
Russia from 14-16 May, 2008 for the India-RussiaChina trilateral Foreign Ministers meeting and the
Brazil, Russia, India, China (BRIC) Foreign
Ministers meeting and met the Foreign Ministers of
Russia and China in bilateral fora.
Two parliamentary delegations from the Russian
Federation visited India in April 2008 - one led by
Chairman of the Commission on Parliamentary
Procedures and Organization of Parliamentary
Activities of the Federal Council (Upper House of
the Russian Parliament), Mr. Nikolai Tulaev and
another comprising of five Young Parliamentarians
of the State Duma (Lower House of the Russian
Parliament).

About 140 events in various spheres, including culture,
economy and science were organized in India in 2008
within the framework of the ‘Year of Russia’ in India.

Besides, the following high level meetings also took place
on the sidelines of multilateral events:

The fifth meeting of the India-Russia Joint Working Group
on Combating International Terrorism was held in New
Delhi from 16-17 December, 2008. The Indian side was
led by Shri Vivek Katju, Special Secretary (IO&Pol) from
MEA and the Russian side was led by Mr. Anatoly Safonov,
Special Representative of the President of the Russian
Federation for International Cooperation in the Fight
against Terrorism and Transnational Crime.

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh met the
Russian President Mr. Dmitry Medvedev on 9 July,
2008 at Toyako, Japan on the sidelines of the G8
Summit.

Smt. L. K. Ponappa, Deputy National Security Advisor
visited Moscow from 3-4 February, 2009 to co-chair a
meeting of the Joint Coordination Group between the
Security Councils of India and Russia.

A Moscow City Government delegation visited Delhi
from 17-21 June, 2008 to discuss holding the Days of
Moscow in Delhi within the framework of the “Year
of Russia” with the Delhi State Government.

External Affairs Minister met Foreign Minister, Mr.
Sergey Lavrov on 29 September, 2008 in New York
on the sidelines of the 63rd UN General Assembly
meeting.

The Deputy Foreign Minister of Russia, Mr. Alexey
Borodavkin called on the External Affairs Minister and
met Secretary (East), Shri N. Ravi on 25 February, 2009.
EAM also collectively received DFM Borodavkin and
Ambassadors of Russia to South Asian countries (India,
Pakistan, Afghanistan, Iran, Bangladesh, Myanmar, Sri
Lanka, Maldives and Nepal).

Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Anand
Sharma participated in the Foreign Ministerial
meeting of BRIC countries (Brazil, Russia, India and
China) in New York on 26 September, 2008 on the
sidelines of the 63rd UN General Assembly session.

Armenia
India’s historically close and friendly relations with
Armenia were marked in 2008 by the visit of the Mayor
of Yerevan, Mr. Yervand Zakharyan to India from 12-15
September, 2008 at the invitation of the Chief Minister
of Delhi, Smt. Sheila Dikshit. The visiting delegation held
bilateral talks with the Delhi Government. The Yerevan
Mayor and Delhi Chief Minister signed an Memorandum
of Understanding on friendship between Delhi and
Yerevan on 13 September, 2008 and on the same day, the
Mayor of Yerevan and Delhi (Smt. Arti Mehra) named a
street in Delhi (the third in India) after Armenia. The
visiting delegation also visited Agra.

14 th session of the India-Russia Inter-Governmental
Commission (IRIGC) on Trade, Economic, Scientific,
Technological and Cultural Cooperation, co-chaired by
the External Affairs Minister and Deputy Prime Minister
of Russia, Mr. Alexander D. Zhukov, was held in New
Delhi on 3 December, 2008. The Commission held
detailed discussions on ongoing bilateral cooperation and
measures to expand it in economic, scientific and cultural
spheres. A Protocol on the deliberations of the
Commission was signed by the co-chairs. India-Russia
Business CEOs’ Council was formed to promote and
pursue bilateral economic and business ties under the coChairmanship of President of Sistema Group of
Companies, Mr. Vladimir Evtushenkov and the Chairman
of Reliance Industries Ltd., Shri Mukesh Ambani.

Exhibiting Armenia’s growing interest in expanding
commercial ties with India, Federation of Indian Chambers
of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) and the Embassy of
36

Eurasia

The fourth session of the India-Belarus InterGovernmental Commission on Economic, Trade,
Industrial, Scientific, Technological and Cultural
Cooperation (IBIGC) was held in New Delhi from 17-18
November, 2008. The Belarusian delegation was led by
the Minister of Industry, Mr. Anatoly Rusetsky, who was
accompanied by a seven- member official delegation and
an 18-member business delegation including
representatives from chemicals and fertilisers,
petrochemicals, timber, heavy engineering, automobiles,
breweries, information technology etc. The Indian side
was led by the Minister of State for Industry, Shri Ashwani
Kumar. The visiting Minister met the External Affairs
Minister, Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Finance Minister, Shri
P. Chidambaram, Minister of Commerce and Industry, Shri
Kamal Nath, Minister of Heavy Industries and Public
Enterprises, Shri Sontosh Mohan Dev and Minister of
State (Independent Charge) for Food Processing
Industries, Shri Subodh Kant Sahai. Working level
meetings were held in the fields of trade, information
technology, food processing, science and technology and
agricultural cooperation. Following the deliberations of
the IBIGC a joint protocol was signed. Belarus also
participated in the India International Trade Fair 2008 in
New Delhi from 14-27 November, 2008.

Armenia jointly organized the first ever India-Armenia
Business Forum in Delhi from 1-2 December, 2007. The
Armenian First Deputy Minister of Agriculture, Mr.
Samvel Avetissian and the Deputy Minister of Economy,
Mr. Mushegh Tumasyan were accompanied by a tenmember business delegation comprising representatives
from information technology, processed foods, textiles and
consumer goods sectors. Besides interaction amongst the
business communities and visits to export oriented units,
the official delegation called on the Minister of State for
External Affairs, Shri E. Ahamed and Secretary (Textiles),
Shri A. K. Singh.
A three-day India-Armenia Friendship Chess Tournament
was held in Delhi in the first week of December 2008
with the participation of Chess Grand Masters from both
sides. It was the first event of its kind between India and
Armenia.

Azerbaijan
The relations between India and Azerbaijan continued
to be cordial during this period. Several working and
business level visits took place within the framework of
multilateral events, including that of Central Vigilance
Commissioner and Special Secretary, Department of
Personnel to Baku for the Personnel to Baku for the
Executive Committee meeting of the International
Association of Anti-Corruption authorities in April 2008;
ONGC Videsh Limited and FICCI to Baku for the First
Azerbaijan-Turkmenistan International Conference on
Oil and Gas in September 2008; Telecommunications
Consultants India Ltd. (TCIL) delegation, led by the
Chairman and Managing Director, for the exhibition
BAKUTEL 2008 in November 2008.

Chairman, Constitutional Court of the Republic of
Belarus, Mr. Justice Pyotr P. Miklashevich and Deputy
Head of the Legal and Expert Department of the
Belarusian Constitutional Court, Mr. Vasili I. Seledevski
visited India from 13-15 November, 2008 on the invitation
of the Chief Justice of India, Shri K. G. Balakrishnan.
The First session of the Indo-Belarusian Joint Commission
on Military Technical Cooperation was held in Minsk from
27-30 May 2008. The five-member Indian delegation was
led by Special Secretary, Department of Defence, Shri P.
K. Rastogi. The two countries discussed opportunities of
cooperation in the field of defence, joint research and
training.

A nine-member Gems & Jewellery delegation visited Baku
from 12-13 December, 2008. Bilateral trade recorded a
good growth up to the month of October 2008 which
stood at US$ 323.78 million.

A Department of Commerce delegation visited Belarus
from 15-16 May, 2008 for the First meeting of the Joint
Working Group on technical regulation and protection
of sanitary and phytosanitary measures. A four-member
Agriculture Ministry delegation led by Principal Advisor,
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, Dr. S. M.
Jharwal, visited Belarus from 10-14 June, 2008 for the
First meeting of the Indo-Belarusian Joint Working Group
on agricultural cooperation. Besides holding talks and
signing a Work Plan, the delegation visited various
agricultural and agro-industrial research and development
facilities.

Belarus
Bilateral exchanges with Belarus at high and working
levels maintained their momentum in 2008. Secretary
(East), Shri N. Ravi visited Belarus on 25 July, 2008 and
met Deputy Foreign Minister of Belarus, Prof. Viktor A.
Gaisenok and handed over a letter from the Prime
Minister addressed to President of Belarus, Mr. Aleksandr
Lukashenko. During the visit, Belarusian Deputy Minister
affirmed Belarus’ support to international civil nuclear
cooperation with India in the Nuclear Suppliers Group.
37

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

was the chief guest at Republic Day celebrations. President
Nazarbayev was accompanied by a high level official
delegation including Foreign Minister, Mr. Marat Tazhin,
and a business delegation representing various sectors.

Georgia
India’s relations with Georgia remained cordial during the
year 2008-09. Our Ambassador in Yerevan (concurrently
accredited to Georgia) held meetings with various high
ranking Georgian government officials in Tblisi. There
were exchange of business delegations and continuation
of economic and cultural cooperation programmes
between the two countries.

During the visit, President, Nazarbayev held delegation
level talks and was hosted to a State banquet in his honour
by the President of India. A number of agreements were
signed including agreements on supply of uranium from
Kazakhstan to India, cooperation in Space, on
Kazakhstan’s accession to WTO, on exploration and
production of oil and gas by ONGC Videsh Ltd. in
Kazakhstan. An extradition treaty was also signed.

In August 2008, there was an armed conflict between
Georgia and Russia and later Russia recognized South
Ossetia and Abkhazia as independent states and
established diplomatic relations with them.

Shri Ashwani Kumar, MoS, Ministry of Industry paid a
visit to Kazakhstan from 4-6 March, 2009. He travelled
with a business delegation. In addition to several business
meetings, he also met with Mr. Sauat Mynbayev, Kazakh
Minister for Energy and Mineral Resources.

Kazakhstan
India’s relations with Kazakhstan developed and
diversified further during the year. Vice President, Shri.
M. Hamid Ansari, visited Kazakhstan from 6-10 April,
2008 at the invitation of the Chairman of the Senate of
Parliament of Republic of Kazakhstan, Mr. Kasim Tokayev.
During the visit, Vice President called on President
Nursultan Nazarbayev, had a useful meeting with Prime
Minister Mr. Karim Massimov, and addressed the Kazakh
Senate. He also addressed the students of Kazakh Institute
of Public Administration in Astana and Al Ferabi National
University in Almaty. The Al Ferabi National University
conferred an Honorary Doctorate degree on the Vice
President. An Indian cultural troupe visited and
performed in several parts of Kazakhstan to coincide with
the visit of the Vice President.

The Seventh Session of the India-Kazakhstan InterGovernmental Commission was held in Astana from 1213 March, 2009. The Commission was co-chaired by Shri
Murli Deora, Minister for Petroleum & Natural Gas and
Mr. Sauat Mynbayev, Minister for Energy and Mineral
Resources of Kazakhstan. The ambit of the Commission
included cooperation in trade, economic, science &
technology, culture & consular matters. A Protocol was
signed in conclusion. During the visit to Astana, Shri
Deora called on President Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan and
on Prime Minister Massimov.

Secretary (East) and Special Envoy of the Prime Minister,
Shri N. Ravi visited Kazakhstan from 26-27 July, 2008
and met the Chief of the Presidential Administration Mr.
Kairat Kelimbetov, Deputy Foreign Minister Mr. Anatoli
V. Smirnov and Deputy Minister of Energy & Mineral
Resources, Mr. Lyazzat K. Kiinov to discuss bilateral and
international issues, including international civil nuclear
energy cooperation with India.

Kyrgyz Republic
India and the Kyrgyz Republic sustained friendly and
cordial ties in 2008-09. The decisions taken during the
visit of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Kyrgyz
Republic, Mr. Adnan Karabaev to India in February 2008
were implemented and resulted in further consolidation
of bilateral relations. Exchange of official level visits in
the field of economy, education, defence, etc. and of
business delegations pursued further opportunities for
bilateral cooperation in these areas. The India-Kyrgyz
Information Technology Centre (established with
Government of India’s grant assistance) entered into
collaboration with Vellore Institute for Technology for
certification of degrees for students of the Centre.

There were other engagements in the fields of economy,
science and technology, energy and polity. The Chairman
of Supreme Court of Kazakhstan, Kairat Mami, led a
delegation to India from 13-20 October, 2008 and had
extensive interactions with Chief Justice, Judges and
Attorney General of India. The First meeting of the Joint
Working Group on Textiles was also held to discuss
prospects of cooperation in this sector.

Tajikistan

The President of Kazakhstan, Nursultan Nazarbayev paid
a State visit to India from 23-26 January, 2009. He was
the guest of honour at the Republic Day parade. This was
the first time that a leader from the Central Asian region

Shri Murli Deora, Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas
led the Indian delegation to a Summit meeting of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organisation held in Dushanbe
on 28 August, 2008. During the visit, he called on the
38

Eurasia

President of Tajikistan, Mr. Emomali Rahmon and held
wide ranging discussions on bilateral and regional matters.
During the visit, the Minister inaugurated the GoI assisted
project for the modernization and upgrading of the VarzobI hydroelectric plant.

spheres.
The Seventh round of Foreign Office Consultations
between Secretary (East) and Special Envoy of the Prime
Minister, Shri N. Ravi, and Deputy Foreign Minister of
Ukraine, Shri Oleksandr Gorin was held in Kyiv on 24
July, 2008. Secretary (East) also met the senior officials of
the Presidential Administration in Ukraine, where, among
other things, international regime for civil nuclear
cooperation with India was discussed.

The fifth Session of India-Tajikistan Inter Governmental
Commission was held in New Delhi from 19-20 November,
2008. The Indian delegation was led by Commerce
Secretary, Shri G. K. Pillai and the Tajik delegation by
Minister of Finance and Economy, Mr. Gulomjon
Bobozoda. A Protocol was signed on the conclusion of
the meeting. India and Tajikistan also signed a Double
Taxation Avoidance Agreement on 20 November, 2008.

Mr. Mykola Tomanko, Deputy Speaker of Verkhovna Rada,
Ukrainian Parliament, visited India from 7-14 February,
2009. During his visit, he called upon Shri K. Rahman
Khan, Deputy Chairman, Rajya Sabha and on Shri
Charanjit Singh Atwal, Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha and
discussed Parliamentary practices and procedures and
proposed enhanced Parliamentary exchanges between
India and Ukraine. He called on Smt. Ambika Soni,
Minister of Tourism and Culture and also held discussions
with Shri Anand Sharma, MoS (EA) and discussed issues
of bilateral, regional and global interest.

Days of Tajik Culture in India were celebrated in October
2008 under the framework of a bilateral Cultural Exchange
Programme. The Minister of Culture of Tajikistan visited
India for the occasion and met the President of ICCR,
Dr. Karan Singh.

Turkmenistan
India’s multi-faceted relations with Turkmenistan developed
further during the year in the political, economic, trade
and cultural spheres. Vice President, Shri M. Hamid Ansari
paid an official visit to Turkmenistan at the invitation of
the President of Turkmenistan, Mr. Gurbanguly
Berdimuhammedov from 4-6 April, 2008. This was his first
visit abroad as Vice President. During the visit, he called
on President Berdimuhammedov and the two dignitaries
chaired delegation level talks between the two countries.
Vice President was accompanied by Minister of State for
External Affairs, Shri E. Ahamed. The Vice President also
visited the city of Mary in Turkmenistan. The two countries
signed a Memorandum of Understanding on cooperation
in the Oil and Gas sector during the visit.

Uzbekistan
India-Uzbekistan relations progressed well in 2008-09 in
the framework of inter-governmental mechanisms, various
cooperation programmes and other interaction. The
bilateral Foreign Office Consultations were held in New
Delhi on 1 August, 2008 which discussed the entire gamut
of bilateral, regional and global issues. Secretary (East),
Shri N. Ravi, led the Indian delegation and the Uzbekistan
delegation was led by Deputy Foreign Minister, Mr. Rustam
Askarovich Tuhatabaev.
The Eighth Session of India-Uzbekistan Inter
Governmental Commission on trade, economic, scientific,
technological and cultural cooperation was held from 1617 September, 2008 in New Delhi. The Indian delegation
was led by Shri Jairam Ramesh, Minister of State for
Commerce and Power. The Uzbek delegation was led by
Mr. B. Khodjaev, Minister of Economy of the Republic of
Uzbekistan. The Commission deliberated on the progress
in trade, investment, scientific and cultural relations and
measures for strengthening relations in these areas. A
Protocol on the conclusions of the Commission meeting
was signed by the two countries.

There were other bilateral exchanges between the two
countries involving official and business delegations. The
Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Shri Murli Deora
visited Turkmenistan in November 2008 and met the
Minister of Oil & Natural Gas of Turkmenistan. There were
various business-level exchanges in the field of oil and gas,
infrastructure, trade, information technology and other areas.

Ukraine
India and Ukraine maintained friendly relations and
engagement in various spheres during the year. The
bilateral trade and economic cooperation developed
further and the two countries continued exchanges in the
field of science & technology, defence, culture, polity etc.
Indian companies and organization participated in
numerous exhibitions and fairs in Ukraine during the year
to promote and expand bilateral trade in respective

India-Russia-China Trilateral Dialogue
Mechanism
India continued its regular dialogue with Russia and China
in the trilateral format at the level of the three Foreign
Ministers. The last trilateral Foreign Ministers meeting
39

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

was held in Yekaterinburg (Russia) on 15 May, 2008 when
trilateral cooperation, regional issues and global
developments were discussed. The trilateral dialogue has
also been initiated in the areas of agriculture, disaster
management and public health. The three countries have
expanded trilateral dialogue to business and academic
sectors.

led the Indian delegation at the Heads of Government
Meeting. During the meeting of SCO Heads of State, the
SCO decided to raise the cooperation with the Observer
states of the Organisation to a qualitatively new level.
Subsequently, India has been invited to SCO Ministerial
meetings in the field of economy and transport.
On the invitation extended by Shri N Ravi, Secretary
(East), Mr. Bolat Nurgaliev, Secretary General of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organisation visited New Delhi
from 26-27 February, 2009. SCO-SG called on EAM and
held delegation level official talks with Secretary (East).
The Indian Council of World Affairs organized a talk by
SG-SCO on ‘Shanghai Cooperation OrganisationEvolution, Growth and Future’. He also participated in a
round table discussion organized by the Institute for
Defence Studies and Analyses.

Shanghai Cooperation Organisation
As an Observer state in the Shanghai Cooperation
Organisation (SCO), India participated in the annual
meetings of the Heads of State and Heads of Government
in Dushanbe and Astana in August and October 2008
respectively. The Minister of Petroleum & Natural Gas,
Shri Murli Deora represented India at the Heads of State
Meeting and the Minister of Power, Shri Sushil K. Shinde

40

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

5

The Gulf

Iran

I

Bilateral Relations
Relations between India and Iran were maintained and
further strengthened through exchange of high level visits
and regular meetings of the bilateral Joint Commission,
Foreign Office Consultations and Consultations between
the two National Security Councils. The momentum
generated thereby increased bilateral cooperation in
different sectors such as energy, trade, commerce, transit,
investment, culture as well as regional and international
issues of mutual interest.

ndia maintained its historical and traditionally cordial
relations and cooperation with the Gulf region
countries. In parallel with increasing imports of oil and
gas, growing trade and investment opportunities, active
steps were taken in cooperation with the countries of the
region in 2008 to strengthen this relationship and to
diversify in new areas. The year witnessed several high
level visits bilaterally manifesting the importance of the
region in our relationship, peaking with Prime Minister’s
visit to Qatar and Oman in November 2008, opening up
new facets for cooperation.

High-level bilateral exchanges
Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Minister of External Affairs
visited Tehran from 28-30 July, 2008 to attend the 15th
NAM Ministerial Conference. He again visited Tehran
from 31 October-2 November, 2008 for the 15th Session
of the India-Iran Joint Commission. This was EAM’s third
visit to Iran in last two years. During the visit, a meeting
of the Joint Business Council and a Seminar on “IndiaIran relations” were also organized. An Extradition Treaty
and Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty on Criminal Matters
and MoUs on Agriculture, Sister Port Arrangements and
on holding of Trade Exhibitions were signed.

The Gulf region is a major trading partner of India. During
2006-2007 the total two-way trade was US $ 47 billion
and in the year 2007-08 it reached more than US$ 76
billion. Gulf countries together provide 70% of our total
crude requirement and play a key role in our energy
security. About 4.5 million Indians live and work in the
Gulf region. They are a vital support to our economy and
remit more than US$ Ten billion annually.

Bahrain
The relations between India and Bahrain remained cordial
and friendly, marked by several important visits. According
to the official figures of the Government of Bahrain there
are 3,00,776 Indian nationals in Bahrain out of a total of
1.04 million residents of Bahrain.

Shri E. Ahamed, Minister of State for External Affairs
attended the Meeting of the Council of Ministers of the
Indian Ocean Rim Association for Regional Cooperation
in Tehran from 4-5 May, 2008. Kumari Selja, Minister of
State for Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation
(Independent Charge) participated in the Second Asia
Pacific Ministerial Conference on Housing & Urban
Development held in Tehran from 10-15 May, 2008 and
handed over the Chairmanship of the Conference to Iran.

From Bahrain the Labour Minister Dr. Majeed Mohsin
Al Alawi visited India on 25 April, 2008 and discussed
with Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs Shri Vayalar Ravi,
the MoU on Labour and Manpower Development. Dr.
Fatima Bint Al Balooshi, Minister of Social Development,
Bahrain, visited India from 17-21 August, 2008 and held
talks with the Minister of Textiles and Minister of State
for Women & Child Development among others. From
India, Shri E. Ahamed, Minister of State for External
Affairs visited Bahrain from 28-29 September, 2008.
Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs Shri Vayalar Ravi
visited Bahrain from 29-31 August, 2008 and interacted
with the Indian community in Bahrain.

Shri M. K. Narayanan, National Security Adviser paid a
visit to Tehran from 30 June-2 July, 2008, at the invitation
of his Iranian counterpart.
Dr. Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, President of the Islamic
Republic of Iran paid a visit to New Delhi on 29 April,
2008. Mr. Isfandyar Rahim Mashae, Vice President, who
accompanied the Iranian President, inaugurated the ‘Days
of Iranian Culture’ festival in New Delhi and Mumbai on
41

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

30 April, 2008. Mr. Mohammad Saiedi Kia, Minister of
Housing and Urban Development participated in the
Bureau Meeting of the Second Asia Pacific Ministerial
Conference on Housing and Urban Development in New
Delhi from 12-14 October, 2008.

Several Indian companies are active in Iran, either
through Joint Ventures with Iranian companies or by way
of investments, in areas including shipping, mining,
railways, steel, ICT, automotives, cement etc.
The Bilateral Investment Promotion and Protection
Agreement (BIPPA) and the Double Taxation Avoidance
Agreement (DTAA) are expected to be finalised shortly.

Foreign Office Consultations
The sixth annual Foreign Office Consultations at the level
of Foreign Secretary from India and Deputy Foreign
Minister from Iran were held in India from 17-18
December, 2008. Bilateral relations, economic and
commercial cooperation, cooperation in the hydrocarbon
sector, the situation in Afghanistan and other regional
issues were discussed.

The finalization of and coming into effect of these two
Agreements will provide a sound basis to future economic
and investment cooperation between the two countries.
Exchange of Business delegations
Economic and commercial exchanges continued. Business
delegations from India to Iran included a Railway
delegation led by the Chairman of the Railway Board,
the Gem and Jewellery Export Promotion Council,
Mumbai, National Productivity Council, All India
Association of Industries, Tea Board of India, Spices Board
of India, Indian Oil Corporation Ltd., Bharat Petroleum
Corporation Ltd., NALCO, Automotive Components
Manufacturing Association, New Delhi, and Federation
of Indian Export Organizations.

Joint Commission Meeting
The India-Iran Joint Commission has seven
subcommittees dealing with Petroleum & Natural Gas;
Trade; Transport and Communications; Industry,
Agriculture & Rural Development; Culture; Science &
Technology & Information Technology; and Consular
Matters. The India-Iran Joint Commission was established
in July 1983 and so far 15 Joint Commission meetings
have held. The 15th Joint Commission meeting was held
in Tehran from 31 October-2 November, 2008. It was cochaired by EAM with Dr. Seyed Shamseddin Hosseini,
Minister of Economic Affairs and Finance of the Islamic
Republic of Iran.

The Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce and
Industry Organized the Ninth Joint Business Council
meeting alongside the 15th JCM
Business delegations from Iran included those sponsored
by the Iran National Carpet Centre, Tehran Jewellery
Syndicate, Rice Research Institute of Iran, Ministry of
Economic Affairs & the Iran Chamber of Commerce,
Industries and Mines for the Mining and SME Exhibition
organized by the CII, the Tehran Stock Exchange and
the Iran International Exhibition Company.

Consultation between National Security Councils
The sixth round of consultations between the National
Security Advisors was held during NSA’s visit to Tehran
in July 2008. The Deputy to the Secretary SNSC Iran
visited India from 10-14 November, 2008 for consultations
with the National Security Council Secretariat. Bilateral
Trade and Investment Trade between Iran and India grew
from US$ 9.5 billion (exports from India - US$ 1.5 billion
and imports by India - US$ 8 billion) in 2006-2007 to
US$ 13 billion (exports from India - US$ 2 billion and
imports by India - US$ 11 billion) in 2007-2008, registering
a growth of about 40%.

Cooperation in the Energy Sector
India attaches high importance to cooperation in the
energy sector in the interests of its energy security as also
a means to bolster regional cooperation. India is a major
consumer of energy and Iran a major source of
hydrocarbons. Cooperation, therefore, extends to different
dimensions – import of crude oil from Iran, export of
petroleum products from India, gas field exploration and
development. Import of LNG from Iran and the project
to build a pipeline to transfer gas from Iran to India
through Pakistan also remain under discussion.

During the period April 2008 to January 2009, the total
trade between US$ 12.8 billion. Important Indian goods
being exported to Iran include primary & semi-finished
iron & steel, manufactures of metals, machinery &
instruments, drugs and pharmaceuticals, processed
minerals, inorganic/agro chemicals, tea, yarn fabric etc.
India also exports petroleum products to Iran in sizeable
quantities. India’s imports from Iran include crude oil,
fruits & nuts, pulses, non-ferrous metals, organic &
inorganic chemicals, chemicals metal scrap, iron & steel,
organic chemicals and leather.

Transit
Iran is essential for the transit of our goods to Central
Asia and Afghanistan. India’s large assistance programme
for Afghanistan also depends on Iran for transit, in the
absence of transit through Pakistan. A consortium of
42

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh with the President of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Dr. Mahmoud Ahmadinejad,
in New Delhi on 29 April, 2008.

Minister of Finance, Kuwait, Mustafa Jassim Al-Shamali calling on the Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh,
in New Delhi on 3 July, 2008.

43

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

Indian companies has been pursuing a project for the
development of Chabahar port the fructification of which
would improve our access to Central Asia and
Afghanistan. We attach importance also to the
International North-South Transport Corridor through
Iran.

this exercise irrespective of the justifications and the
pleadings that may be put forward by the claimants or
their Governments.
This Division attended to 12 Right to Information Act
cases from April-December 2008 regarding queries from
the claimants of the United Nations Compensation.

Kuwait

Oman

Bilateral relations between India and Kuwait continued
to be warm and friendly. The relationship was marked by
exchange of high level visits. MoS, Shri E. Ahamed visited
Kuwait from 29-31 January, 2008. During the visit, MoS
called on the Kuwaiti Prime Minister. A wide range of
bilateral and regional issues, including the revised format
for Labour Contract to be signed between the Kuwaiti
Employer and Indian Worker were discussed in his
meetings with the Deputy PM/Foreign Minister and
Minister of Social Affairs in Labour. According to official
statistics of the Government of the State of Kuwait, there
were 579,409 Indian nationals in Kuwait in February 2008.
Shri E. Ahamed, MoS (EA) visited Kuwait to convey
condolences to the royal family and the people of Kuwait
on the demise of the Father Amir Sheikh Sa’ad Abdullah
Al-Sabah on 13 May, 2008.

Shri Pranab Mukherjee, External Affairs Minister
accompanied by MoS (EA), Shri E. Ahamed and Secretary
(East) paid an official visit to Muscat from 13-14 January,
2008. During the visit, EAM called on Deputy PM for
Council of Ministers and Mr. Yousef bin Alwai bin
Abdullah, Minister responsible for Foreign Affairs of
Oman. EAM inaugurated the Indian Embassy cum
Residence Complex and chaired the Regional Meeting of
Indian HoMs in Gulf and West Asia and North Africa
countries. The existing cordial relations between India
and Oman were further strengthened with the visit of
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh to Oman from 8-9
November, 2008. The highlight of the visit was signing of
the MoU on Manpower and the MoU for establishing an
India-Oman Joint Investment Fund with a seed capital of
US$ 100 million and going up to US$ 1.5 billion.

The Second Kuwait-India Joint Ministerial Commission
was held in Delhi from 1-3 July, 2008 chaired jointly by
MoS (EA), Shri E. Ahamed from Indian side and Minister
of Finance Mr. Mustafa Al-Shamali from the Kuwaiti side.
An MoU for cooperation between the CAG of India and
Kuwait’s State Audit Bureau was signed on 15 July, 2008.

Minister of State for External Affairs visited Oman in
September 2008. He called on Dr. Omer bin Abdul Munim
Al Zawawi, Special Adviser to HM the Sultan for External
Liaison and Mr Yousuf Bin Alawi Bin Abdullah, Minister
Responsible for Foreign Affairs to exchange views on issues
of mutual concern. Shri Shankersingh Vaghela, Union
Minister of Textiles, visited Oman from 29-31 August,
2008. He held a meeting with Mr. Maqbool Ali Sultan,
Minister of Commerce of the Sultanate. Minister for Legal
Affairs Mr Mohammed bin Ali bin Nasir Al Alawi visited
New Delhi in June to attend the 47th meeting of AsianAfrican Legal Consultative.

Kuwait Cell
The final phase of compensation distribution started with
UNCC sending to SKC a list of 8615 Untraced Claimants.
This was our last chance given by UNCC to locate and
pay these persons. Undisbursed funds were to be returned
to UNCC and would lapse in UNCC with no further
chance of getting this money. The work of locating the
claimants started in October 2005 with sending the list
of claimants who responded to the advertisements as per
the list sent by UNCC. The work ended in October 2006
as UNCC refused to accept any further lists. UNCC sent
money between January 2007 and July 2007, which had
to be disbursed within six months and un-disbursed money
returned to UNCC within six months of its transfer by
UNCC to India. The last instalment of un-disbursed
money was returned in January 2008. UNCC has made it
very clear that they will not entertain any requests by any
of the Governments to send the returned money after

Minister for Foreign Affairs Mr. Yusuf bin Alawi visited
New Delhi on 16 December, 2008. The sixth meeting of
Indo-Oman Strategic Consultative Group was held in
New Delhi on 7 May, 2008 and the seventh meeting was
held in Muscat from 18-19 January, 2009.
Economic and commercial ties were further consolidated.
Bilateral trade (non-oil) grew steadily and is poised to
cross US$ 2 billion by end 2008 compared to US$ 1.4
billion in 2007.

Qatar
India’s friendly relations with Qatar were further
consolidated in 2008.

44

Foreign Minister of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Prince Saud Al-Faisal meeting with the
Union Minister of External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee, in New Delhi on 28 February, 2008.

45

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh visited Qatar on
9 November, 2008. During the visit, Qatar and India
signed two documents on defence cooperation and
security as well as law enforcement matters. Means of
bolstering the bilateral relations and a number of regional
and international issues were discussed during the high
level meetings.

Indian Vice-Chief of Army Staff visited Saudi Arabia in
May 2008 and called on Saudi Assistant Minister of
Defence Prince Khalid bin Sultan. In July 2008 two Saudi
naval warships, ‘Al-Dammam’ and ‘Al-Yanbu,’ visited
Mumbai on the first ever goodwill visit to India in July
2008.

Haj

Shri Murli Deora, Minister for Petroleum and Natural Gas
met his Qatari counterpart Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister of Energy and Industry, Mr. Abdullah bin Hamad
al Attiyah on 10 November, 2008. Currently, India buys
7.5 million tones of LNG from RasGas under a long-term
deal with Qatar.

The total number of Indian pilgrims performing Haj in
December 2008 was about 175,000. 122,213 Indian
pilgrims visited Saudi Arabia through the Haj Committee
of India, and remaining pilgrims visited the Kingdom for
Haj through the private tour operators. Shri Syed Sibtey
Razi, Governor of Jharkhand led the Indian Haj Goodwill
Delegation to Saudi Arabia. He attended a reception
hosted by HRH Abdullah Bin Abdul Aziz, the King of
Saudi Arabia on 9 December, 2008.

Saudi Arabia
The year, marked by several high level visits, witnessed
an upswing in bilateral relations between India and Saudi
Arabia. Saudi Foreign Minister, Prince Saud Al Faisal
visited India from 28-29 February, 2008 and called on
Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh and Minister of
External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee. He again visited India
on December 26th and called on the Vice President, EAM
and NSA.

United Arab Emirates
The year 2008 was a year of consolidation in the friendly
bilateral ties between India and UAE. External Affairs
Minister, Shri Pranab Mukherjee visited UAE in May
2008. He met Foreign Minister, Sheikh Abdullah bin
Zayed Al Nahyan and Sheikh Mohammed Bin Zayed Al
Nahyan, Crown Prince of Abu Dhabi. Commerce and
Industry Minister, Shri Kamal Nath visited UAE in April
and met Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum Vice
President and PM of UAE and Ruler of Dubai, Minister
of Economy and Minister for Higher Education and
Scientific Research. Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs,
Shri Vayalar Ravi visited UAE in November and discussed
issues of interest with UAE Labour Minister, Saqr Ghobash
Saeed Ghobash. From the UAE side, Minister of Foreign
Trade, Shaikha Lubna Al Qasimi visited India on 25 April.
She was awarded “Woman achiever of the year” by FICCI.
The first ever India-UAE Joint Air Forces exercise took
place in September 2008 in Abu Dhabi.

Minister of External Affairs (EAM) Pranab Mukherjee
paid a two-day visit to Saudi Arabia from 19-20 April,
2008 and called on Saudi King, Abdullah bin Abdul Aziz
Al Saud and Governor of Riyadh Prince Salman bin Abdul
Aziz Al Saud. He also held discussions with Saudi Foreign
Minister, Prince Saud Al Faisal. MoS for External Affairs,
E. Ahamed visited Saudi Arabia on 17 April, 2008 and
signed Haj agreement with Saudi Haj Minister, Dr. Fouad
Al-Farsy.
Finance Minister, P. Chidambaram, along with Petroleum
and Natural Gas Minister, Murli Deora, attended the Oil
Summit, a meeting of major oil producer and consumer
countries, held in Jeddah on 22 June, 2008, held at the
behest of Saudi King Abdullah.
The economic relations strengthened during the year. A
high level delegation, led by Deputy Chairman of Planning
Commission, Dr. Montek Singh Ahluwalia, visited Riyadh
in May 2008 and met with the Saudi Ministers of Economy
& Planning and Commerce & Industry.

Yemen
India and Yemen bilateral relations remained friendly.
During the year the relations were further strengthened
with exchange of visits between the two countries. Secretary
(East) led the Indian delegation to hold the Foreign Office
consultation with Yemen in March 2008. Other important
delegation visits to Yemen were those of Gas Authority of
India Ltd, Indian Oil Corporation, Electronics Corporation
of India Ltd and NTPC. From Yemen side the important
delegation visits were Yemen Oil delegation, Yemen Oil
and Gas Corporation delegation, Yemen military (education
and training) delegation etc.

India and Saudi Arabia signed a new bilateral air services
agreement in January 2008. A composite delegation from
Ministry of Fertilizer and Ministry of Petroleum, led by
Secretary (Fertilizers), visited Riyadh from 25-27 October,
2008 to discuss bilateral cooperation in the fertilizer sector.
Indian delegation from Centre of Advanced Computing
(C-DAC) visited Riyadh in October 2008.

46

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

Iraq

West Asia and North Africa

India and Iraq have enduring political, economic and
cultural ties. These were guided by the resolution passed
by Indian Parliament on 8 April, 2003, by which India
stands for an early restoration of sovereignty to the Iraqi
people and the right of Iraqi people to freely determine
their political future and control their natural resources.
India supported a free, democratic, pluralistic, federal and
unified Iraq, and extended assistance to the Iraqi
Government and its people directly and as part of
international efforts under the United Nations auspices.

Relations with the region as a whole
In keeping with the importance of the WANA region to
India’s foreign policy objectives, relations with the
countries concerned were lent further substance in diverse
spheres of interaction including through high-level
political and economic interactions, consultations through
established bilateral mechanisms, project assistance and,
as with the Arab Republic of Egypt and the League of
Arab States, through the establishment of innovative
dialogue mechanisms. India’s support for the Palestinian
cause was further underlined during what was a trying
period especially for the civilian population of the
Occupied Palestinian Territories, marked additionally by
lack of progress in the Middle East Peace Process.

In the year 2008-09, India contributed towards
development of Iraq’s human resources. India provided
100 slots to Iraq under Indian Technical and Economic
Cooperation (ITEC) programme to train its officials in
various prestigious training and professional institutions
all over India. The Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOC)
provided training in India to 228 Iraqi oil officials. India
offered academic slots to Iraq for higher studies under
the ‘Cultural Exchange Programme Scholarship Scheme’
(CEP) and the ‘General Cultural Scholarship Scheme’
(GCSS) organized by the Indian Council for Cultural
Relations.

Algeria
A Parliamentary Friendship Group between India and
Algeria was established in the Algerian Parliament in April
2008. Mr. Ahmed Ouyahia, the Personal Representative
of the President of Algeria, led the Algerian delegation
to the India-Africa Forum Summit held in New Delhi in
April 2008. The Special Envoy on West Asia and the
Middle East Peace Process, Shri C. R. Gharekhan, visited
Algeria on 22 July, 2008. He met with Foreign Minister of
Algeria, Mr. Mourad Medelci and was received by the
President of Algeria, Mr. Abdelaziz Bouteflika. External
Affairs Minister, Shri Pranab Mukherjee met Foreign
Minister, Mr. Mourad Medelci on the sidelines of the
NAM Foreign Ministers meeting held in Tehran in July
2008.

India donated 800 metric tons of fortified biscuits to Iraqi
refugees in Syria through the World Food Programme in
New Delhi. The Embassy of India in Baghdad, on an
average, issued around 1350 visas every month to the Iraqi
nationals during the period April-October 2008. The
majority of Iraqis visited India on Tourist and Medical
visas and included around 400 Iraqi students.

India – Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)

India-Algeria trade and economic relations have grown
significantly during the year. Indian firms actively explored
prospects in the automobile, petrochemical and other
sectors in Algeria.

The India-GCC relations remained friendly and witnessed
further strengthening in 2008. The fourth round of India
GCC dialogue took place on 29 September, 2008 at New
York signifying the institutionalization of the mechanism.
EAM led the Indian delegation and Secretary General
GCC led the GCC delegation. They discussed issues of
mutual concern and ways to strengthen and promote
India-GCC relations.

Djibouti
India’s relations with Djibouti remain warm and cordial.
Shri Anand Sharma, Minister of State for External Affairs
met the Foreign Minister of Djibouti, Mr. Mahmoud Ali
Yossouf on 28 June, 2008 on the sidelines of the African
Union Summit at Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt.

The second round of India-GCC Free Trade Agreement
negotiating team meeting took place in Riyadh
(September 2008) after a hiatus of two and half years. It
was agreed to establish a continuous process of exchange
of information through electronic means before the next
round scheduled at New Delhi.

INS Sindhuvijay made a port call at Dijibouti in October,
2008 and INS Tabar, which is deployed for anti-piracy
efforts, also made a port call at Djibouti the following
month.

47

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

Egypt

Middle East held in Sharm el-Sheikh; Shri Anand Sharma,
Minister of State for External Affairs in June 2008 to
attend the 11th Summit of the African Union, also at
Sharm El-Sheikh, Shri C. R. Gharekhan, Special Envoy
for West Asia & the Middle East Peace Process, who
visited Cairo in April 2008 and Smt. Ambika Soni, Union
Minister of Tourism and Culture, who visited Cairo in
November 2008. High-level Egyptian visitors have also
included the Minister for International Cooperation, Ms.
Fayza Aboul Naga who led the Egyptian delegation to
the India Africa Forum Summit, the Minister of Trade
and Industry, Eng. Rachid Mohamed Rachid and the
Minister of Agriculture and Land Reclamation, Mr. Amin
Abaza, who also visited India in April 2008.

There were important exchanges of high-level visits with
Egypt during the year. External Affairs Minister, Shri
Pranab Mukherjee paid a bilateral visit to Egypt from 1-3
July, 2008 during which he called on President
Mohammed Hosny Mubarak at Sharm el-Sheikh and held
delegation level talks with the Foreign Minister of Egypt,
Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit in Cairo. During his visit,
the External Affairs Minister also met the Secretary
General of the League of Arab States, H.E. Mr. Amre
Moussa.
President Hosny Mubarak paid a State visit to India from
16-19 November, 2008. He was accompanied, among
others, by Mrs. Suzanne Mubarak and the Ministers of
Foreign Affairs, Trade & Industry, Communications &
Information Technology, the Minister of Information as
well as a large business delegation. During his visit,
President Mubarak called on the President. The VicePresident, the External Affairs Minister, and the
Chairperson of the UPA called on President Mubarak.
The Prime Minister held wide-ranging delegation-level
discussions with President Mubarak on 18 November,
2008. The following documents were signed during the
visit: (i) Extradition Treaty; (ii) Agreement on abolition
of visa requirement for holders of diplomatic, special and
official/service passports; (iii) MoU on Cooperation in the
field of Health & Medicine; (iv) MoU on Cooperation in
the Exploration and Use of Outer Space for Peaceful
Purposes; and, (v) MoU on Trade & Technical
Cooperation. External Affairs Minister and the Foreign
Minister of Egypt also signed a Joint Declaration on the
State Visit of President Mubarak establishing a Strategic
and Security Policy Dialogue between the two countries.
During the visit, the President conferred the Jawaharlal
Nehru Award for International Understanding for the year
1995 on President Mubarak. President Mubarak also
addressed Indian business persons. On the margins of the
visit, several Indian information technology companies
signed memoranda of intent with Egypt’s Ministry of
Communications & Information Technology. NASSCOM
and the Information Technology Industry Development
Agency (ITIDA) of Egypt also signed an MoU on
cooperation in the software sector.

In keeping with expanding trade and economic relations
with Egypt, the Apparel Export Promotion Council
participated in EGYTEX 2008 exhibition in Cairo from
16-18 November, 2008; a Tea Tasting-cum-Business Meet
was held in Cairo on 20 May, 2008; a trade delegation
from CAPEXIL visited Egypt from 29 November-4
December, 2008; a delegation from Egypt’s General
Authority for Investments and Free Zones visited India
from 12-18 April, 2008 on an investment promotion
campaign; the Gujarat State Petroleum Corporation Ltd.
signed a concession agreement for two oil and gas
exploration blocks in Egypt on 9 March, 2008; & on 13
November, 2008, ONGC Videsh Ltd. announced that it
had made a second oil discovery in the North Ramadan
Concession, Gulf of Suez.
An Egyptian Defence delegation, led by Maj Gen
Mohamed Mohsen Saad El Shazly, Deputy Chief of
Operation Authority of the Egyptian Armed Forces visited
India from 7-13 June, 2008 for the second meeting of the
Indo-Egypt Joint Defence Committee. The Indian
delegation to the meeting was led by Shri P. K. Rastogi,
Special Secretary, Ministry of Defence.
The ‘Days of Indian Culture in Egypt’, a week-long event
comprising performances by Indian music and dance
troupes, exhibitions of paintings and photographs and
screening of Indian films, was held from 10-17 November,
2008 under the framework of the Cultural Exchange
Programme.
The Egyptian Vice Minister of Culture, Dr. Faisal Abdel
Kader Younis participated in the India Arab Partnership
Forum and the India Arab Festival held in New Delhi
from 2-7 December, 2008.

Other visits exchanged between the two countries
included those by Shri Jairam Ramesh, Minister of State
for Commerce and Power in May 2008 during which he
also represented India at the World Economic Forum -

48

President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, Mohamed Hosny Mubarak meeting the
Union Minister of External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee in New Delhi on 18 November, 2008.

President of Palestine, Mahmoud Abbas meeting the President, Pratibha Devisingh Patil,
in New Delhi on 7 October , 2008.

49

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

Israel

A seven-member delegation representing the Jordanian
leather industry participated in the 16th Delhi Leather Fair
held in New Delhi from 16-18 October, 2008.

Secretary (Agriculture and Cooperation), Dr. P. K. Mishra,
led a delegation to Israel from 1-8 April , 2008. An Action
Plan for Bilateral Agricultural Cooperation for 2008-10
was agreed to during the visit. Secretary, Department of
Science and Technology Dr. T. Ramasami along with
Secretary, Department of Bio-Technology Shri MK Bhan
visited Israel from 8-10 November, 2008 to discuss
cooperation in science and technology. Defence Secretary,
Shri Vijay Singh visited Israel in November 2008 for the
Seventh India Israel Joint Working Group meeting on
Defence Cooperation. The Director General, Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of Israel, Mr. Aaron Abrahamovich visited
India from 7-8 July, 2008 during which he called on
External Affairs Minister and held delegation-level talks
with Shri N. Ravi, Secretary (East).

A 25-member cultural troupe from Jordan took part in
the India-Arab Cultural Festival held in New Delhi from
2-7 December, 2008.

Morocco
Shri C.R. Gharekhan, Special Envoy on West Asia and
the Middle East Peace Process visited Morocco from 2326 July, 2008.
Indian group “Oberoi Hotels and Resorts” and Moroccan
real estate group “El Alami Holding” signed a joint
agreement in September 2008 to build a US$ 76.3 million
tourist complex in Marrakech. The complex would include
90 luxury suites and 50 villas to be erected on 30 hectares.

The Indian Council for Cultural Relations signed an MoU
with Tel Aviv University, to establish a rotating Chair in
Indian studies. A team comprising the Vice-Chancellors
of Jawaharlal Nehru University, Jamia Millia Islamia
University, North East Hill University and the University
of Calcutta, visited Israel from 6-12 July, 2008. A
Kuchipudi dance group led by Ms. Vyjanthi Kashi and a
Hindustani violin group led by Ms. Anupriya Deostale,
sponsored by ICCR, performed at the Karmiel Dance
Festival on 24 July, 2008.

A seven-member Electronics & Software Export
Promotion Council’s delegation visited Morocco from 31
March-3 April, 2008 for promoting export of electronics
and IT products from India in the Moroccan market.
A two-member delegation from the PLASTINDIA
Foundation visited Morocco from 14-17 October, 2008.
A Rajasthani Gypsy Music Group participated in the
eight-day music festival “Mawazine, Rhythms of the
World” organized in Rabat on 16 May, 2008. Ms. Madhup
Mudgal, classical singer from India gave a performance at
the 14th Fez Festival of World Sacred Music held from 615 June, 2008. Smt. Padmavathi Paradin and Beena
Paradin from India participated in the Fez Culinary
Festival held from 24-26 October, 2008. An 18-member
Gnawa music group is visiting India to perform at the IndoArab Cultural Festival from 2-7 December, 2008.

Jordan
External Affairs Minister, Shri Pranab Mukherjee, met
the Jordanian Foreign Minister, Dr. Salaheddin Bashir on
the sidelines of the 63rd session of the United Nations
General Assembly on 29 September, 2008 and discussed
bilateral relations and the situation in West Asia.
Ambassador C.R. Gharekhan, Special Envoy for West
Asia & MEPP, visited Jordan in April 2008.

A Moroccan cultural troupe took part in the India-Arab
Cultural Festival held in New Delhi from 2-7 December,
2008. Deputy Minister of Culture Mrs. Khadija Alghour
participated in the India Arab Partnership Forum and the
India Arab Festival held in New Delhi from 2-7 December,
2008.

The Export Promotion Council for Export Oriented Units
& Special Economic Zone Units signed a Memorandum
of Understanding with the Jordan Chamber of Commerce
on 4 May, 2008 in Amman for mutual cooperation in trade
and economic matters. A business delegation from 40
Indian companies under the aegis of Engineering Export
Promotion Council and Export Promotion Council for
EoUs & SEZs participated in the Fifth Re-build Iraq
Exhibition held in Amman from 5-8 May, 2008. A
delegation from Jordan Investment Board (JIB) visited
India from 2-9 August, 2008 and interacted with several
industry leaders and business bodies in Mumbai, Bangalore
and New Delhi. JIB has identified India as one the 14
target countries for attracting investments into Jordan.

Shri Jaouad Kadiri was appointed India’s honorary consul
in Marrakech.

Palestine
India remained committed to its unwavering support for
the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people for a
homeland of their own and supported the comprehensive
dialogue between Palestine and Israel, which was initiated
at the Annapolis Peace Conference in November 2007.

50

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

India participated in the New Asia-Africa Strategic
Partnership Ministerial Conference on Capacity Building
for Palestine at Jakarta in July 2008. In the conference,
India committed to provide 60 ITEC slots to the
Palestinian people for training courses annually, which
later was increased to 80 slots.

Dr. M.M. Pallam Raju, Minister of State for Defence,
visited Lebanon from 10-12 September, 2008 to meet the
Indian contingent deployed in Southern Lebanon as part
of United Nations peace keeping force (UNIFIL).
Sponsored by the ICCR, a Rajasthani music group led by
Shri Samundar Khan Langa and a Shehnai group led by
Pandit Daya Shankar visited Lebanon from 17-22 October,
2008.

The President, Palestinian National Authority Mr. Mahmoud
Abbas paid a State visit to India from 6-9 October, 2008.
President Abbas called on President, Smt. Pratibha Devisingh
Patil. Vice President, Shri M. Hamid Ansari called on
President Abbas. Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh and
President Abbas held delegation level discussions. The
Chairperson of the United Progressive Alliance, Smt. Sonia
Gandhi, the External Affairs Minister, Shri Pranab
Mukherjee, and the Minister of State for External Affairs,
Shri E. Ahamed, called on President Abbas.

The India Tourism Office in Dubai participated in the
Tourism Exhibition held in Beirut during October 2008.

Libya
India-Libya bilateral relations during the year continued
to grow. Minister for African Affairs, Mr. Ali Abdul Salam
Treiki visited New Delhi as Head of the Libyan Delegation
to participate in the India-Africa Forum held in New Delhi
in April 2008. A Libyan cultural performed in the
associated cultural events.

A Memorandum of Understanding regarding construction
and equipping of the Jawaharlal Nehru High School at
Abu Dees (Palestine) was signed during the visit. In the
presence of the Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh,
President Mahmoud Abbas laid the foundation stone of
the Chancery-cum-Residences Complex of the Embassy
of Palestine, being built in New Delhi as a gift of the
Government and people of India. The Palestinian side
deeply appreciated India’s traditional and steadfast
commitment to the Palestinian cause.

An MoU was signed between RITES and Railroads Project
Execution and Management Board for cooperation in the
field of Railways in November 2008. This will include
projects as well as exchange of expertise and training. An
MoU for operationalisation of a consortium between
Indian Oil-Sonatrach (Algeria) was signed between the
two sides in May 2008.

In the course of discussions, India renewed its commitment
to the economic development of Palestine. In this regard,
reaffirming the Government of India’s commitments in
project assistance for Palestine, the Prime Minister, Dr.
Manmohan Singh announced a grant of US$ 10 million as
budgetary support to the Palestine National Authority as
well as an additional US$ 10 million in project assistance
for Palestinian development programmes.

Indian companies and Oil PSUs remained engaged in
developmental activities such as oil and oil pipelines,
housing, construction and infrastructure, power,
computerization and training etc. in Libya.
ICCR-sponsored cultural troupes performed in Tripoli and
Sirte in August 2008.
19 Indian companies participated in the Tripoli
International Fair held in April 2008. 40 of the 100
training slots offered to Libya by Minister of Petroleum,
Shri Murli Deora during his visit to Libya last year, have
been utilized by Libyan officials from the National Oil
Corporation.

Through a series of statements, the Government of India
strongly condemned the Israeli military incursion into
Gaza which began in December, 2008. Reiterating India’s
unstinted and unwavering support for the just Palestinian
cause, the Prime Minister also called upon the
international community help restore peace in the region.
Further, the Government of India contributed $1 million
to UNRWA for relief efforts in Gaza.

Somalia
India’s High Commissioner to Kenya was concurrently
accredited to Somalia. Piracy off the Somali coast affected
Indian flagged ships and Indian merchant sailors with
greater frequency during this period. Consent of the
Somali authorities was obtained for the Indian Navy to
participate in anti-piracy operations in Somali waters.

Lebanon
India and Lebanon continued to enjoy cordial and friendly
relations. India welcomed the election of Gen. Michel
Sleiman, as the new President of Lebanon in May 2008.
51

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

Sudan

Minister, Shri Pranab Mukherjee and Chairperson UPA,
Smt. Sonia Gandhi called on the Syrian President.

Mr Salman Suliman Alsafi, the Sudanese Minister of State
for Investment attended the FICCI- Indo -Arab
Investment Projects Conclave I in April 2008. The Under
Secretary in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, HE Dr. Mutrif
Siddig visited India in July 2008 during which he called
on Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri E. Ahamed.
Dr. Awad Al-Jaz, Minister of Finance and National
Economy visited India in October 2008 as Special Envoy
of the President of Sudan. He called on the External
Affairs Minister, Shri Pranab Mukherjee during which he
handed over a letter for the Prime Minister, Dr.
Manmohan Singh from the Sudanese President. During
this visit, the Special Envoy also met the Minister of
Railways, Shri Lalu Prasad Yadav, the Finance Minister
of Finance, Shri P. Chidambaram and the Minister of
Petroleum & Natural Gas, Shri Murli Deora.

President Bashar Al-Assad and the Prime Minister, Dr.
Manmohan Singh held delegation level talks on 18 June.
Efforts aimed at strengthening bilateral economic and
commercial cooperation between India and Syria, the
encouragement of joint ventures in a variety of areas,
including in the Syrian phosphatic fertilizers, hydrocarbon
and power sectors were highlighted in the talks. India
offered to conduct a consultancy study on the integrated
development of the Syrian phosphoric sector.
Subsequently, a delegation led by Secretary (Fertilizers)
visited Syria.
Documents signed during the visit included (i) Agreement
on the Mutual Promotion & Protection of Investments
(ii) Agreement on the Avoidance of the Double Taxation
and Prevention of Fiscal Evasion and (iii) Work Plan for
Cooperation in the Field of Agriculture and Allied Sectors
for 2008-2009.

The Vice Chief of Army Staff visited Sudan to inspect
Indian peacekeepers in the United Nations Mission in
Sudan.

The Minister of Culture of Syria, Dr. Riyadh Nassan Agha,
participated in the India Arab Partnership Forum and the
India Arab Festival held in New Delhi from 2-7 December,
2008. Syria also participated in the Painting exhibition,
handicraft exhibition and the cultural festival during the
event.

During the year, two Indian nationals remained missing
in Sudan.
The public sector company, WAPCOS won a donorfunded tender for consultancy for water and electricity
supply projects in southern Sudan.
In November 2008, a folk song and dance ensemble from
Goa visited Khartoum, Kadugli and Malakal under the
auspices of the ICCR. Training was also provided at the
Foreign Service Institute, New Delhi to 15 officials from
the Ministry of Regional Cooperation of the Government
of Southern Sudan.

Tunisia
The first meeting of the Joint Working Group on Small
and Medium Enterprises was held in New Delhi from
8-9 April, 2008. The fourth meeting of the Joint Working
Group on Drugs and Pharmaceuticals was held in Tunis
from 5-7 October, 2008. Partnership between the Pasteur
Institute of Tunisia and the National Institute of
Pharmaceutical Education and Research, for research as
well as commercial production of vaccines and serum in
Tunisia and India, was examined and biotechnology was
identified as an area of cooperation.

The Minister of Culture, Youth and Sports of Sudan, Mr.
Mohamed Yousif Abdalla participated in the India Arab
Partnership Forum and the India Arab Festival held in
New Delhi from 2-7 December, 2008.

Syria

An eight-member cultural troupe, sponsored by ICCR
under the India-Tunisia Cultural Exchange Programme
visited Tunisia from 29 July-7 August, 2008. The Troupe
gave seven performances in various cities across Tunisia.

The President of Syria, Dr. Bashar Al-Assad, accompanied
by Mrs. Asma Assad, paid a State visit to India from
17-21 June, 2008. During the visit, the President of Syria
also visited Bangalore and Agra. Dr. Bashar al-Assad was
also accompanied by the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr.
Walid al-Moualem, Minister for Expatriates, Dr. (Ms.)
Buthaina Shaaban, Minister of Economy and Trade, Mr.
Amer Husni Lutfi and Minister of Telecommunication &
Technology, Mr. Emad Sabouni. The President of Syria
called on the President, Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil.
Vice-President, Dr. M. Hamid Ansari, External Affairs

The League of Arab States
As a follow-up to discussions held in Cairo in July, 2008
during the visit of the External Affairs Minister, Shri Pranab
Mukherjee, the Secretary General of the League of Arab
States, Mr. Amre Moussa visited India from 30 November2 December, 2008. The Secretary General and the External
52

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

in cooperation with the ICCR and the Ministry of External
Affairs that brought together nearly 200 artistes from
various Arab countries from 2-7 December, 2008. The
festival also included film shows, cultural performances, a
handicrafts fair, a painting and photo exhibition and a
seminar on “India-Arab Civilizational Linkages” organised
by the ICWA. Ministers for Culture from Sudan, Syria,
Morocco, Egypt, Yemen and Oman also attended the event.

Affairs Minister held delegation level talks on 2 December,
2008 following which, an Memorandum of Cooperation
was signed providing for the establishment of the IndiaArab Cooperation Forum as a formal mechanism to
strengthen and diversify relations in various fields. The
External Affairs Minister and the Secretary General
inaugurated the “India-Arab Forum: Partnership through
Culture,” a week-long cultural festival organised by FICCI

53

6

Africa (South of Sahara)

East and Southern Africa

India hosted several high level visits from the region:
South African President, Mr. Thabo Mbeki visited
India to participate in the India-Africa Forum
Summit in New Delhi from 7-9 April, 2008.

India-Africa Forum Summit
The India-Africa Forum Summit held in New Delhi from
8-9 April 2008, was a landmark event. The Summit
created a new architecture for the relationship between
India and Africa for the early part of the 21st century.
The Delhi Declaration and the Africa-India framework
for cooperation that emerged from the Summit set out
an ambitious road map.

The then Vice President of Zambia, Mr. Rupiah
Bwezani Banda, attended India-Africa Forum
Summit held in Delhi from 8-9 April, 2008.
President of Uganda, Mr. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni,
as Head of the East African Community, participated
in the India-Africa Forum Summit from 8-9 April,
2008. He was on State Visit on 10 April, 2008.

The Prime Minister announced the doubling of the
existing levels of Lines of Credit to Africa to US $ 5.4
billion over the next five years. These Lines of Credit will
be utilized in such crucial areas as enhancing agricultural
production, food processing, small and medium
enterprises, irrigation, infrastructure, IT, energy and
pharmaceutical sectors, among others. These projects will
be prioritized by the African governments, reflecting their
own needs.

President of Tanzania, Mr. Jakaya Mrisho Kikwete,
as Chairman of the African Union, visited India and
participated in the India-Africa Forum Summit from
8-9 April, 2008.
Prime Minister of Ethiopia, Mr. Meles Zenawi,
visited India and participated in the India-Africa
Forum Summit from 8-9 April, 2008.
The new President of South Africa, Mr. Kgalema
Motlanthe, accompanied by several South African
Ministers, visited India to attend Third IBSA
Summit in New Delhi on 15 October, 2008.

A separate grant of US $ 500 million was also announced
for projects specially in the areas of capacity building and
human resources development. These include an entire
range of programmes, namely, doubling of educational
scholarships under ITEC, general scholarship schemes of
the ICCR, organization of courses in water resources,
health, agriculture, mining, establishment of apex
institutions in such diverse areas as trade, IT, vocational
training, diamond, coal etc.. These programmes will keep
Africa as the largest recipient of the ITEC programme.

Mr. Angidi Veeriah Chettiar, Vice President of
Mauritius visited Chennai to participate in the
Seventh Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Convention from
7-9 January, 2009.
At the invitation of the Prime Minister, Rt. Hon.
Raila Odinga, EGH, MP, Prime Minister of Kenya,
visited Gujarat to participate in the Vibrant Gujarat
Global Investors’ Summit (VGGIS) 2009 from 1114 January, 2009.

The Prime Minister also announced an offer of the Duty
Free Tariff Preference (DFTP) Scheme for access to
products from African LDCs. Out of the 50 LDCs of the
world, 34 are in Africa. A number of African nations have
already joined the Scheme. This was a fulfilment of a
promise made by us earlier at the WTO.

Mr. Paul Kagame, President of Rwanda, visited India
from 18-23 January, 2009 to participate in the
FICCI-organized India-Africa Business Partnership
Summit (19-20 January) in New Delhi as the Chief
Guest.

This new architecture of the India Africa Forum Summit
has been built upon a solid foundation of the historical
and civilizational ties that have existed between India
and Africa, and which were strengthened during the long
periods of struggle against colonialism, imperialism and
apartheid, in which India and Africa were partners.

Mr. Meles Zenawi, Prime Minister of Ethiopia,
visited India from 4-5 February, 2009 to participate
in the Delhi Sustainable Development Summit 2009
organized by TERI.
54

Africa (South of Sahara)

From Indian side, President Smt. Pratibha Patil made
a brief technical stop over in Cape Town on 24 April,
2008 on her way back to India after her visit to Latin
American countries.

Minister of State for Fisheries of Uganda
(November)

Other important visits to India during the year included:

State Minister of Capacity Building of Ethiopia
(November)

Minister of Minister for Public Service Management
of Tanzania (November)

Foreign Minister of Kenya, representing President
of Kenya (April).

Deputy Minister for Agriculture and Food Security,
Malawi (November).

President of the African National Congress, South
Africa (June).

Assistant Minister of Trade and Industry,
Cooperatives and Marketing, Lesotho (November).

Speaker of the House of Federation of Ethiopia
(May)

President of Mauritius (private visit) (December)

Foreign Minister Namibia (June).

Minister of Information, Communication
Technology, Namibia (December)

The Minister for Natural Resource and Tourism of
Tanzania (June)

Minister of Energy and Mines of the State of Eritrea
(January).

State Minister of Labour & Social Affairs of Ethiopia
(June).

Hon. Raila Odinga, Prime Minister of Kenya. visited
Gujarat to participate in the Vibrant Gujarat Global
Investors’ Summit (VGGIS) 2009 (January)

Minister of Education, South Africa (June-July).
Minister of Health, South Africa (July).

Minister of Agriculture of Kenya and Mr. Amason
Kingi Jeffah, Minister for the East African
Community visited India (January).

Prince Mangosuthu Buthelezi, President of South
Africa’s Inkatha Freedom Party and Chairman of the
House of Traditional Leaders (July)
Minister of Interior, Mozambique (July).

Minister of Environment and National
Development Unit of Mauritius (January).

State Minister for Technical and Vocational
Education and Training of Ethiopia (July).

Minister for Energy of Mozambique (January).
Minister of Commerce, Industry & Trade, Swaziland
(January).

Minister for Public Service and Administration,
South Africa (August).

Minister for Health and Social Welfare, and Deputy
Foreign Minister of Tanzania (January).

Minister of Health of Madagascar (August)
Deputy Attorney General/Minister of State for
Justice and Constitutional Affairs of Uganda
(August).

Minister for Industry, Trade and Marketing of
Tanzania (January).
Minister for Information & Communications
Technology (ICT) of Uganda (January).

Minister of Infrastructure Development of Tanzania
(September)

Minister of State for Economic Monitoring, Office
of the President of Uganda, (January).

Minister for Communications, Science and
Technology of Tanzania (September)

Deputy Minister of Health, Zambia (January).

Minister of Natural Resources of Rwanda (October)

Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
Mozambique (February)

Minister for Agriculture of Eritrea (October)

Minister for Coordination for Environmental Action
of Mozambique (February)

Mauritian Parliamentary delegation (23-member)
led by the Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly
of Mauritius (October)

Minister of Social Security, National Solidarity and
Senior Citizens Welfare and Reforms Institutions of
Mauritius (26 January to 8 February)

Minister of Housing, South Africa (October).
Minister for Agriculture, Food Security and
Cooperatives of Tanzania (November)

Minister of Health of Rwanda (February).
Minister of Natural Resources of Rwanda (February).

Minister of Agriculture and Animal Resources of
Rwanda (November)

Minister of Medical Services of Kenya (February)
55

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

Botswana

Minister of Defence, Justice and Security of
Botswana (February)

India and Botswana enjoy cordial relations which former
Botswana’s President described as excellent. The year
2008 has seen the follow-up on the six agreements signed
during the visit of former President Festus Mogae in
December 2006. The two countries are also discussing a
number of other agreements, including an MoU on
Cooperation in the field of Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises and another on Cooperation in the field of
Agriculture and Allied Sectors. Bilateral defence relations
got a big boost with the visits of Chief of Air Staff (CAS)
Air Chief Marshal J H Major to Botswana from 14-17
September, 08 at the invitation of the Lt. Gen T H C
Masire, Commander, Botswana Defence Force (BDF) and
Chief of Army Staff, General Deepak Kapoor from 27-28
November, 2008.

Dy. Minister of Defence of Namibia (February)
Minister of Energy and Minerals of Tanzania
(March)
Minister of Trade & Industry of Botswana (March)
Vice-Prime Minister, Minister of Finance and
Economic Empowerment of Mauritius (March).
Vice Minister of Agriculture, Mozambique (March)
Minister of Natural Resources and Energy, and
Minister of Information, Communication and
Technology, Kingdom of Swaziland (March)
Minister of State for Investment, Minister of Trade
and Industry, and Minister of State for Finance of
Uganda (March).
Minister of Regional Integration and International
Cooperation of Zimbabwe (March).

To enhance the bilateral technical cooperation, a
delegation from Ministry of Education of Botswana visited
India to discuss the implementation of tele-education
project. TCIL has already installed the tele-medicine
hardware in Nyangabgwe hospital in Francistown. Work
on VVIP connectivity in the President’s Office has been
completed. There is appreciation for Pan-African enetwork project in Botswana. An Innovation hub similar
to a Cyber City in India has been established in Botswana.
Another Botswana delegation visited India from 25-27
November, 2008 to take part in the third round of India
and SACU PTA negotiations.

From India:
Parliamentary delegation led by Deputy Speaker of
Lok Sabha to Mauritius and South Africa (April).
External Affairs Minister to South Africa (May).
The Special Envoy of the Prime Minister on Climate
Change visited Mauritius (May).
Commissioner for NRI Affairs, Government of Goa
to Kenya (May).
Commissioner for NRI Affairs, Government of Goa
to Mozambique (May).

A delegation led by Dr. Harjit Singh Anand, Secretary,
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation,
visited Botswana from 11-14 April, 2008 to participate in
an exhibition-cum-seminar on ‘Innovative Building
Materials & Construction Technologies for Sustainable
Housing in Africa’.

Minister of State for External Affairs to Ethiopia
(July).
Minister of State for External Affairs Shri Anand
Sharma to South Africa (July & September).
Minister for Tourism and Culture to South Africa
(August).

On the bilateral economic and commercial front, a tenmember IT industry delegation led by Electronics &
Computer Software Export Promotion Council visited
Gaborone from 29-30 September, 2008 and participated
in a “Buyer-Seller-Meet” and “One-to-One” interactions
with the IT companies of Botswana.

Minister of State for External Affairs to Tanzania
(August).
Raksha Utpadan Rajya Mantri to South Africa
(September).
Minister of State for Commerce & Power to Ethiopia
(October).

Chief Minister of Gujarat to Uganda and Kenya
(November).

A Children’s Film Festival under India-Botswana CEP was
held in Gaborone from 10-15 November, 2008 in
collaboration with Department of Culture and Ministry
of Youth, Sport and Culture wherein 14 children’s films
from India were screened.

Minister for Industry and Commerce, Government
of Assam to Kenya (January 2009)

Brig. (Retd) Dikgakganatso Ndelu Seretse, Minister of
Defence, Justice and Security of Botswana visited India

Health Minister, Government of Kerala to South
Africa (November).

56

Africa (South of Sahara)

Ethiopia

in connection with the Seventh International Aerospace
Exposition, 11-15 February, 2009, held in Bangalore.

Prime Minister of Ethiopia, Mr. Meles Zenawi,
accompanied by Foreign Minister Mr. Seyoum Mesfin,
attended the India-Africa Forum Summit at New Delhi
in April 2008.

Hon. Daniel N. Moroka, Minister of Trade & Industry,
Govt. of Botswana attended the “5th CII-EXIM Bank
Conclave on India-Africa Project Partnership: 22-24
March, 2009” in New Delhi.

Shri Anand Sharma, Minister of State for External Affairs
visited Ethiopia on 30-31 July, 2008 as Special Envoy of
the Prime Minister seeking support of Ethiopia, which is
an IAEA Governing Body Member, regarding the
proposed Indian Safeguards Agreement with IAEA.
Ethiopia fully supported India in Vienna and the Prime
Minister told MOS (AS) that India’s re-emergence on
the world stage was good for Africa in general and Ethiopia
in particular.

Burundi
The two-way trade during 2007-08 was US$ 9.89 million
which saw a growth of nearly 25%. Indian exports were
worth US$ 8.04 million.
A delegation of businessmen from the Gujarat Chamber
of Commerce and Industry paid a visit to Burundi on 1415 November, 2008 to explore possibilities of increasing
bilateral trade and investment.

Shri Jairam Ramesh, Minister of State for Commerce &
Power, visited Ethiopia from 5-7 October, 2008, leading
an Indian official and business delegation, to attend the
Fifth India-Ethiopia Joint Trade Committee meeting held
in Addis Ababa.

Comoros
Comoros signed an MoU with TCIL for setting up the
Pan-African e-network in the country. Necessary
equipment has reached Moroni and the implementation
process would commence once Govt. of Comoros finalises
the sites for the tele-medicine, tele-education and VVIP
connectivity.

Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Minister of External Affairs, met
Ethiopian Prime Minister Meles Zenawi on the sidelines
of UNGA, New York and discussed issues of bilateral
relations.

Another project costing US$ one million has been offered
to Comoros in the field of agro-processing under IBSA.
Govt. of Comoros has been requested to furnish the
feasibility study enabling the Govt. of India to implement
the project.

The Speaker of the House of Federation, Degefe Bula,
led a nine-member delegation on a study visit to Delhi
from 6-9 May, 2008. Another seven-member delegation
led by the Deputy Speaker of the House of Peoples’
Representatives visited BPST, New Delhi, from 4-8
August, 2008, on a benchmarking mission. A regional
parliamentary delegation headed by the Speaker of the
Southern Nations, Nationalities Peoples Regional Council
also visited BPST from 26-28 August, 2008, as a
Parliamentary experience sharing programme.

Eritrea
Two vessels of the Indian Navy, viz., INS Godavari and
INS Aditya paid a goodwill visit to Massawa port from 36 September, 2008 and to Assab port from 7-8 September,
2008.

Mr. Mohamed Malin Ali, State Minister of Labour &
Social Affairs visited India from 16-21 June, 2008. The
Ethiopian State Minister met Minister of State (IC),
Labour & Employment on 17 June, 2008 and discussed
issues of mutual interest.

The Eritrean Minister for Agriculture, Mr. Arefaine Berhe,
accompanied by Director General in the President’s
Office, Mr. Yemani Ghebremeskel, paid an official visit to
India from 28 September to 5 October, 2008. The Eritrean
Minister met Union Minister of Agriculture on 29
September, 2008 to discuss and review cooperation in the
area of agriculture between the two countries.

H.E. Mr. Wondwosen Kiflu, State Minister for Technical
and Vocational Education and Training, Ethiopia visited
India from 14-17 July, 2008. The Ethiopian Minister met
MOS, HRD on 17 July, 2008 and discussed issues of
mutual interest.

Mr. Tesfai Ghebreselaissie, Minister of Energy and Mines
of the State of Eritrea, visited India from 18-23 January,
2009 to participate in the India-Africa Business
Partnership Summit in New Delhi organized by FICCI
and supported by Government of India. The Minister and
delegation had a meeting with the Secretary, Ministry of
Mines to discuss areas of bilateral cooperation.

Mr. Fikru Desalegne, State Minister of Capacity Building
of Ethiopia visited India from 23-28 November, 2008 on
an experience sharing visit. The delegation had meetings/
presentations at Department of Personnel & Training and
57

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

Indian Institute of Public Administration. The delegation
also visited Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of
Administration, Mussoorie.

Indian community in general. Shri Faleiro also met Kenya’s
Education Minister, Prof. Sam Ongeri. As part of their
study tour abroad, a team of 15 senior defence officials
from the National Defence College of India visited Kenya
from 11-16 May, 2008. INS Godavari paid a goodwill visit
to Mombasa from 17-21 August, 2008.

The year 2008 has been celebrated as the 60th anniversary
of establishment of diplomatic relations between India
and Ethiopia. The Ethiopian Postal Service issued a set of
three postage stamps commemorating 60 years of
establishment of diplomatic relations between Ethiopia
and India.

A delegation of Customs officials visited Kenya from 6-8
August, 2008 to help Kenya Revenue Authority to launch
an IT-based software programme for revenue collection.
Senior officers of the National Human Rights Commission
of India including its Chairperson Shri Justice S. Rajendra
Babu visited Kenya from 19-25 October, 2008 to attend
the Commonwealth Human Rights Institutions Forum
meeting and the Ninth International Conference of the
International Coordination Committee of National
Human Rights Institutions.

Second International Non-Violence Day was organized
on 2 October, 2008 at the UN Conference Centre where
PM Meles Zenawi, delivered the Gandhi Memorial
lecture. The Ethiopian PM released the first ever
publication in Amharic of the book “India - A Dynamic
Democracy”. It was organized by the Embassy in
cooperation with the UNECA.

Shri Narendra Modi, Chief Minister Gujarat visited Kenya
from 18-20 November, 2008 as part of a Road Show to
promote the Vibrant Gujarat: Global Investors’ Summit
2009. He was accompanied by a composite delegation of
senior State officials and leading businessmen of Gujarat.
The Chief Minister had meetings with Kenya’s Vice
President and Minister of Home Affairs Mr. Kalonzo
Musyoka, the Prime Minister Mr. Raila Odinga and
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Local
Government Mr. Musalia Mudavadi.

TERI signed an MoU with UNECA for establishing Africa
Centre for Climate Change Policy Studies to strengthen
Africa’s effort to address the challenge of climate change.
Ethiopia is the first beneficiary of the Pan African eNetwork project in Africa, which was launched in 2007.
A Bharatnatyam dance troupe led by Guru Saroja
Vaidyanathan visited Ethiopia in June 2008. Goan music
and dance troupe ‘Pioneers of Quepem’ visited Ethiopia
from 27 October to 2 November, 2008 and gave
performances in four cities.

A Kenya Railways delegation led by its Managing Director
visited India in May 2008 to explore the possibility of tieups and to study the working of the Metro project.

Mr. Meles Zenawi, Prime Minister of Ethiopia, visited India
from 4-5 February, 2009 to participate in the Delhi
Sustainable Development Summit 2009 organized by
TERI. During the visit, External Affairs Minister Shri
Pranab Mukherjee called on the Ethiopian Prime Minister
and discussed issues of bilateral cooperation.

The Fifth India-Kenya Joint Trade Committee meeting
was held on 16-17 December, 2008 in New Delhi. The
Kenyan delegation was led by Dr. (Eng.) Cyrus Njiru,
Permanent Secretary in the office of Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Trade and the Indian delegation
was led by Shri Jairam Ramesh, MOS for Commerce and
Power.

Bilateral trade between the two countries has steadily been
increasing and is heavily in India’s favour. According to
the Ethiopian Customs Authority, India’s exports to
Ethiopia in 2007-08 are worth US$ 426.9 mn. while
imports are to the tune of US$ 14 mn. Indian investments
in Ethiopia have crossed US$ 3.5 billion in 2008 and India
is now the second largest investor in Ethiopia after Sudan.

A tea delegation led by Shri Pradyut Bardoloi, Minister
for Industry and Commerce, Government of Assam visited
Kenya on a study tour from 11-16 January, 2009 to learn
about the mechanism put in place in the small tea growers
sectors of Kenya and held meetings with Kenya Tea
Development Authority officials.

Kenya
Foreign Minister of Kenya, Mr. Moses Wetang’ula, visited
India from 6-10 April, 2008 to participate in the IndiaAfrica Forum Summit, representing President Kibaki. Shri
Eduardo Faleiro, Commissioner for NRI Affairs,
Government of Goa visited Kenya from 21-25 May, 2008
to promote the welfare of the Goan expatriate community
in Kenya in particular and to interact with the overseas

Attorney General Hon. Amos Wako visited Ahmedabad
to attend an International Meeting on Peace and Law
held from 28 December, 2008 to 5 January, 2009.
A high-level delegation led by Prime Minister Rt. Hon.
Raila Odinga, attended the Vibrant Gujarat Global
Investors’ Summit (VGGIS) from 11 to 14 January 2009
58

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh with the Prime Minister of Ethiopia, Meles Zenewi,
in New Delhi on 9 April, 2008.

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh meeting with the President of Namibia, Hifikepunye Pohamba
on the sidelines of the 63rd Session of the UN General Assembly in New York, USA
on 26 September, 2008.

59

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

held at Gandhi Nagar, Gujarat. He held discussions with
top Indian industrialists and businessmen. He also visited
various industrial establishments including Mundra Port
and Porbandar, etc. PM Raila Odinga also held discussions
with Gujarat Chief Minister Shri Narendra Modi who took
him on a tour to Fair Price Shops to observe the working of
Public Distribution System to distribute foodgrains among
the poor sections of the society.

extended till 2011. The performance of the IATT has
been uniformly praised by the Lesotho leadership.

Mr. William Ruto, Minister of Agriculture of Kenya and
Mr. Amason Kingi Jeffah, Minister for the East African
Community visited India and participated in the IndiaAfrica Business Partnership Summit organized by FICCI
from 19-20 January, 2009, in New Delhi.

On exchange of visits, Mr. Khotso Matla, Assistant
Minister of Trade and Industry, Cooperatives and
Marketing, Government of Lesotho visited India on 26
November, 2008 to witness the signing of an MoU for
negotiating the PTA between India and SACU.

Mr. P.A. Nyong’o, Minister of Medical Services of Kenya
visited India from 1-4 February, 2009 in connection with
the Fifth Meeting of the International Advisory Panel (IAP)

On the technical cooperation side, Lesotho has been
making full use of the training opportunities offered under
the ITEC Programme. India is also setting up an IT Centre
at Lerotholi Polytechnic in Maseru. MoUs on agricultural
cooperation and Local Government between India and
Lesotho are under discussion.

The first session of the India-Lesotho Joint Commission
was held in New Delhi on 17 March, 2009. the meeting
discussed cooperation in areas such as SMMEs, human
resources development, mining, health, agriculture, rural
development, and water resources.

There has been increase in the bilateral trade in the last
4-5 years with the volume being US $ 650 million in the
year 2007. Major items of exports from India to Kenya
include drugs and pharmaceuticals, chemicals, machinery
etc. Major items imported by India include cashew, leather
and leather products, scrap metal etc.

Madagascar
Govt. of India extended Line of Credit of US$ 25 million
to finance two projects viz. (i) project for rice productivity
(US$ 10 mn) and (ii) project for fertilizer production (US$
15 mn) in Madagascar. An agreement in this regard was
signed in New Delhi on 14 November, 2008 between Exim
Bank of India and the Malagasy Minister of Agriculture,
Live Stock and Fisheries H. E. Mr. Armand Panja
Ramanoelina. President of Madagascar H.E. Mr. Marc
Ravalomanana also made a specific mention of India’s
assistance in agriculture sector during a seminar on
Madagascar Action Plan (MAP) on 18 November, 2008
in Antananarivo.

Indian Company ESSAR with Econet wireless
International launched a fourth GSM network mobile
service on 26 November, 2008 under brand name YU.
The ESSAR group has invested US$ 500 million in to
the venture. In addition ESSAR group through ESSAR
oil has purchased 50% stake in Kenya Petroleum Refineries
Ltd. at a cost of US$ 11 million. Other major investments
include purchase of US$ 200 million property by Reliance
Group in Nairobi, Sher Karunturi, a flower firm of
Karunturi Group invested US$ 78 million and
construction of LPG plant in Nairobi by Bharat Petroleum
Corporation at total cost of US$ 70 Million. The Road
Show on ‘Vibrant Gujarat’ at Oshwal Centre and
“Business Meet” at Kenya International Conference
Centre (KICC) on 20 November, 2008, organized during
the visit of Chief Minister of Gujarat, was attended by
more than 500 Kenyan industrialists and businessmen.
During the meeting bilateral cooperation between two
countries in the sectors like small scale industries,
infrastructure development, energy, information and
communication technology (ICT) and mineral
exploration were discussed.

India will soon be installing an intranet project linking
the Malagasy Presidency with all the Ministries and
Departments of the Government of Madagascar. An MoU
for implementation of the project, estimated to cost US$
6 million, was signed on 18 September, 2008. Necessary
process is already underway to set up another prestigious
IT project, Pan African e-network, to provide Indian
expertise in healthcare and education to the Malagasy
people.
Dr. Ralainirina Paul Richard, Minister of Health of
Madagascar, visited India from 17-24 August, 2008,
leading a three-member delegation. The delegation visited
Mumbai and Goa and had discussions with CIPLA Ltd.
including visiting their manufacturing facilities.

Lesotho
India’s relations with Lesotho continued to grow steadily.
At the request of the Prime Minister of Lesotho, the term
of the Indian Army Training Team (IATT) in Maseru was

An India-Madagascar Business Seminar was organized in
60

Africa (South of Sahara)

Antananarivo on 1 September, 2008 during the visit of a
15-member multi- sectoral delegation from the
Confederation of Indian Industry to explore the
opportunities of bilateral trade and investment.

to Malawi were increased to 35 in 2008-09.
The Indian Council for Cultural Relations sponsored
dance and music troupe led by Odissi dancer Ranjana
Gauhar and classical music artiste Dr. Mustafa Raza gave
performances in Malawi from 28-31 October, 2008.

India exported 50,000 tonnes of non-basmati rice to
Madagascar enabling it to resolve its food scarcity at a
very critical juncture.

Mauritius
During the year, India’s comprehensive engagement with
Mauritius continued in various fields.

The year 2008 witnessed a new momentum in the bilateral
relationship with the opening of resident Malagasy
Embassy in New Delhi in October 2008.

A 16-member Parliamentary delegation led by Deputy
Speaker of Lok Sabha, Shri Charanjit Singh Atwal, visited
Mauritius en route to attend the 118th Assembly of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union meeting in Cape Town from
10-12 April, 2008. The delegation called on the Speaker
of the National Assembly of Mauritius, Mr. Rajkeswur
Purryag.

Malagasy imports from India during the year 2007 were
to the tune of US$ 76.75 million while the exports from
Madagascar to India stood at US$ 18.68 million. As per
figures available upto September 2008, India’s exports to
Madagascar amount to US$ 58.50 million while
Madagascar’s exports to India amounted for US$ 6.8
million.

A 23-member Mauritian Parliamentary delegation led by
the Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly of
Mauritius, Mr. Marie Joseph Noel-Etienne Ghislain
Sinatambou, visited India from 12-17 October, 2008 to
participate in the Orientation Programme conducted by
the Public Diplomacy Division of the Ministry. The
delegation called on the Prime Minister and the External
Affairs Minister. Besides Delhi, the delegation also visited
Mumbai.

M/s Escorts are sending 450 tractors and allied equipments
worth US$ 10 million to Madagascar under India’s LoC.
M/s Lucky Exports have been awarded the contract for
setting up seed fertilizer plants and bio-fertilizer plants
worth US$ 15 million by the Government of Madagascar
under the above LoC. Three Indian companies namely,
Gimpex, Varun Trading and Sahara India have opened
their offices in Madagascar during 2008 and are exploring
opportunities for investments in the mining sector. M/s
Essar has been involved in the exploration of oil and gas
in Madagascar for over two years. They have invested
nearly US$ 5 million so far. A large number of Indian
companies, including Tatas, Birlas, Ashok Leyland,
Kirloskars, HCL, Ercom, Angelique, Jaguar, etc. had made
exploratory visits to Madagascar to avail of the investment
friendly climate.

Sir Anerood Jugnauth, President of Mauritius, was on a
private visit to India from 14-21 December, 2008.
A high-level delegation led by the Vice President of
Mauritius, Mr. Angidi Veeriah Chettiar, and including
Members of Parliament Mr. Yatin Varma, and Mr. Cader
Sayed Hossen, attended the Seventh Pravasi Bharatiya
Divas Convention in Chennai from 7-9 January, 2009.
Mr. Angidi Chettiar was conferred the Pravasi Bharatiya
Samman during the Convention by the President of India.
He is the fourth Mauritian dignitary to be honoured with
the Pravasi Bharatiya Samman. Earlier recipients of the
Samman include Sir Anerood Jugnauth, President of
Mauritius in 2003, Mr. Abdul Raouf Bundhun, former Vice
President of Mauritius in 2006 and Dr. Navinchandra
Ramgoolam, Prime Minister of Mauritius in 2008.

Malawi
Mr. Frank Tumpala Deputy Minister for Agriculture and
Food Security visited New Delhi to attend the conference
on India-Africa Cooperation for Sustainable Food Security
from 10-12 November, 2008.
On 14 May 2008, through an Agreement signed between
Exim Bank of India and Government of Malawi, a credit
line for US$30 million for irrigation, grain storage, tobacco
threshing and one village one project was extended to
Malawi. On 16 June, 2008 a cheque for US$ 260,689/(Rs. 1 crore) for flood relief was handed over to President
of Malawi. Malawi has been regularly utilizing the facilities
of Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC)
civilian training programme. Subsequent to India Africa
Forum summit in April 2008, ITEC civilian training slots

Mr. Lormus Bundhoo, Minister of Environment and
National Development Unit of Mauritius visited India
from 4-11 January, 2009 in connection with the 57th AfroAsian Rural Development Organisation (AARDO)
Executive Committee Session and the 16 th General
Session of the AARDO Conference. During the visit, the
Minister had meetings with Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh,
Minister of Rural Development, Shri Namo Narain
61

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

undertook joint training exercises with the Mauritius
National Coast Guard. The First Training Squadron of
the Indian Navy, INS Tir, INS Krishna and CGS Vivek
visited Mauritius from 24-28 September, 2008. During the
visit, the ships conducted exercises with the Mauritian
Coast Guard. Spare parts for the Mauritius National Coast
Guard vessel Observer were handed over to Mauritian
authorities. Coinciding with the visit, Vice Admiral Sunil
Damle, Flag Officer Commanding-in-Chief, Southern
Command visited Mauritius from 23-28 September, 2008.
A 33-member team of officers undergoing the Naval
Higher Command Course visited Mauritius from 27 April
to 1 May, 2008. An Indian Naval Training Team
conducted Ships Diver Refresher course and Marine
Commando course in Mauritius for the Mauritian
National Coast Guard from 19 May to 6 June, 2008.

Meena, Minister of Environment and Forests, Kum. Selja,
Minister of State for Housing and Urban Poverty
Alleviation, Shri Shyam Saran, Special Envoy of PM on
Climate Change, and Dr. R. K. Pachauri, DG, TERI.
Mrs. Sheilabai Bappoo, Minister of Social Security,
National Solidarity and Senior Citizens Welfare and
Reforms Institutions visited India from 26 January to 8
February 2009. The Minister visited Mahila Unnati
Kendra (Manasi), Pune. The Minister paid a courtesy call
on Chief Minister of Maharashtra in Mumbai. Prime
Minister Navinchandra Ramgoolam was conferred Degree
of Honoris Causa by the Dr. D. Y. Patil University, Mumbai
and, while in Mumbai, Mrs. Sheila Bappoo accepted the
degree on his behalf on 4 February, 2009.
Mr. Mohammed Asraf Ally Dulull, Minister of Information
and Communication Technology of Mauritius, led a
delegation to Mumbai to participate in NASSCOM’s
ITES-BPO Leadership Summit from 11-13 February, 2009.
An MoU between Controller of Certifying Authorities,
Department of Information Technology and the
Information and Communication Technologies Authority
of Mauritius to set up a Mauritian Public Key
Infrastructure (PKI) based on the Indian PKI model was
signed in New Delhi during the visit.

An India-Mauritius Inter-Governmental MoU was signed
on 27 February, 2009 for the supply of one Dhruv
Advanced Light Helicopter (ALH) to Mauritius.
Due to the severe shortage of rice in Mauritius,
Government of India exported 9,000 metric tonnes of rice
to Mauritius as a special case despite export ban.
The total bilateral trade between India and Mauritius
during the financial year 2007-08 was US$ 1096.11 million
(Rs. 441,301.74 lakhs). The exports from India to
Mauritius were US$ 1086.04 million (Rs. 437,245.95
lakhs) and imports from Mauritius to India were US$
10.07 million (Rs. 4,055.79 lakhs).

A team of IT experts from the Ministry of
Communications and Information Technology visited
Mauritius from 27 April to 19 May, 2008 to assist the
National Computer Board of Mauritius in the setting up
of the National Computer Emergency Response Team
(CERT-MU).

Mauritius was the single largest source of Foreign Direct
Investment (FDI) into India during the period April 2008January 2009, with FDI inflows from Mauritius to India
amounting to US$ 9.5 billion or approximately 41% of
the total FDI inflow during the period.

Dr. Rama Krishna Sithanen, Vice-Prime Minister, Minister
of Finance and Economic Empowerment of Mauritius,
visited India to participate in the India-Africa Project
Partnership 2009 held in New Delhi from 22-24 March,
2009. During the visit, he called on the Minister of
External Affairs, on 23 March, 2009, wherein bilateral
issues were discussed. Dr. Sithanen also visited Mumbai.

The fourth meeting of the India-Mauritius Joint
Committee on Hydrography was held from 4-6 February,
2009. The Mauritian side was led by Permanent Secretary
of the Ministry of Lands and Housing, Ms. Asha Devi
Burrenchobey.

The Special Envoy of the Prime Minister on Climate
Change, Shri Shyam Saran visited Mauritius from 22-25
May 2008 to brief the Government of Mauritius on India’s
position on climate change issues.

The launch on 26 February, 2008 of the Pan-African ENetwork project providing for tele-education and telemedicine to Mauritius was warmly welcomed in Mauritius.

In April 2008, INS Investigator was deployed in Mauritian
waters to undertake hydrographic survey in the Saint
Brandon area. Director General Indian Coast Guard paid
an official visit to Mauritius from 7-10 April, 2008. INS
Mumbai and INS Karmuk visited Mauritius from 16-19
April, 2008 en route to participation in the India-BrazilSouth Africa Maritime Exercise (IBSMAR). The two ships

The Sankara Nethralaya Medical Research Foundation
of Chennai is setting up an eye hospital in the New
Souillac Government Hospital in Mauritius. ITCWelcomegroup is planning to establish a five-star hotel
in Mauritius. The Apollo-Bramwell Hospital, a joint
project of the Mauritian British American Investment
(BAI) group and the Apollo Group of India, will
62

Africa (South of Sahara)

commence activities in 2009. An agreement was signed
between the State Trading Corporation (STC) of
Mauritius and the State Bank of India International
(Mauritius) Limited (SBIIML) on 27 August, 2008, under
which SBIIML will extend a credit line to STC of
Mauritius for purchase of petroleum products from the
Mangalore Refinery and Petrochemicals Limited (MRPL)
of India. The State Bank of India Mauritius completed
the takeover of the Indian Ocean International Bank and
merged into a single entity on 27 October, 2008. The
Mauritius Agricultural Marketing Co-operative
Federation and the Ceres Beeja Research Group of India
signed a MoU in July 2008 for assistance from the later
for improving agricultural production and technical
capability of the Federation. Indian Oil (Mauritius)
Limited reached the 16 th position in the Top 100
Companies of Mauritius, with a revenue of around US$
135 million. Binani Cement of India received approval of
the Government of Mauritius to set up a cement factory
to produce 500,000 tonnes of cement. The Fortis-Clinique
Darne hospital was inaugurated on 25 March 2009. Fortis
and its partner, the CIEL Group, have a 58% controlling
stake in the hospital. The Birla Institute of Technology
(BIT); Dr D.Y. Patil University and the Asian School of
Cyber-Law (ASCL) decided to set up their campuses in
Mauritius.

with the Prof. Venancio Massingue, Minister of Science
& Technology. Mr. Atul Chaturvedi, Secretary (Fertilizers)
led a 12-member delegation to Maputo on 18-19
September, 2008. He held discussions with the Minister
of Mineral Resources of Government of Mozambique on
setting up an Urea plant in Mozambique. While from
Mozambican side, Mr. Jose Antonio Pacheco, Minister of
Interior visited India as a special envoy to the President
from 17-22 July, 2008 and held high-level talks on Beira
Rail Project being executed by the Indian Company
RICON - the consortium of RITES and IRCON which
has won a 25-year concession for the rehabilitation and
management of the Beira railway system (SENA line).
He also met Home Minister Shri Shivraj Patil during his
stay in Delhi.
Dr. Managala Rai, Secretary, Department of Agricultural
Research and Education (DARE), ICAR, Ministry of
Agriculture visited Maputo to attend the Annual General
Meeting of Consultative Group on International
Agricultural Research held from 2-5 December, 2008.
H.E. Mr. Salvador Namburete, Minister for Energy of
Mozambique visited India from 11-19 January, 2009 to
participate in the PETROTECH-2009 held in New Delhi
from 11-15 January, 2009. The visiting Minister called on
the Minister of Petroleum & Natural Gas, Shri Murli
Deora, Minister of Power, Shri Sushil Kumar Shinde and
Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Anand Sharma
and discussed bilateral cooperation with them. He also
participated in the India-Africa Business Partnership
Summit held from 19-20 January, 2009 in New Delhi.

The Government and the people of Mauritius contributed
a sum of Rs. 1.72 crores towards the Prime Ministers
National Relief Fund in connection with the floods in
Bihar.
Various cultural troupes continued to be sent to Mauritius
by India under the cultural exchange programme.

Mr. Oldemiro Baloi, Minister of Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Mozambique visited India from 18-20
February, 2009. He co-chaired the second session of the
India-Mozambique Joint Commission on Scientific,
Technical and Economic Cooperation held on 19 February,
2009. The Indian delegation was led by Shri Anand
Sharma, Minister of State for External Affairs. Bilateral
Investment Promotion and Protection Agreement was
signed between the two Ministers on the occasion. The
Foreign Minister of Mozambique called on Shri M. Hamid
Ansari, Vice President of India and had meetings with
Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Minister of External Affairs and
Shri Vayalar Ravi, Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs.

Mozambique
India’s relations with Mozambique continued to be very
warm and cordial during the period. Two Indian Naval
Ships-INS Mumbai and INS Karmuk visited Mozambique
in May 2008 for a port call on the port of Maputo from
20-23 May, 2008. INS Karmuk also called on the port of
Nacala on its way back to India. Prof. Venancio Massingue,
Minister of Science & Technology was one of the high
profile visitors to the ship during its stay at Maputo port.
Three Mozambican Navy Personnel were also given
training aboard INS Karmuk during its journey from
Maputo to Nacala port.

Dr. Alcinda Antonio de Abreu, Minister for Coordination
for Environmental Action, Mozambique visited India to
attend the Delhi Sustainable Development Summit from
5-7 February, 2009. She met with MOS (Environment).

Shri Eduardo Faleiro, Commissioner for Non-Resident
Indians, Government of Goa visited Mozambique from
16-21 May, 2008. Apart from meeting a cross section of
PIOs/NRIs, Mr. Faleiro called on Mr. Joaquim Chissano,
former President of the Republic of Mozambique and met

An Exhibition cum Seminar on Innovative Building
Materials and Construction Technologies for Sustainable
63

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

Housing in Africa was organized in Maputo jointly by the
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation
(MHUDA), Government of India and the Ministry of
Public Works and Housing, Government of Mozambique
on 3 & 4 April, 2008. Towards the technical assistance,
Government of India approved a Third Line of Credit of
US$20 million in April, 2008 for water drilling projects
in Nampula and Zambezia provinces and the agreement
on this was signed between EXIM Bank and the
Mozambican Government in Maputo in May 2008. The
Fourth Line of Credit for US$25 million for setting up IT
Park in Mozambique has also been approved by the
Government of India. A Fifth Line of Credit for US$30
million has also been approved for rural electrification in
Inhambane, Gaza, Zambezia and Nampula provinces of
Mozambique.

supported India in the UN, Commonwealth and other
regional and international fora; supported India’s
candidature to numerous UN bodies; and significantly,
continued to support India’s candidature for Permanent
Membership to an expanded UNSC. Prime Minister Dr.
Manmohan Singh met Namibian President Pohamba on
the sidelines of the UNGA Session on 26 September 2008
and had fruitful discussions on a wide range of topics of
mutual interest.
A number of high-level visits between the two countries
during the year underscored once again the warm and
cordial ties existing between the two countries and further
broadened and deepened the bilateral engagements.
Shri Jairam Ramesh, Minister of State (Commerce), paid
a successful visit to Namibia from 26-28 March, 2008
when he called on the Namibian Prime Minister Mr.
Nahas Angula and Founding President and Father of the
Namibian Nation, Dr. Sam Nujoma and met Namibian
Minister of Mines & Energy, Mr. Erkki Nghimtina,
Minister of Trade and Industry, Mr. Immanuel Ngatjizeko,
Minister for Works, Transport & Communication, Mr. Joel
Kapaanda and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Marco
Hausiku. The visit was very fruitful resulting in a number
of initiatives covering- diamond, trade and industry,
railways, agriculture (schemes to grow pulses in Namibia
with buy back arrangements), mining and SMEs. On the
margins of the visit, STC and LLD Diamonds (Pty) Ltd.
signed a MoU for setting up a Joint Venture Company for
processing of rough diamonds for jewellery (ex-Namibia).

Government of India proposed an assistance package of
US$333,000 to Mozambique for developing Youth Centre
with special emphasis on sports (football), in the backdrop
of World Cup in South Africa in 2010, under IBSA Fund.
An emergency assistance of Rs one crore (US$ 256,000/
- approx.) was also provided to Mozambican Government
in May, 2008 towards relief for the flood victims.
Trade relations between India and Mozambique have also
been growing steadily. India is among eight major trading
partners of Mozambique. Bilateral trade between the two
countries increased by 34% from US$ 113.591 million in
2006 to US$152.58 million in 2007 largely due to increase
in exports from India to Mozambique, which rose from
US$78.246 million in 2006 to US$ 135.858 million in 2007.

Namibian Minister for Information and Communication
Technology H. E. Mr. Joel Kaapanda visited India to attend
the third meeting of the Internet Governance Forum in
Hyderabad from 3-6 December, 2008.

An 11-member business delegation under the auspices of
Capexil, India visited Maputo from 23-26 November, 2008
and held a Buyer-Seller Meet during their stay in Maputo.
A delegation from NTPC also visited Maputo from 16-20
February, 2009 to explore the possibility of acquiring coal
mines and setting up a thermal plant in Mozambique.
During their stay, the delegation held talks with the
concerned Government authorities and private coal mine
owners.

The Second India-Namibia Joint Trade Committee (JTC)
meeting was held in Walvis Bay on 18 & 19 February,
2008. The meeting was very fruitful and covered: trade
and investment; customs cooperation and revenue
matters; line of credit to Government of Namibia;
agricultural sector; ITEC/SCAAP programmes; water
resources; IT sector; telecommunications; mining
exploration and development; gems and jewellery;
warehousing and logistics; cooperation in industrial sector;
energy sector; transport infrastructure; health; film
industry and tourism. It was also agreed that a Bilateral
Investment Protection and Promotion Agreement (BIPA)
and a Mining Agreement/MoU would be signed between
the two countries to promote trade and investment and
develop close ties in the mining sector. The successful
holding of the JTC meetings was a very positive

Coal India was awarded two coal blocks in Moatize, Tete
province in Mozambique in March 2009 through
participation in open tender floated by the Mozambican
Government.

Namibia
India and Namibia enjoy excellent and time-tested ties
characterised by mutual appreciation of a strong tradition
of cooperation between the two countries and that were
further consolidated during 2008-09. Namibia consistently
64

Africa (South of Sahara)

reference point for their social and economic welfare
programmes in Namibia.

development, aimed at boosting India’s trade and
investment with Namibia and with the Southern African
Customs Union (SACU).

Towards enhancing the bilateral, economic and
commercial ties, several high powered commercial
delegations visited Namibia. A three-member Diamond
India Ltd (DIL) delegation Namibia, 9-12 September, as
a follow up of decisions taken during the visit of MOS
(C) to Namibia in March 2008. The delegation called on
the Minister of Mines and Energy, Mr. Erkki Nghimtina,
Minister of Trade and Industry, Dr. Hage Geingob and
Founding President, Dr. Sam Nujoma. Again as a followup to the same visit, a joint STC/Sanghavi Group
delegation of six members visited Namibia in May 2008
to move forward on the MoU signed between STC and
LLD Diamond (Pty) Ltd., Namibia. A team from RITES
visited Namibia, 16-22 April, 2008 as a follow up on the
visit of Namibian Minister of Works, Transport and
Communication Mr. Joel Kapaanda to India in February
2008.

A 16-member National Defence College (NDC) team
visited Namibia from 11-16 May, 2008. This was the first
ever visit by an NDC team to Namibia. During the visit,
the team called on the President of Namibia, Mr.
Hifikepunye Pohamba, Founding President and Father of
the Namibian Nation, Dr. Sam Nujoma, Prime Minister,
Mr. Nahas Angula, Defence Minister, Maj. Gen. (Rtd.)
Charles Namoloh and Chief of the Namibian Defence
Force Lt. Gen. Martin Shalli.
From the Namibian side, the Namibian Minister of
Defence, Mr. Charles Namoloh visited India from 14-19
February, 2008 to attend “Fifth Land and Naval System
Exhibition - DefExpo India 2008”. The Minister was
accompanied by Namibian Navy Commander and met
the Minister of Defence Shri A.K. Antony. The Namibian
Minister of Works, Transport and Communication Mr. Joel
Kapaanda visited India from 18-25 February, 2008 and
met Minister of Railways Shri Lalu Prasad.

A two-member team from the Wild Life Trust of India
visited Namibia from 6-17 September, 2008 and explored
the possibility of importing Namibian Cheetahs to India
where Cheetahs, in wild, are now extinct. An Odissi dance
performance by Ranjana Gauhar and Vichitra Veena
recital by Dr. Mustafa Raza were organised by ICCR at
the National Theatre of Namibia, Windhoek on 4
November, 2008. The cultural performance generated lot
of public interest and much goodwill.

A Namibian Parliamentary delegation headed by Peya
Mushelenga, Chairperson of the Standing Committee on
Economic, Natural Resources and Public Administration
of Namibian Parliament participated in a conference on
SME Financing, Better Banking Regulations and
Integration of SMEs in Mumbai on 3 May, 2008.

Rwanda

Namibian Foreign Minister, Marco Hausiku, visited India
to attend the International Institute for Democracy and
Electoral Assistance (I-IDEA) Council meeting held in
New Delhi from 15-22 June, 2008 and went directly to
Sharm-el-Sheikh to participate in AU Summit where
MOS (AS), Shri Anand Sharma had a fruitful discussions
on matters of mutual interest.

Rwandan Minister of Natural Resources, Mr. Kamanzi
Stanislas, visited India from 14-15 October, 2008 to coChair the Sixth session of the Council International
network for Bamboo and Rattan in New Delhi on 15
October, 2008 along with the Minister of State
(Environment & Forests) Shri S. Ragupathy.
Mr. Christophe Bazivamo, Minister of Agriculture and
Animal Resources of Rwanda, visited India to participate
in the International Conference on “India-Africa
Cooperation for Sustainable Food Security” held in New
Delhi from 10-12 November, 2008, organized in line with
the declaration and recommendation of the India-Africa
Forum Summit held in April 2008.

Mr. Victor Simunja, Dy. Minister of Defence of Namibia
visited India in connection with the Seventh International
Aerospace Exposition from 11-15 February, 2009, held in
Bangalore.
Ms. Angelica Bergmann, Executive Director of
Mukwamahlang Tukondjeni Community, a Trust
established by the First Lady of Namibia, Madam Pohamba
and Ferdi Roulen Titus (Namibia Agrimine) participated
in the “Youth and Women Dialogue” an outreach event
for India-Africa Forum Summit in April 2008. The
Namibian participants returned highly impressed by their
special experience and exposure in India at the event and
were determined to use their Indian experience as a

Mr. Paul Kagame, President of Rwanda, visited India from
18-23 January, 2009 to participate in the India-Africa
Business Partnership Summit (19-20 January) in New
Delhi as the Chief Guest. The Summit was organized by
FICCI with the support of Ministries of External Affairs
and Commerce & Industry. During the visit, President of
Rwanda met Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh to
65

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

discuss bilateral cooperation issues. He also gave lectures
at the Indian Institute of Foreign Trade and at Indian
Council for World Affairs.

cooperation between the two countries on multilateral
issues, in particular the reform of the UN system, the
WTO Doha Round and the global financial crisis. The
two countries signed new Agreements on Customs
Cooperation, S&T, visa free travel for diplomatic and
official passport holders, and a Programme of Cooperation
in Culture during 2008.

Dr. Richard Sezibera, Minister of Health of Rwanda,
visited India from 1-4 February, 2009 in connection with
the Fifth Meeting of the International Advisory Panel
(IAP). The Rwandan Minister called on Dr. Anbumani
Ramadoss, Minister of Health and Family Welfare for
discussions on bilateral cooperation.

The President of South Africa, Mr. Thabo Mbeki,
accompanied by Foreign Minister Dlamini-Zuma visited
India from 7-9 April, 2008 to participate in the IndiaAfrica Forum Summit in New Delhi. He also had a
bilateral meeting with Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan
Singh during which progress in implementing the Tshwane
Declaration of 2006 was reviewed.

Mr. Stanislas Kamanzi, Minister of Natural Resources,
Republic of Rwanda visited India to participate in the
Delhi Sustainable Development Summit 2009 from 5-7
February, 2009 organized by TERI.
The two-way trade was US$ 13.58 million in which Indian
exports were worth US$ 12.92 million.

The new President of South Africa, Mr. Kgalema
Motlanthe attended the Third IBSA Summit in New
Delhi on 15 October, 2008, his first visit aboard since
becoming President of South Africa. He also called on
the President of India and had a bilateral meeting with
Prime Minister. Several South African Ministers
accompanied President Motlanthe on the visit.

A delegation of businessmen from the Gujarat Chamber
of Commerce and Industry paid a visit to Rwanda from
12-13 November, 2008 to explore possibilities of increasing
bilateral trade and investment.

Seychelles

The President of India Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil made
a brief technical stop over in Cape Town on 24 April,
2008 on her way back to India after her visit to Latin
American countries.

Two Indian Navy Ships - INS Mumbai and INS Karmuk,
paid a goodwill visit to Seychelles from 1-3 June 2008.
Two Indian warships INS Godavari and INS Talwar paid
a four-day goodwill visit to Seychelles on 2 September,
2008.

Shri Pranab Mukherjee, External Affairs Minister visited
South Africa on 10 & 11 May, 2008 to attend the Fifth
IBSA Trilateral Ministerial Commission Meeting held in
Somerset West. He also had a bilateral meeting with South
African Foreign Minister to discuss the follow up to the
Seventh India-South Africa Joint Ministerial Commission
Meeting which was held in Pretoria from 20-22 February,
2008. Later, on the sidelines of the 63rd session of UNGA,
the EAM again met the South African Foreign Minister
on 29 September, 2008.

A five-member Telecommunications Consultants India
Limited (TCIL) visited Seychelles from 28 September to
1 October, 2008 for installation/execution of the panAfrican e-Network project.
A five-member Kathak Dance Group, led by Mrs.
Paramita Maitra, visited Seychelles from 4-6 July, 2008.
Exports from India for the year calendar 2007 were US$
7.63 million. The main items of exports were food and
live animals, beverages, tobacco, crude materials, inedible
mineral fuels, lubricants, animal and vegetable oils and
chemicals.

Mrs. Ambika Soni, Minister for Tourism and Culture
visited South Africa from 14-17 August, 2008 and met
with her South African counterpart Mr. Pallo Jordan.
Together with ANC Deputy President Mr. Kgalema
Motlanthe, she also led a peace walk in Johannesburg to
mark the commemoration of the 100th Anniversary of
Mahatma Gandhi’s historic passive resistance movement
resulting in the bonfire of 1908. Other events aimed at
reinforcing Mahatma Gandhi’s teachings included a public
lecture by Prof. Kader Asmal, a symposium at University
of Witwatersrand, an essay competition for high school
students and a film week.

South Africa
India’s strategic partnership with South Africa expanded
to new areas and was further consolidated through a series
of high level visits and other interactions. South Africa
lent strong proactive support to the proposal to enable
full civil nuclear cooperation with India at the meetings
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG). There was fruitful

Shri Anand Sharma, MOS(AS) visited South Africa on
66

Africa (South of Sahara)

Freedom Party and Chairman of the House of Traditional
Leaders visited India from July 7-13, 2008 under the
ICCR’s Distinguished Visitors’ Programme.

29 & 30 July, 2008 as Prime Minister’s Special Envoy. He
called on President Mbeki. MOS(AS) visited South Africa
again on 15-18 September, 2008 to launch the Centre for
Indian Studies in Africa at the University of the
Witwatersrand in Johannesburg, the first such Centre in
the African continent and jointly inaugurated the GandhiLuthuli Chair of Peace Studies in the University of
KwaZulu-Natal, Durban with ANC President Jacob
Zuma. A three-member delegation from the Government
of Kerala, led by Health Minister P K Sreemathi Teacher,
visited Cape Town from 14-17 November, 2008.

Apart from the VVIP & ministerial visits, several high
level official visits also took place including visit of
Secretary, Mines on 11-16 February, 2008 to explore the
possibility of setting up of an aluminium smelter by the
National Aluminium Company Ltd. (NALCO) in South
Africa, Secretary, Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises to attend the Annual Small Business Summit
organized by the South African Department of Trade and
Industry from July 31 to August 2, 2008, Secretary, Civil
Aviation on 6 & 7 August, 2008 to discuss cooperation
in civil aviation in the trilateral IBSA as well as bilateral
context and Health Secretary, in November 2008 to
attend the Third Convention of Parties Conference to
the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
in Durban and Textiles Secretary from March 19-24, 2009
in connection with hosting of Mega Textiles Show in Cape
Town and Johannesburg.

An Indian Parliamentary delegation, led by Shri Charanjit
Singh Atwal, Deputy Speaker of Lok Sabha visited South
Africa from 13-18 April, 2008 to attend the 118th
Assembly of the Inter Parliamentary Union held in Cape
Town.
Several South African Ministers also visited India. Dr.
Zola Sidney Themba Skweyiya, South African Minister
of Social Development travelled to India from 2-8 March,
2008 to attend the Second Ministerial Meeting of the
Forum of Ministers of Social Development from South
Asia organized by UNESCO and Ministry of HRD in New
Delhi on 5 & 6 March, 2008. Dr. Lindiwe Nonceba Sisulu,
South African Minister of Housing visited India from 913 March, 2008 at the invitation of the Ministry of Urban
Development to discuss matters of mutual interest. She
returned to India in October 2008 for an international
conference organized by Slum Dwellers International. Ms.
Grace Naledi Mandisa Pandor, South African Minister of
Education visited India from 29 June to 3 July, 2008 and
discussed ways and means of strengthening cooperation
in the HRD sector, particularly in the areas of technical
and vocational education with her Indian counterpart.
Dr. Mantombazana Tshabalala-Msimang, South African
Minister of Health visited India on 29 & 30 July, 2008
and held discussions with Dr. Anbumani Ramdoss,
Minister for Health and Family Welfare. A South African
health delegation also visited India to discuss recruitment
of pharmacists from India. Ms GJ Fraser-Moleketi, South
African Minister for Public Service and Administration
visited India from 9-17 August, 2008.

Defence has emerged as an important area of cooperation
between the two countries. The Sixth meeting of the Joint
Defence Committee was held in New Delhi on 13 & 14
March, 2008. The meeting discussed issues such as
exchange of observers in military exercises, South African
participation in training courses in India, visit of training
delegations, exchange of senior level military courses and
sports and adventure activities. Two Indian naval ships,
INS Mumbai and INS Karmuk visited South Africa to
participate in the inaugural trilateral IBSA navies’ exercise
IBSAMAR I in May 2008 at Simon’s Town. The ships
also paid a goodwill visit to Durban. Raksha Utpadan
Rajya Mantri Shri Rao Inderjit Singh visited South Africa
in September 2008 to attend the Africa Aerospace and
Defence (AAD) Exhibition in Cape Town. He also met
the South African Deputy Minister of Defence. India’s
Chief of Army Staff (COAS) Gen. Deepak Kapoor visited
South Africa from 24-27 November, 2008 at the invitation
of the South African Chief of Army. During the visit,
COAS held detailed discussions on army-to-army
cooperation. He also called on the South African Defence
Minister.

Dr. Jacob Zuma, President of the African National
Congress (ANC) along with several ANC Executive
Committee Member visited India from 8-12 June, 2008,
when a MoU between the ANC and the Indian National
Congress (INC) was signed. Dr. Jacob Zuma and the
delegation also met with UPA Chairperson, Smt. Sonia
Gandhi.

India’s economic and commercial relations continued to
flourish with the value of bilateral trade increasing by 33%
from about US$ 4.7 billion in 2006-07 to US$ 6.27 billion
in 2007-08. India’s exports to South Africa were valued
at US$ 2.65 billion and imports at US$ 3.61 billion.

Prince Mangosuthu Buthelezi, President of the Inkatha

Towards enhancing our commercial exchanges further,

67

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

India participated in several sectoral exhibitions, including
Tenth Annual Africa Power & Electricity Congress,
Computer Faire 2008, Africa Rail Conference &
Exhibition, Africa Big Seven and the Johannesburg
International Motor Show. In collaboration with CII, a
major Doing Business with India Conference was held on
23 September, 2008 in Johannesburg, aimed at providing
the participants with an overview of the Indian economy
and specifics on different facets of doing business with
India. The success of the conference has encouraged CII
to consider making it an annual event. Inspired by the
success of the India Business Forum launched in May 2007
to provide a platform for Indian companies that have
established offices in South Africa, a South African
Business Forum was launched in Mumbai. This brings
together the heads of South African companies which
have established a presence in India. The India-South
Africa Working Group on Coal and Hydrocarbons met
for the first time in Delhi on 29 & 30 July, 2008. In
addition, there were visits by delegations from AEPC in
April 2008 to promote exports by the garment industry,
ASSOCHAM in August 2008, IEEMA in November 2008
representing the electrical manufacturing industry and a
Gujarat Investment Corporation delegation in November
2009 to promote Vibrant Gujarat.

highlight of the cultural calendar was the ‘Shared
Histories’ programme organized as a public-private
partnership with Teamwork Productions whose second
edition from August-October 2008 featured Indian
literature, dance, theatre, music, art, cuisine, cinema and
textiles. India also participated in the inaugural edition
of the Capital Arts Festival organized by the City of
Tshwane in Pretoria in September 2008.

Swaziland
India’s relations with the Kingdom of Swaziland also grew
steadily through this period. The two countries signed an
MoU on setting up of four Hole-in-the-Wall Learning
Stations (HITWLS) in Swaziland. The agreement was
signed by Indian High Commissioner to Mozambique (who
is also concurrently accredited to the Kingdom of
Swaziland) and Swaziland’s Minister for Enterprise and
Employment, Mr. Lutfo Dlamini on 12 July, 2008. The
Hole in the Wall Project has since been completed and
inaugurated by the Deputy Prime Minister of Swaziland
on 2 March, 2009. High Commissioner of India in
Mozambique, concurrently accredited to Swaziland, was
the Chief Guest at the inauguration ceremony.
The Minister of Commerce, Industry and Trade, Ms.
Jabulile Mashwama led the Swaziland’s trade delegation
to attend the FICCI organized “India-Africa Business
Partnerships Summit” held in New Delhi from 19-20
January, 2009.

Two-way investment continued to rise, with Indian
companies estimated to be executing projects worth
approx. US$ 2.5 billion in South Africa.
A strong impetus to academic interaction between the
two countries was given with the launch in September
2008 of the Centre of Indian Studies in Africa (CISA) in
September 2008 at the University of the Witwatersrand,
the first ‘India focus’ centre in Africa, and the GandhiLuthuli Chair of Peace Studies at the University of
KwaZulu Natal. A number of Vice Chancellors from South
African universities visited India to strengthen academic
linkages with counterpart institutions. These included the
Vice Chancellors of Universities of Pretoria, Johannesburg,
North-West, Witwatersrand and Stellenbosch. The
University of Stellenbosch hosted an India evening on 28
August, 2008. The University of Western Cape also hosted
an India evening on 14 November, 2008 during which a
bust of Mahatma Gandhi and books on India were gifted
to the University.

Her Royal Highness Princess Tsandzile Dlamini, Minister
of Natural Resources and Energy and Hon. Pastor Nelisiwe
Shongwe, Minister of Information, Communication and
Technology, of Kingdom of Swaziland visited India to
participate in the India-Africa Project Partnership 2009
held in New Delhi from 22-24 March, 2009.

Tanzania
Bilateral relations between India and Tanzania were warm
and cordial during the period under report.
Following the election of the President of Tanzania Jakaya
Mrisho Kikwete as the Chairman of the African Union,
an invitation was extended to him to attend the IndiaAfrica Forum Summit, which was held in Delhi on 8 & 9
April 2008. President Jakaya Kikwete co-Chaired the
Summit with Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh.

A Programme of Cooperation in the fields of Arts and
Culture between India and South Africa was signed during
the visit of Minister of Tourism & Culture Mrs. Ambika
Soni in August 2008. A number of cultural troupes
sponsored by the Indian Council for Cultural Relations
(ICCR) visited various cities in South Africa. A major

President Kikwete also called on Prime Minister
Manmohan Singh before the commencement of the
Summit to discuss bilateral cooperation between India
and Tanzania. The issues discussed were Food Security,
Energy Security, Counter-Terrorism, Technical
68

Africa (South of Sahara)

Cooperation and Human Resources Development. India
has extended a line of credit of US $ 40 million to Tanzania
for the purchase of agricultural implements.

Africa Cooperation for Sustainable Food Security” held
in New Delhi from 10-12 November, 2008, organized in
line with the declaration and recommendation of the
India-Africa Forum Summit held in April 2008.

During 27-29 August, 2008, Shri Anand Sharma, Minister
of State for External Affairs visited Dar es Salaam as the
Leader of the Indian delegation to the Tenth Regional
Conclave on India-Africa Project Partnership, organized
by Confederation of Indian Industries (CII). The event
was co-chaired by Mrs. Mary Nagu, Minister for Industry,
Trade and Marketing of Tanzania. Shri Sharma also held
discussions with Mr. Seif Ali Iddi, Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Tanzania
during the visit. He also laid the foundation stone for the
High Commission of India Chancery-cum-Residential
Complex in Dar es Salaam on 28 August, 2008.

The Seventh Session of the India-Tanzania Joint
Commission on Economic, Technical and Scientific
Cooperation was held in New Delhi from 13-14 January,
2009. The Indian delegation was led by Mr. Nalin Surie,
Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs and the Tanzanian
side by Prof. David H. Mwakyusa, MP, Minister of Health
and Social Welfare. Mr. Seif Ali Iddi, Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation was also a
member of the delegation. The Agreed Minutes signed
after the meeting identified key areas for cooperation in
the field of Agriculture, Small and Medium Industries,
Trade and Industry, Information Technology, Health,
Education, Water Resources and Capacity Building.
Special emphasis will be given to short and long term
technical training and graduate courses.

The Minister for Natural Resource and Tourism of
Tanzania, Mrs. Shamsa Selengia Mwangunga,
accompanied by a delegation of the Tanzania Tourist Board
(TTB) and tourism sector businessmen visited India from
17-24 June, 2008. Minister Mwangunga called on Minister
of Tourism and Culture, Smt. Ambika Soni and sought
India’s help in developing hospitality sector and training
of manpower in Tanzania.

The Tanzanian Minister for Industry, Trade and
Marketing, Dr. Mary Nagu, visited India to attend the
Partnership Summit 2009 from 19-20 January, 2009 at
the invitation of our Minister for Commerce and Industry.
Mr. William Mganga Ngeleja, Minister of Energy and
Minerals of Tanzania, visited India from 6-8 March, 2009
to attend a meeting on Renewable Energy (Solar Power)
at the invitation of Astonfield Renewable Resources Ltd.
During the visit, the Tanzanian Minister paid a courtesy
call on Shri Sis Ram Ola, Minister of Mines and discussed
issues of bilateral cooperation.

Tanzanian Minister of Infrastructure Development, Dr.
Shukuru Kawambwa, visited India in September 2008 at
the invitation of Railway Minister Shri Lalu Prasad Yadav.
During the meeting, he requested for a loan from the
Indian Government for the Tanzania Railway Limited in
which the RITES has majority shareholding major stakes.
The Railway Minister assured the Tanzanian Minister that
the request would be considered and pledged India’s
commitment to provide all necessary assistance in the
operation and management of railways in Tanzania.

An 11-member ICCR-sponsored composite group of Ms.
Ranjana Gauhar, Odissi and Dr. Mustafa Raza, Vichitra
Veena visited Tanzania from 18-24 October, 2008 and gave
four performances in Dar es Salaam and one performance
in Zanzibar.

The Tanzanian Minister of State for Public Service
Management, Mrs. Hawa A. Ghasia, led a six-member
delegation and undertook study tour to India to learn and
study Indian Government’s operation in general and
employment management.

The total bilateral trade between India and Tanzania for
the period January-October 2008 stood at US$ 852 million
with India’s exports - US$ 709 and India’s imports from
Tanzania - US$ 143 million (Source: Tanzanian Revenue
Authority). Major items of Indian exports were
Pharmaceuticals, transport equipment, electrical
machinery, construction material/ machinery, textiles &
garments, ICT hardware and software, etc.

In connection with the setting up of Centre of Excellence
in ICT, a six-member expert team from C-DAC visited
Tanzania from 11-24 December, 2008. During the visit
the team completed identification of ICT Centre in Dar
es Salaam and ten other Centres across Tanzania.
Selection procedure for training of the ten Tanzanian
experts by C-DAC in India was also completed.

Bank of India resumed operations in Tanzania June 2008.
Air India operates tri-weekly flights between Dar es
Salaam and Mumbai (via Nairobi). Tanzindia Assurance
Company Ltd, owned by Kenindia Assurance Co Ltd,
whose main promoters are Life Insurance Corporation

Mr. Stephen Masatu Wasira, Minister for Agriculture,
Food Security and Cooperatives of Tanzania visited India
to participate in the International Conference on “India69

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

of India, General Insurance Corporation of India, The
New Indian Assurance Co Ltd, National Insurance Co
Ltd, United India Insurance Co Ltd. Tata International
Limited has a subsidiary in Dar es Salaam. Tatas have
signed a MoU with the National Development
Corporation (NDC) of Tanzania for creating a facility for
soda ash extraction from Lake Natron in north-western
Tanzania. National Mineral Development Corporation
has a prospecting concession at Nzega, Ibungu in northcentral Tanzania. RITES has a small project office at
Tabora for the locomotives leased to the Tanzania Railway
Corporation. In March 2006 RITES was awarded the
concession worth US$100 million to run Tanzania Railway
Corporation for 25 years. Reliance Industries Ltd has
acquired a majority stake and management control of Gulf
Africa Petroleum Corporation (GAPCO), headquartered
in Mauritius and having a significant presence in east
Africa in the downstream petroleum sector.

H.E. Mr. Freddrick Ruhindi, Deputy Attorney General/
Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs
visited India on 11 & 12 August, 2008 leading a threemember delegation for a study tour. The Ugandan MOS
for Justice and Constitutional Affairs met Dr. Ashwani
Kumar, Minister of State for Industry, Shri Jairam Ramesh,
Minister of State for Commerce & Power and Shri K.
Venkatapathy, Minister of State for Law & Justice and
discussed issues of mutual interest.
Mr. Fred Mukisa, Minister of State for Fisheries of Uganda
visited India to participate in the International Conference
on “India-Africa Cooperation for Sustainable Food
Security” held in New Delhi from 10-12 November, 2008,
organized in line with the declaration and
recommendation of the India-Africa Forum Summit held
in April 2008.
The two-way trade during 2007-08 was US$ 168.76
million which registered a 50% growth. Exports from India
to Uganda were US$ 153.64 and imports from Uganda
were US$ 15.12 million.

Uganda
India’s relations with Uganda continued to be warm and
friendly. In April 2008, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni
paid a visit to India during which he attended the IndiaAfrica Forum Summit in New Delhi (8 & 9 April) in his
capacity as the Head of the East African Community. It
was followed by a State Visit on 10 April, 2008. He was
accompanied by Mr. Sam Kutesa, Minister of Foreign
Affairs and Mr. Semakula Kiwanuka, Minister of State of
Finance, Planning & Economic Development
(Investments).

A 12-member delegation from ASSOCHAM visited
Uganda from 27-31 May, 2008. The delegation held
meetings with the Ugandan Minister of State for Planning
and Investment, Minister of Communication and
Information Technology, Minister of Economic
Monitoring, Minister of Education, Minister of State for
Local Administration, Director of Export Promotion
Board and other members of the Ugandan business
community.

During the State Visit, President Museveni met President
Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil, who hosted a banquet in
honour of President Museveni. President Museveni held
talks with Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh. External
Affairs Minister Shri Pranab Mukherjee called on
President Museveni. The two sides discussed possibilities
of intensifying cooperation in a number of areas including
agro-processing, railways, energy, mining, small and
medium enterprises and defence. They also agreed to
begin talks on signing a Bilateral Investment Protection
and Promotion Agreement. In his banquet speech,
President Museveni lauded the contribution of the Indian
expatriate community to Uganda’s economy. In his talks
with Prime Minister, he called for a greater role for India
in Uganda’s economic development, which elicited a
positive response from the Indian side. A number of areas
were identified in which the Indian side agreed to assist
Uganda in terms of investment, capacity building and
market access. The visit produced a roadmap for
cooperation between the two countries in the next few
years, and helped to strengthen bilateral relations.

The Chief Minister of Gujarat, Shri Narendra Modi,
visited Uganda on 17 &18 November, 2008. He was
accompanied by a 15-member delegation that included
chief executives of several Indian companies. During the
visit, the delegation held talks with a number of Ugandan
companies to explore possibilities of increasing bilateral
trade and investment.
A delegation of businessmen from the Gujarat Chamber
of Commerce and Industry paid a visit to Uganda from 811 November, 2008 to explore possibilities of increasing
bilateral trade and investment.
Prof. Gilbert B. Bukenya, Vice President of Uganda paid
a private visit to Gujarat from 12-20 January, 2009. During
the visit, he also participated in the Vibrant Gujarat Global
Investors’ Summit 2009 from 11-14 January, 2009. The
Ugandan delegation also included Prof. Semakula
Kiwanuka, Minister of State of Finance, Planning and
Economic Development, Prof. Ephram Kamuntu, Minister
of State for Industry and Technology and Mr. Hope
Mwesigye, Minister of State for Local Government.
70

Prime Minister, Dr Manmohan Singh meeting with the President of Tanzania, Jakaya Kikwete,
in New Delhi on 7 April, 2008.

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh meeting with the President of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni,
in New Delhi on 10 April, 2008.

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

Shri Ham Mulira, Minister for Information &
Communications Technology (ICT) of Uganda visited
India to participate in the India-Africa Business
Partnership Summit organized by FICCI from 19-20
January, 2009 in New Delhi.

H.E. Mr. Mwendoi Akakandelwa MP, Deputy Minister of
Health, Zambia visited India to participate in the IndiaAfrica Business Partnership Summit held from 19-20
January, 2009 in New Delhi.

Zimbabwe

Mr. Maurice P. Kagimu Kiwanuka, Minister of State for
Economic Monitoring, Office of the President of Uganda,
was on a study tour of India from 18-20 January, 2009.
The Minister met with Shri Kanti Lal Bhuria, Union
Minister of State for Agriculture and Shri Anwar-ul-Hoda,
Member, Planning Commission of India. The Minister also
participated in the FICCI event.

The India-Zimbabwe Small and Medium Enterprises
Project was launched by President Mugabe on 4 August,
2008, financed by a grant of US$ 5million from the
Government of India. The project will help development
of small and medium enterprises in Zimbabwe and
contribute significantly to country’s efforts to turnaround
its economy.

Mr. Aston Kajara, Minister of State for Investment, Mr.
Gagawala Wambuzi, Minister of Trade and Industry and
Ms. Ruth Nankabirwa, Minister of State for Finance,
Uganda, visited India and participated in the India-Africa
Project Partnership 2009 held in New Delhi from 22-24
March, 2009. During the visit, the three Ministers called
on Shri Anand Sharma, Minister of State for External
Affairs and discussed issues of bilateral cooperation.

The ITEC slots for Zimbabwe have been increased from
40 to 50 per annum for 2008-09. The slots have been
further increased to 65 recently based on the utilization
of ITEC slots till date.
Three delegates from Zimbabwe participated in the
Outreach Programme for Women and Youth organised
on the sidelines of India-Africa Forum Summit in New
Delhi from 27 March to 8 April, 2008.

Zambia
The bilateral relations between India and Zambia
continued to grow. Mr. Felix C. Mutati, Zambia’s
Commerce, Trade & Industry Minister, visited Delhi to
participate in Confederation of Indian Industries (CII)’s
India-Africa Conclave from 19-21 March, 2008. The then
Vice President Mr. Rupiah Bwezani Banda accompanied
by Foreign Minister Mr. Kabinga J. Pande, Health Minister
Mr. Brian Chituwo, Education Minister Mr. Geoffrey
Lungwangwa and other government officials attended
India-Africa Forum Summit held in Delhi on 8 & 9 April,
2008.

A six-member delegation led by Mr. K.C.D. Mohadi,
Home Minister of Zimbabwe, visited Chennai from 29
December 2008 to 3 January, 2009 to inspect the plant
and production facilities of M/s. Eagle Press Pvt. Ltd.
A six-member delegation led by Mr. K.M. Kangai,
Secretary for External Relations of ZANU-PF and exDeputy Speaker of Parliament of Zimbabwe and including
O. M. Mpofu, Minister for Industry & International Trade,
visited Surat, India from 2-5 January, 2009 to explore
possibilities of setting up a diamond polishing plant in
Zimbabwe.

Vice President of Zambia Mr. Rupiah Bwezani Banda was
handed over on 14 May 2008 a cheque for US$ 250,689/
- (Rs. 1 crore) for flood relief from India. Zambia has been
fully utilizing the Indian Technical and Economic
Cooperation (ITEC) civilian training programme.
Subsequent to India Africa Forum summit in April 2008,
ITEC civilian training slots to Zambia were increased to
80 for 2008-09. India has offered a line of credit of US$
50 million to Zambia for Itezhi-Tezhi hydro power project.

Mrs. Priscilla Misihairabwi-Mushonda, Minister of
Regional Integration and International Cooperation of
the Republic of Zimbabwe, was on a visit to India from
23-25 March, 2009 to attend the “5th CII EXIM Bank
Conclave on India-Africa Project Partnership Conclave:
22-24, March, 2009”. She had a wide-ranging discussion
with Hon. Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri
Anand Sharma, covering bilateral cooperation issues.

An 11-member dance and music troupe led by Odissi
dancer Ranjana Gauhar and classical music artiste Dr.
Mustafa Raza gave a performance in Lusaka on 2
November, 2008 to a wide acclaim.

A 12-member Gujarati Folk Dance Group “Panghat”,
sponsored by ICCR, visited Zimbabwe from 22-31
October, 2008. The group’s performances in Harare,
Kwekwe and Bulawayo were attended by capacity crowds
and received standing ovations for its performances. India
participated in the 11th edition of Zimbabwe International
Film Festival (ZIFF) held in Harare from 5-14 September,

Two Hole-in-the-wall projects funded by Government of
India were inaugurated on 12 December, 2008 in two
Lusaka schools with one computer learning kiosk in each.
72

Africa (South of Sahara)

SACU

2008. India also participated in the International Images
Film Festival (IIFF) for Women on the theme ‘enriching
women’ held in Harare from 21-29 November 2008 where
the Indian entry ‘DAATU’ (Kannada) won the award for
‘Best Depiction of a Woman’.

The negotiations between India and South African
Custom Unions (SACU) for a Preferential Trade
Agreement (PTA) was carried forward during this period.
The second round of the India-SACU PTA negotiations
were held on 21 & 22 February 2008 at Walvis Bay. The
negotiations were productive and covered much ground
towards conclusion of an India-SACU PTA.

Africa Capacity Building Foundation
(ACBF)
India continued to participate in the meetings of the
Harare-based Africa Capacity Building Foundation
(ACBF). India is the first Asian country to have become
a full member of the ACBF – a premier institution for
sustainable development and poverty alleviation in Africa.

The Third round of negotiations between India and SACU
for the PTA was held in New Delhi from 25-27 November,
2008. An MoU for negotiating the PTA which was
finalized and agreed to by the two sides during the second
round of negotiations was signed on 26 November, 2008
in presence of Sh. G.K. Pillai, Commerce Secretary and
Mr. Khotso Matla, Assistant Minister of Trade and
Industry, Cooperatives and Marketing, Government of
Lesotho. Lesotho is currently in Chair of SACU.

African Union
As a follow-up to decisions taken at the India-Africa
Forum Summit, MOS (AS) Shri Anand Sharma led a
delegation to the AU Summit at Sharm-el-Sheikh, Egypt,
in June 2008, and had a discussion with Chairperson of
the AUC and various Ministers of the Member States.
Discussions with senior officials of AUC were held on 27
& 28 November 2008 in Addis Ababa in which proposals
under the India Africa Action Plan were discussed.

South African Development Community
(SADC)- India Forum
A four-member Indian technical team visited SADC
Secretariat as follow-up of the decisions taken in the IndiaSADC Forum meeting held in Windhoek in April 2006.
Seven projects have been short-listed out of the 11 projects
proposed, for implementation.

The Fifth Steering Committee meeting of the Pan-African
E-network took place in Addis Ababa on 1 & 2 December
2008. 32 countries have signed the MoU with TCIL so
far and by 31 March, 2009, the project will become
operational in 12 countries. The hub of the network,
which is in Dakar, is already operational and the pilot
project in Ethiopia is already functioning.

West Africa
India’s relations with the 25 West African countries assumed
significant importance during the year, with the hosting of
first-ever India-Africa Forum Summit in April 2008 at New
Delhi and the initiatives announced by the leadership at
the Summit. The region is rich in minerals and metals and
hydrocarbons. Indian companies have invested in
exploration. As a part of South-South cooperation and
policy of inclusive development, Government of India has
endeavoured in improving the manpower skills of this region
in the fields of education, science & technology, information
technology etc. The importance attached by India to
developing relations further is demonstrated by the
announcement to open resident Missions in Mali and Niger.
Gabon opened its Mission in New Delhi and Gambia
announced its intention to open one soon. Government of
India increased the ITEC slots for these countries from 279
to 575, while the Indian Council for Cultural Relations in
collaboration with MEA, increased the number of
scholarships from 21 to 66.

Common Market for Eastern & Southern
Africa (COMESA)
A high powered COMESA delegation attended the IndiaAfrica Forum Summit in April 2008. The period saw the
follow-up on the Communiqué issued during the visit of
COMESA ministerial delegation to New Delhi in October
2006. An energy expert from India joined COMESA
Secretariat, Lusaka, on deputation since 1 July, 2008.

East African Community (EAC)
Amb. Juma V. Mwapachu, Secretary General of EAC
attended the India-Africa Forum Summit in April 2008
at the invitation of MEA. Subsequently a meeting was
held in Arusha in July 2008 at the EAC Secretariat to
review the implementation of the Memorandum of
Understanding. Amb. Mwapachu also attended the fifth
CII-EXIM Bank Conclave on India-Africa Project
Partnership from 22-24 March, 2009 in New Delhi.

Angola
Vice Minister of Industry represented Angola in the IndiaAfrica Forum Summit. MOS for Commerce Jairam
Ramesh visited Angola in March 2008 and held
73

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

Central African Republic

discussions with the Ministers of Geology, Mines &
Petroleum and the External Relations. Bilateral trade more
than doubled in 2007-08 to reach nearly US$ 1,200
million. ITEC slots have been increased to 18.

In August 2008, GoI approved a Line of Credit of US$
29.5 million for utilization for (a) setting up a modern dry
process cement plant of 400 TPD capacity (US$ 24
million) and (b) for procurement of 100 buses for internal
transport (US$ 5.5 million). An agreement for
disbursement of the above amount was signed in Bangui
in October 2008 between EXIM Bank of India, Dakar
and the Government of the Central African Republic.

Benin
Dr. Boni Yayi, President of the Republic of Benin, was on
a five-day State visit to India from 3-7 March, 2009 as
Head of a 34-member official delegation, the first by a
Head of State from Benin.

Chad
Government of India extended a Line of Credit of US$
50 million under the TEAM-9 Initiative and projects for
establishing a bicycle plant, assembly of agricultural
implements plant, steel billet plant and rolling mill plant,
cotton yarn plant are under implementation.

During the plenary level discussions, led by PM Dr.
Manmohan Singh, on the Indian side and President Dr
Boni Yayi on the Benin side, the two sides discussed the
entire gamut of bilateral, regional and multilateral issues
of mutual interest. Prime Minister offered a concessional
Line of Credit to the tune of US$ 15 million to Benin in
addition to a grant of US$ 2 million.

Cote D’ Ivoire
Bilateral economic relations got further boost with a Line
of Credit of US$ 25.5 million awarded to the Government
of Cote d’Ivoire for financing (i) Mahatma Gandhi IT&
BT Park ($ 20 million), (ii) Fisheries Processing Plant (US$
4 million) and (iii) Coconut Fibre Processing Plant (US$
1.5 million) projects. A project for setting up the Centre
for Demonstration and Promotion of Technologies (CDT)
with GoI financial assistance has been completed. Ivorian
Minister of Industry and Promotion of Private Sector
participated in CII-EXIM Bank India Africa Project
Partnership Conclave held in Delhi from 18-21 March,
2008. ITEC slots for Cote d’Ivoire have been increased
to 45.

Five bilateral documents were signed during the visit,
which pertain to establishment of Joint Commission,
Foreign Office Consultations and an IT Centre of
Excellence in Benin and MoUs providing for cooperation
in capacity-building and SSI sector.
Benin reiterated its support for India’s bid for Permanent
Seat on the UN Security Council as well as for India’s
candidature for a Non-Permanent seat in 2011-2012.
Benin also strongly condemned the dastardly terrorist
attacks on Mumbai and pledged to work closely with India
in tackling the scourge of international terrorism.

Democratic Republic of Congo

Burkina Faso

President Joseph Kabila visited New Delhi in April 2008
to attend the First India-Africa Forum Summit. During
the visit, he also held bilateral discussions with Prime
Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh. India donated medicines
worth US$ 1 million and offered an immediate Line of
Credit of US$ 25 million for a priority project. Based on
Prime Minister’s directives, Commerce Secretary led a
high-level delegation of government officials and
representatives of public and private sector companies to
Kinshasa in June 2008. Based on the discussions held with
the Ministers of the Congolese Government, Commerce
Secretary has recommended several projects for
consideration by the Government of India under its Line
of Credit. A Memorandum of Understanding was signed
between Federation of Chambers of Commerce and
Industry and the Federation of Congolese Enterprises
during the visit. A delegation from the Confederation of

Prime Minister Tertius Zongo visited India in 2008 to
attend the India-Africa Forum Summit in New Delhi and
held discussions with Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan
Singh on matters of bilateral interest. GoI offered an LoC
of US$ 25 million for rural electrification project. In June
2008, GoI sent a consignment of medicines valued at
US$80,000 for flood affected people.

Cameroon
Foreign Office Consultations were held in September 2008
at New Delhi. The two sides agreed to set up a Joint
Commission. India agreed to set up an IT Centre of
Excellence in Cameroon. Government of India has offered
a Line of Credit of US$38 million for agro-processing
products. ITEC slots were increased to 15.
74

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh with the President of Republic of Benin, Dr. Boni Yayi
at the signing ceremony, in New Delhi on 4 March, 2009.

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

Indian Industries visited DRC in August 2008 to explore
trade and business possibilities.

Minister of Commerce and Industry. GoI announced its
decision to open a resident Mission in Bamako.

Gambia

Niger

GoI approved an EXIM Bank LoC of US$10 million to
finance construction of the National Assembly building
complex. Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs Dr. Oumar
A. Touray visited India in May 2008 and during his
meeting with MoS (AS), informed of his Government’s
decision to open a Resident Mission in New Delhi.

GoI announced its decision to open a Resident Mission
in Niamey. A Line of Credit of US$ 25 million has been
approved for power supply and electrification.

Nigeria
Pursuant to the bilateral strategic partnership established
with Nigeria during Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan
Singh’s visit in October 2007, a road map for further
cooperation was charted out. Vice-President Goodluck
Jonathan represented Nigeria in the First-ever IndiaAfrica Forum Summit at New Delhi in April 2008.
Minister of State Anand Sharma visited Nigeria in July
2008 and during his call on President Umaru Musa
Yar’Adua, the latter supported India’s quest for
international cooperation in peaceful uses of civil nuclear
energy. External Affairs Minister, Pranab Mukherjee
reviewed bilateral issues with the Nigerian Foreign
Minister Chief Ojo Maduekwe in September at New York.
High Commission of India organized a photographic
exhibition at Lagos on India-Nigeria relations on the
occasion of the Golden Jubilee of establishment of
diplomatic relations between India and Nigeria. Several
other cultural events, seminars and conferences were also
organized. Bilateral trade during 2007-08 exceeded
US$8.5 billion and Indian exports registered a 20% growth
to cross US$1 billion. Nigeria continued to remain our
single largest source of hydrocarbons. ITEC slots to Nigeria
were increased to 85 for the year 2008-09.

Ghana
Bilateral ties were further consolidated with high level
visits from both sides. President J. A. Kufuor visited India
to participate in the India-Africa Forum Summit. During
his visit to Accra in April 2008, Commerce and Industry
Minister Kamal Nath met President J.A. Kufuor and
discussed matters of mutual interest. MoS Shri Anand
Sharma visited Ghana in 2008 to inaugurate “Seat of
Government and Presidential Complex” built by an Indian
company (Shapporji Pallonji & Co). Government of India
had provided a LoC of US$ 30 million for the project.
MoS (AS) was conferred “The Companion of the Order of
the Volta” award by the President of Ghana. During the
visit, MoS (AS) also laid the foundation stone for the
Foreign Service Training Institute. An auditorium in the
Institute will be named after Pt. Jawaharlal Nehru. Escorts
Limited of India set up a tractor assembling plant in Tema
while Mahindra & Mahindra set up another tractor
assembling plant in Kumasi. Government of India
provided a LoC of US$ 25 million to finance projects in
the fields of information and communication technology,
railway corridors and agro processing.

Senegal

Guinea

President of Senegal Abdoulaye Wade participated at the
India-Africa Forum Summit. EXIM Bank set up its office
in Dakar. MoS Shri Anand Sharma paid a visit to Senegal
in July 2008. He inaugurated an IT Centre of excellence
which was established as a part of US$10 million LoC
extended by India. MoS Shri Sharma called on the
President of Senegal and also held bilateral meetings with
the Foreign Minister, Dr. Cheikh Tidiane Gadio and
Minister of Mines and Industries Qusmane Ngom. Dr.
Gadio expressed Senegalese Government’s gratitude for
developmental assistance provided by India. During the
visit a Bilateral Investment Promotion and Protection
Agreement was signed. GoI extended US$25 million Line
of Credit through EXIM Bank to finance rural
electrification and fishing industry development projects.
Government of India exported 15,000 tonnes of rice to
Senegal.

Minister of Transport and Minister of Energy & Hydraulic
and delegation participated in CII-EXIM Conclave on
India Africa Project Partnership 2008 held from 19-21
March, 2008 in New Delhi. A LoC of US$ 8.51 million
through ECOWAS Bank of Investment and Development
(EBID) was awarded to Govt. of Guinea for improvement
of urban transportation system. Besides, a second LoC of
US$20 million, also through EBID, has been announced
for Rehabilitation and Expansion of Electricity Network
in Guinea. ITEC slots for Guinea have been increased to
15.

Mali
Minister of Economy, Industry and Trade of Mali and the
National Director for Commerce and Agreements visited
India from 26-30 May, 2008. During the visit, they met
76

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh meeting with the President, Democratic Republic of Congo, Joseph Kabila Kabange,
in New Delhi on 9 April, 2008.

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh meeting with the President of Senegal, Abdoulaye Wade,
in New Delhi on 8 April, 2008.

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

Economic Commission for West African
States (ECOWAS)

Sierra Leone
At the invitation of MoS(AS), Mrs. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, Minister of Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Sierra Leone visited India from 6-11
October, 2008 and held bilateral discussions. The two sides
identified areas for bilateral cooperation in agriculture,
energy, education, IT, health, transport and industry
sectors. At the request of Sierra Leone Government, India
exported 40,000 tons of non-Basmati rice. GoI extended
a US$15 million Line of Credit to Sierra Leone for
financing the development of commercial agriculture.
Another LoC of US$29.45 million, through ECOWAS
Bank for Investment and Development, for rehabilitation
of Telecom sector was signed. ITEC slots for Sierra Leone
were increased to 25.

President, Ibn Mohammed Chambas participated in the
India-Africa Forum Summit. ECOWAS countries
successfully utilized US$ 250 million line of credit granted
to ECOWAS Industrial Bank.

Pan-African e-Network
The ambitious project of Government of India, announced
in September 2004, to connect all 53 countries of the
African Union to provide effective communication and
connectivity among them, progressed further with the
signing of an agreement between the Ministry of External
Affairs and Telecommunications Consultants India
Limited (TCIL). 32 of the 53 countries have signed
country agreements and identified national coordinators,
consignees and sites. Installation and commissioning
activities were undertaken. Hub station and submarine
Cable Landing station in Dakar, Senegal became
operational in August. Equipment installation and testing
has been completed in 12 countries. Live demonstration
of tele-medicine and video-conferencing sessions were
successfully held in Senegal and Addis Ababa with the
assigned hospitals and universities in India.

Togo
GoI sent a consignment of medicines worth US$ 225,000
for the flood affected people. Rehabilitation of hospitals
by Indian Government started under the GoI’ LoC of US$
20 million.

78

Europe

I

7

Nordic, Central and Eastern European countries in India.
Trade with most of these countries is increasing at a faster
pace, and is moving away from traditional commodities
to engineering goods and value-added items. Investments
from India are also increasing. The potential for high
technology manufacturing in India, cooperation in
petroleum, non-conventional energy, biotechnology,
nanotechnology and engineering, together with areas like
deep-sea fishing and food processing are raising new
possibilities for collaboration. Nordic countries are also
beginning to view the Indian stock market and financial
instruments as safe and remunerative for their large
investable funds. The relatively high growth rates in the
former East Europe, coupled with the new possibilities
arising from a dynamic and economically vibrant India is
further boosting mutually beneficial economic activity
between India and these parts of Europe.

ndia’s engagement with EU as well as individual
countries in Europe has intensified and diversified in
fields such as defense, security, nuclear, space, trade and
investment, energy, food security, climate change, science
and technology, culture and education.
Exchange of high level visits between India and Europe
has been maintained. Summit-level interactions have
taken place with EU, France, Belgium and UK. In addition,
multilateral events provided occasions for PM level
interactions with UK, Germany and Italy. Regular
telephonic conversations between the leadership ensured
that India and Europe remained closely in touch discussing
issues of mutual interest. Extensive interaction at
Ministerial and official levels continued besides growing
exchanges of Parliamentarians and civil society dialogues.
Special envoys were sent to all the EU countries seeking
support for waiver in the NSG for Civil Nuclear
Cooperation with India. Belgium went public in its support
to India’s candidature for the Permanent Membership of
the expanded UNSC during the visit of the King of the
Belgium in November 08. Following the Mumbai terrorist
attacks, leaders of EU and member states sent condolence
messages and made telephone calls condemning the attacks
and reaffirmed solidarity in the fight against terrorism.

Albania
The Foreign Minister of Albania, Mr. Lulzim Basha, visited
India from 17-20 December, 2008. This was the first ever
visit by a Foreign Minister from either side. Apart from
delegation level talks held with EAM, Foreign Minister
Basha had an interactive session at the Institute of
Defence Studies and Analyses (IDSA). During the visit,
the Embassy of Albania was formally inaugurated on 18
December, 2008 by the Albanian Foreign Minister. He
also visited Kolkata where he had a meeting with the
Chief Minister of West Bengal and visited Mother Teresa
Memorial House. The Foreign Minister and the
accompanying business delegation also had a meeting with
the Indian businessmen, organized by the Confederation
of Indian Industry (CII) in Kolkata. Secretary (ER) visited
Albania on 28 July as Special Envoy of Prime Minister to
seek support for India’s civil nuclear energy initiative. He
met Prime Minister Sali Berisha and Foreign Minister
Lulzim Basha during the visit. Albania extended
unambiguous support at IAEA. Albanian Cd’A of Albania
arrived to open their Resident Mission in New Delhi.

Central Europe
Introduction
India has traditionally enjoyed warm, friendly and close
relations with countries of the Nordic as well as Central
and Eastern Europe. Efforts to diversify and deepen our
friendly relations with these countries are being pursued
assiduously. The expanded EU poses new challenges and
opportunities.
The relatively high rates of economic growth in India as
opposed to Europe, the availability of skilled technical
personnel at very competitive costs in India, the large
Indian market, and niche areas of excellence including
IT and Pharmaceuticals, and the growing capacity of
Indian companies to invest abroad, taken together with
the prospect of ageing populations and shrinking academic
and labour force, have all led to renewed interest of

Belgium
The King of the Belgians His Majesty Albert II visited
India from 3-12 November, 2008. He was accompanied
by Queen Paola, Foreign Minister, Karel De Gucht and a
79

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

sizeable academic and business delegation. Besides Delhi,
they visited Agra, Mumbai, Hyderabad, Mammalapurum
and Chennai. FM, Karel De Gucht publicly declared,
Belgian support for India’s candidature for permanent
membership of the expanded UNSC during their
interaction with the industry. Several MoUs were signed
with public and private sector firms on banking, port
embarkation, application of nuclear / radiology techniques
to agriculture modernization, information technology, etc.
Academic cooperation MoUs too were concluded. Both
countries agreed to uplift the level of bilateral relationship
from good to global level and also to double the quantum
of bilateral trade in the next five years. Secretary (West)
visited Belgium on 29 July, 2008 for First round of Foreign
Office Consultations (FOC).

Minister of Bulgaria paid an official visit to India from 27
February-4 March, 2009. The official engagement day was
3 March, 2009.

Croatia
Shri Nalin Surie, Secretary (West) visited Zagreb from
30-31 July, 2008 as the Special Envoy of Prime Minister
and met with Croatia’s Foreign Minister, Gordan
Jandrokovic, to canvas Croatia’s support for facilitating
international cooperation with India’s civilian nuclear
energy programme. Croatia supported for India’s specific
waiver in NSG meeting. The bilateral trade registered a
growth of 40% over 2006. ICCR sponsored five-member
Mohiniattam dance group gave performances at Zagreb,
Zabok, Sisak and Cakovec in April 2008. From Rajasthan,
a 43-member Manganiyar Sufi Musicians Group
performed at the Croatian National Theatre in July 2008.

An Economic and Trade Mission led by Jean-Claude
Marcourt, Minister of Economy and Commerce from the
Regional Government of Walloon visited India from 2027 September, 2008.

Cyprus
Cyprus lent its valuable support to India during the NSG
meeting held in Vienna on 6 September, 2008. In this
connection, C.R. Gharekhan, Prime Minister’s Special
Envoy, visited Cyprus from 30 July-1 August, 2008. He
called on President, Demetris Christofias and Minister of
Foreign Affairs Markos Kyprianou. The Cyprus-India
Business Association, organized a business seminar, in
October 2008, in Nicosia. Minister for Commerce, Industry
and Tourism of Cyprus delivered the key note address and
emphasized the need to upgrade economic cooperation
between the two countries. Internally, the election of
Demetris Christofias as the sixth President of the Republic
of Cyprus on February 24 raised hopes for settlement of
the Cyprus issue. Foreign Office Consultations with Cyprus
is scheduled to be held in New Delhi on 3 July, 2009.

Under ICCR sponsorship, Ms Uma Sharma with her
troupe performed Kathak dance in Brussels and Leuven
in June 2008. A Rajasthani cultural troupe performed in
the Ghent Trade Fair in September 2008 in which India
was the Guest Country.

Bulgaria
Prime Minister Manmohan Singh met with Bulgarian
President Georgi Purvanov on 24 October, 2008 on the
sidelines of the Seventh ASEM Summit in Beijing. Speaker
of Lok Sabha, Somnath Chatterjee led a 13-member
parliamentary delegation to Bulgaria from 16-20 June,
2008. A three-member Parliamentary delegation led by
Shri S. S. Ahluwalia, MP (RS) attended the Sixth General
Assembly of International Parliamentarians’ Association
for IT (IPAIT VI) in Sofia from 8-12 June, 2008. Secretary
(West) visited Sofia from 20-22 July, 2008 as Special Envoy
of Prime Minister to seek support for India’s civil nuclear
energy initiative and as leader of Indian delegation for
the Foreign Office Consultations. Bulgaria extended its
support at the NSG meeting for India’s specific waiver.
13 th session of the Indo-Bulgarian Joint Defence
Committee meeting took place in New Delhi from 8-9
May, 2008. Deputy Minister of Interior of Bulgaria led a
four-member delegation to India from 9-13 June, 2008.
The Government of India has appointed, an Honorary
Consul in Bourgas. Protocol for Exchange of Instruments
of Ratification in respect of the Treaty on Mutual Legal
Assistance in Criminal Matters and the Treaty on the
Transfer of Sentenced Persons was signed on 9 September,
2008 in Sofia. The Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign

Czech Republic
Secretary (ER) visited Prague as a Special Envoy of PM
in July 2008 and sought support of Czech Republic for
India’s Civil Nuclear Energy Initiative. The Czech
Republic had supported and voted for India at the NSG
meeting held in September 2008. During the period, there
have been regular high level visits from both sides. From
the Indian side the visits included that of MoS (AS) Shri
Anand Sharma from 7-9 September, 2008 and Commerce
and Industry Minister, Shri Kamal Nath from 10-12
September, 2008. From the Czech side, Industry and Trade
Minister Martin Riman visited India in November 2008,
while the Chief of General Staff of Czech Armed Forces
Lt. Gen. Vlastimil Picek’s visit to India took place in April
2008. Trade and Economic relations with Czech Republic
80

Europe

have been expanding rapidly and bilateral trade is
expected to cross the $ 1 billion mark in 2008.
Negotiations on the Social Security Agreement between
India and Czech Republic have been completed and the
signing of the Agreement is likely to take place in 2009.

extended its unconditional support to India’s specific waiver
at the NSG meeting. Estonia continues to be a beneficiary
of the ITEC programme and its slots for the year 2008-09
have been increased to 20. Bilateral trade during 2007-08
is expected to be about Euro 45 million.

Denmark

Finland

Following the visit of Danish Prime Minister to India in
February 2008, bilateral interaction further strengthened.
Shri Vilas B. Muttemwar, MoS for New and Renewable
Energy, visited Denmark in April 2008 to attend the First
meeting of the India-Denmark Joint Committee for
Cooperation in New and Renewable Energy. A threemember Danish Energy Agency delegation, accompanied
by a business delegation, visited India from 24-28
November, 2008 for the Second Joint Committee meeting
and took part in Wind India 2008 Seminar. A 12-member
delegation of the Danish Parliamentary Committee for
Health visited India from 10-17 September, 2008 on a
study tour. The delegation met Indian Parliamentary
Health Committee, Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs
and Minister of Health. The Secretary, Ministry of
Overseas Indian Affairs, visited Copenhagen from 29-30
September, 2008 in connection with expeditious
conclusion of a Social Security Agreement and an MoU
on Labour Mobility Partnership with Denmark. Denmark
launched a Work-in-Denmark Centre at Danish Embassy
in New Delhi in October 2008 aimed at attracting Indian
talent to Denmark especially in the IT, engineering and
healthcare sectors. An MoU between India and Denmark
for cooperation in Environment was signed on 27 October,
2008 in New Delhi. Bilateral trade with Denmark in 200708 was US$ 1074.6 million. As a Special Envoy of the
Prime Minister, Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Science &
Technology had spoken with Danish Foreign Minister on
25 July, 2008 to seek their support for India-US Civil
Nuclear Energy Agreement. Denmark had supported and
voted for India’s specific waiver at the NSG meeting held
in September 2008.

During 2008, bilateral relations with Finland continued
to grow in content and substance. Minister of State for
External Affairs, Shri Anand Sharma paid bilateral visit
in June 2008 and called on the Finnish Prime Minister
and held talks with Minister for Foreign Affairs. He also
met Speaker of the Finnish Parliament and Chairman of
the Parliamentary Foreign Affairs Committee and State
Secretary for Political Affairs in the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs. Minister of Science & Technology and Earth
Sciences Shri Kapil Sibal visited Helsinki as a Special
Envoy of the Prime Minister in July 2008 to brief the
Finnish Government about the Indo-US Civil Nuclear
Cooperation Agreement. During the visit he met Minister
officiating for Prime Minister and Finance Minister besides
State Secretary in the Prime Minister’s office. Finland had
extended its unconditional support at the NSG meeting
for India’s specific waiver. He had earlier visited Helsinki
in March 2008 and signed a bilateral agreement on
Science and Technology with Finland. Minister of State
for Industry Dr. Ashwani Kumar visited Finland from 2529 May, 2008 to inaugurate the Second Global Innovation
Summit which was attended by a number of leading Indian
and Finnish companies. Former President of India, Dr.
A.P.J. Abdul Kalam visited Finland from 14-16 April, 2008
as the Chief Guest for SITRA’s Inclusive India Seminar.
Bilateral trade with Finland in 2007 grew by 31.54% and
it was Euro 645 million. In order to further strengthen
the trade relations, the 15th Joint Economic Commission
met in Delhi in April 2008. The FOCs with Finland was
held in New Delhi in March 2008. Mrs. Tarja Halonen,
President of Finland visited India from 5-7 February, 2009
in connection with the Delhi Sustainable Development
Summit (DSDS) organized by The Energy & Resources
Institute (TERI). She was accompanied by Minister of
Foreign Trade and Development, Mr. Paavo Vayrynen and
a business delegation.

Estonia
Relations with Estonia are fast acquiring substantive
content. Foreign Minister of Estonia, Mr. Urmas Paet
visited India from 23-25 November, 2008 and held talks
with EAM, Shri Pranab Mukherjee besides meeting
Minister of Science and Technology, Shri Kapil Sibal. The
Annual Foreign Office Consultations were also held in
Tallinn from 8-9 October, 2008. Earlier, Special Secretary
(Ad), visited Estonia in July 2008 as Special Envoy of the
Prime Minister to brief the Estonian authorities on the IndoUS Civil Nuclear Cooperation Agreement. Estonia had

France
President Nicolas Sarközy was on a State visit to India
from 25-26 January 2008. He was the Chief Guest at the
Republic Day Parade. He was accompanied by five high
ranking French Ministers and a large business delegation.
Discussions focused on wide-ranging bilateral, regional
and multilateral issues. Emphasis was laid on civil nuclear
81

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

cooperation, energy, trade and emerging areas of
cooperation. At the conclusion of the visit, in addition to
a Joint Statement, a Joint Declaration on the Fight Against
Global Warming was issued. The Agreements signed
during the visit included Agreement on Mutual Protection
of Classified Information in the field of Defence,
Agreement on Transfer of Sentenced Prisoners,
Agreement between Commissariat L’ Energie Atomique
(CEA),France and DAE, India for construction and
operation of Jules Horowitz (JH) Reactor, Agreement on
India-France Development Cooperation through AFD
and an MoU on an International Associated Laboratory
in the field of Neuro Science.

naval exercises were conducted in May 2008 and the
second operational coordinated maritime patrol took place
off the Horn of Africa.
The Sixth Indo-French Joint Committee Meeting on
Atomic Energy was held at Kalpakkam from 2-3
December, 2008. French nuclear group Areva and
Department of Atomic Energy signed an Agreement on
17 December, 2008 for the supply of 300 tonnes of
uranium.
Efforts to increase Indo-French business interaction
continued during the year. Commerce and Industry
Minister (CIM) Shri Kamal Nath visited France thrice,
first from 3-5 July, 2008 to hold discussions with his
counterparts, second time in September 2008 in the
context of India-EU and India-France Summits and third
time from 8-9 January, 2009 to attend the economic
seminar entitled “New World, New Capitalism” held at
the behest of President Sarkozy and co-chaired by former
British PM Tony Blair. The CIM level Indo French Joint
Committee on Economic and Technical cooperation held
its annual meeting in New Delhi from 16-17 September,
2008. Deputy Minister for Foreign Trade Ms. Anne-Marie
Idrac visited India in January 2009 to attend the
Sustainable Development Summit.

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh visited Paris for the
India-France Bilateral Summit on 30 September, 2008.
Both PM and President Nicolas Sarkozy reaffirmed the
Strategic Partnership between India and France and their
commitment to further strengthen cooperation in core
areas such as civil nuclear cooperation, space and defence.
In addition, emphasis was laid in furthering cooperation
in scientific, technical and education fields and on
environmental issues. A High-Level CEOs Forum was
created. Agreements signed during the Summit covered
areas of Civil Nuclear Cooperation, cooperation in outer
space, use of PSLV for launch of satellites and Social
Security.

France and India view each other as important partners
in space technology and applications. Arianespace
continues to provide launch facilities for Indian Satellites
(INSAT). The agreements in the space sector signed
during PM’s visit to France in September 2008 provide
legal framework for cooperation in this area. In December
2008, W2M satellite was launched by Ariane Space in
Korou, French Guyana which was jointly built by Antrix/
ISRO and EADS – Astrium for Eutelsat.

French Minister for State for External Affairs and Human
Rights, Ms. Rama Yade had a bilateral meeting with EAM
in New Delhi during her visit for the 19th India-EU Troika
Ministerial Meeting on 30 May 2008. MoS for External
Affairs, Shri Anand Sharma led Indian delegations to the
International Conferences in Support of Afghanistan in
Paris; first held from 11-14 June, 2008, and later again on
14 December, 2008. A delegation from the Indo-French
Parliamentary Friendship Group led by Senator Mr. Pierre
Fauchon visited India from 14-22 September, 2008. The
19th Round of the Indo-French Strategic Dialogue was
held in Paris on 11 August, 2008 between NSA and the
Diplomatic Adviser to President Sarkozy Jean-David
Levitte and the 20th round was held in New Delhi on 17
January, 2009. India-France Foreign Office Consultations
were held on 6 February, 2009 in Paris. Foreign Secretary
led the Indian delegation.

The Governing Board meeting of the Indo-French Centre
for Promotion of Advanced Research (CEFIPRA) took
place in Paris on 14 January, 2009.
In the field of education, a meeting of the Indo-French
Consortium of Universities was held in Shillong from 1618 November, 2008 along with the Annual Meeting of
the Association of Indian Universities (AIU).
The Indian cultural calendar in France since January 2008
included 31 dance performances, 28 music concerts, nine
cultural festivals, 24 photographic exhibitions & 20 art
exhibitions including Indian participation in the Biennale
of Design at Saint Etienne in 2008, and 14 film festivals
with Indian participation. India was the “Country of
Honour” in about a dozen cultural events covering diverse
fields which include cinema, performing arts, visual arts,

The 11th meeting of the High-Level Committee on
Defence (HLCD), held in Paris from 25-26 November,
2008, decided to enhance maritime security and antipiracy operations in the Gulf of Aden and to improve
coordination. Joint exercises, staff talks at the level of the
Armed Forces and other professional exchanges at the
mid-career level have been proceeding well. The Varuna
82

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh with the President of France, Nicolas Sarkozy, at Elysee Palace,
in Paris on 30 September, 2008.

Minister for Foreign Affairs and Vice-chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany, Dr. Frank Walter Steinmeier
meeting the Union Minister of External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee,
in New Delhi on 20 November, 2008.

83

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

German Environment Forum along with Shri Sevugan
Regupathy, Minister of State in the Ministry of
Environment & Forests. During the Second India Week
organized in Hamburg from 9-16 November, 2008,
business conferences were organised on “Doing Business
with India”, “Aviation and Hi-tech Logistics”, renewable
energy, tourism and Chemical and Pharmaceuticals. India
was the partner country at the “5th International
Automotive Suppliers Fair IZB” organized by M/s
Wofsburg AG in Wolfsburg from 29-31 October, 2008. A
German Centre, established in Gurgaon jointly by two of
Germany’s banks, viz. Bavarian Landesbank (BLB) and
Landesbank Baden Württemberg (LBBW), to facilitate
the activities of German SMEs became operational during
2008. Mr. Christian Wulff, Minister President of Lower
Saxony visited India from 3-7 October, 2008.

literature, fashion etc. India was guest of honour in some
of the prominent cultural events in the first half of 2008
including at the Annecy Animation Film Festival and
Poetry Market in Paris both held in June 2008.

Germany
Germany is India’s largest trading partner within the EU,
second most important source of technological
collaborations globally and an important investor. The
year saw continued exchanges of bilateral visits, an
expansion of trade and investment ties and a substantial
expansion of partnerships in science and technology.
Dr. Frank-Walter Steinmeier, German Federal Vice
Chancellor and Minister for Foreign Affairs visited India
from 19-21 November, 2008 accompanied by Members
of Parliament and a large delegation of officials and
businessmen. Besides Delhi, Dr. Steinmeier also visited
Bangalore, where he inaugurated the German Consulate.

Science and Technological Cooperation has emerged as
one of the key elements in the Indo-German interaction.
Minister for Science & Technology and Earth Sciences,
Shri Kapil Sibal, visited Germany from 26-30 June, 2008
to attend the Festive Assembly of the Max Plank Society
held in Dresden, Germany on 27 June, 2008. He and
Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel jointly addressed the
Festive Assembly. Mr. Sibal also addressed the Nobel
Laureates gathering at Lindau. Dr. Annette Schavan
subsequently visited India from 8-10 September, 2008 for
the Golden Jubilee Celebrations of IIT-Madras. An MoU
was signed between DAAD and IIT-Madras on the setting
up of a Centre for Sustainable Development Studies. She
also announced the STAR Scholarships for Scholars from
IIT-M visiting Germany. Meanwhile, the Science Express
carrying an exhibition mounted by the Max Planck Society
completed its journey after visiting 55 cities in India and
receiving over 2 million visitors.

The fifth meeting of the India-Germany Joint Working
Group on Counter Terrorism was held in Berlin from 1617 October, 2008.
Important progress was registered in defence cooperation.
India was the partner country of the Berlin Air Show,
ILA 2008 held in May 2008 and the Indian pavilion was
inaugurated jointly by Defence Minister, Shri A.K.Antony
and Chancellor Angela Merkel. A group of 20 CEOs of
German Aerospace industry attended a CEO’s Round
Table with MoS Defence Production, Shri Inderjit Singh,
while nearly 200 business delegates participated in a
business conference on India during the event. Defence
Secretary level High Defence Committee met in April
2008 and met again in March 2009; its three sub-groups
in April 2008 and in January 2009.

Ms Heidemarie Wieczorek-Zeul, German Federal Minister
of Economic Cooperation and Development visited India
from 20-24 October, 2008 for celebrating 50 years of
Partnership in Indo-German Development Cooperation.
The strategic framework for further Indo-German
development cooperation was finalized.

Exchange of trade and economic delegations and
organization of promotional events continued apace.
Commerce and Industry Minister, Shri Kamal Nath led a
90-member business delegation comprising of SMEs to
Germany from 8-9 September, 2008. Bilateral Civil
Aviation talks were held in Berlin from 10-11 April, 2008
when both sides agreed to add a further 26 flights weekly
taking the total to 69 flights a week to each side. Secretary,
Labour and Employment, visited Germany from 6-10
October, 2008 for discussions on the issue of Technical
and Vocational Education and Training. First meeting of
the Joint Working Group on Agriculture was held on 12
November, 2008 in Hannover. German Federal
Environment Minister Mr Sigmar Gabriel led a large
German business delegation to India from 17-18
November, 2008 when he co-inaugurated the First Indo-

17th meeting of IGCG (Indo-German Consultative Group)
was held in Munich from 11-14 September, 2008.

Greece
Shri Nalin Surie, Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs,
visited Athens in July 2008, as PM’s Special Envoy to
seek Greece’s support in the Nuclear Suppliers’ Group
for India’s civil nuclear agreement. Greece had supported
at the NSG meeting for India’s specific waiver. A 16member team from the National Defence College (NDC),
84

Europe

was opened in August 2008. A high level team headed by
Additional Secretary (AD), visited Iceland and apart from
making proposals for the opening of resident Mission in
Iceland also called on Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Iceland and the Mayor of Reykjavik. A delegation
comprising officials from the Ministries of External Affairs
& Commerce, Scientists from Ministry of New &
Renewable Energy, ONGC and representative of CII,
FICCI & Air India visited Iceland to discuss cooperation
in Geothermal and Civil Aviation. The delegation met
Ministers, senior officials in the Government of Iceland
and CEOs. The instruments of Ratification for entry into
force of the Bilateral Investment Promotion and
Protection Agreement signed between India and Iceland
in June 2007 was exchanged on 16 December, 2008 in
New Delhi.

New Delhi visited Greece in May 2008. India participated
in the Thessaloniki International Trade Fair held at
Thessaloniki, Greece, from 6-14 September 2008.
Instruments of Ratification of India-Greece Science and
Technology Cooperation Agreement, signed during the
visit of the former President A. P. J. Abdul Kalam to Greece
in April 2007, were exchanged on 30 September, 2008.

Holy See
A 13-member Indian delegation led by Shri Oscar
Fernandes, Minister of State (IC) for Labour and
Employment, visited Vatican from 10-13 October, 2008
to participate in the Canonization ceremony of Sister
Alphonsa on 12 October, 2008.

Hungary
India’s relations with Hungary are close, friendly and
multifaceted. The State Visit of Hungarian Prime Minister
to India in January 2008, besides diversifying and
consolidating the relationship, gave the necessary
momentum and resulted in meaningful cooperation in
various sectors. Seven agreements in the fields of
agriculture, health, S&T, defence and oil exploration were
signed during the visit. The other important visit from
Hungary to India was that of Hungarian Defence Minister
Imre Szekeres in February 2008. Visits from the Indian
side to Hungary included that of Shri Anand Sharma,
MoS (AS), Shri Kamal Nath, Commerce and Industry
Minister in September 2008 and Dr. M.S. Gill, MoS (IC)
for Youth Affairs and Sports, in November 2008. Secretary
(ER) visited Hungary as a Special Envoy of the Prime
Minister in July 2008 to seek their support. Hungary
supported the India-US civil nuclear energy agreement
and voted in favour of it in the NSG meeting held in
September 2008. This period witnessed enhanced
cooperation between the two countries in various fields.
India was the first-ever country to be invited as the guest
of honour country at the Budapest International Trade
Fair in September 2008. Another significant initiative was
the progress made in the finalization of the Totalisation/
Social Security agreement between India and Hungary,
which is expected to be signed in 2009. Foreign Office
Consultations with Hungary was held in New Delhi on
15 January, 2009. Secretary (West) led the Indian
delegation.

Ireland
A 16-member National Defence College team visited
Ireland in May 2008 for a study tour.
Mr. Billy Kelleher, TD, Minister for Labour Affairs led an
education mission to India in April 2008 to give a boost
to admission of Indian students to Irish higher educational
institutions.
A delegation from National Human Rights Commission
of India headed by Justice S. Rajendra Babu, Chairman,
visited Ireland and exchanged views with its counterpart.

Italy
In the general elections held from 13-14 April, 2008, the
centre-right coalition led by Mr. Silvio Berlusconi was
voted to power. Mr. Berlusconi was sworn in as the Prime
Minister on 8 May, 2008.
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh met PM Berlusconi
on 24 October, 2008 on the sidelines of the ASEM Summit
in Beijing.
The Seventh India-Italy Joint Defence Committee
Meeting was held along with the Fourth Joint Working
Group Meeting and the fourth meeting of the Military
Cooperation Group in Rome in March 2008. A bilateral
Cooperation Plan for 2008-09 was drawn up and agreed
to by both sides. Visits from India to Italy included those
of Chief of Air Staff from 16-19 January, 2008 and that of
Vice Chief of Naval Staff in October 2008. The Chief of
Italian Army staff visited India from 17-21 November,
2008.

Iceland
In the backdrop of taking relationship with Iceland to a
qualitatively high levels following President of India’s visit
to Iceland in May 2005 and President of Iceland’s visit to
India in 2000, 2007 and 2008. India’s resident Mission

Among other visits from India were those of Minister of
Agriculture, Consumer Affairs, Food and Public
Distribution; Minister of State for Labour and
85

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

Official level talks on Double Taxation Avoidance
Agreement took place in New Delhi from 10-12
November, 2008. On the cultural side, eminent Kathak
dancer Uma Sharma and her eight-member troupe
performed in Vilnius on 2 June, 2008 to an appreciative
audience in a programme.

Employment; Minister of State for Environment and
Forests; and, Chief Minister of Maharashtra, Defence
Secretary and Secretary (Urban Development).
The Fifth MCG meeting for bilateral staff talks was held
in New Delhi from 25-26 February, 2009.
Chief of Naval Staff, Admiral Suresh Mehta, visited Italy
from 15-20 March, 2009 while the Italian Undersecretary
for Defence Guido Grosetto attended the Aero India 2009
show at Bangalore from 10-14 February, 2009.

Luxembourg
Secretary (West), Shri Nalin Surie visited Luxembourg
on 28 July, 2008 as Special Envoy of the PM on nuclear
issue during which he held discussions on wide ranging
issues with the Luxembourg authorities.

Principal Scientific Advisor to the GoI, Dr. R
Chidambaram visited Italy from 11-18 March, 2009 for
the 700th Anniversary of the founding of the University
of Perugia.

India and Luxembourg signed the Agreement on
Avoidance of Double Taxation (DTAA) in New Delhi in
June 2008, after two rounds of negotiations.

Latvia

The L&T-Paul Wurth consortium commissioned the
largest blast furnace in India at Tata Steel at Jamshedpur
on 31 May, 2008. The Consortium also bagged a Rs.1205
crores order from Bhushan Steel Limited for turn-key
construction of a 2.5 million TPA Blast Furnace for their
plant in Meramandali, Orissa.

Relations between India and Latvia are warm and growing.
During the period Shri Sharat Sabarwal, Special Secretary
(AD) visited Riga on 30 July, 2008, as Special Envoy of
our PM, and met with Mr. Normans Penke, the State
Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and also
Political Advisor to the PM and sought their active support
in the NSG to the Indo-US Nuclear deal. Latvia gave the
NSG deal a clear support. Foreign Office Consultations
with the Latvian Foreign Ministry were held on 5 May,
2008 in New Delhi. The bilateral trade is far short of
potential, but Indian exports to Latvia increased to US$
34.8 million in 2007 and imports stood at US$ 13.1
million, representing a 30% increase in the bilateral trade.
Latvia´s diplomats have been regularly attending the
Professional Course for Foreign Diplomats, conducted by
the FSI in Delhi.

Macedonia
The Government of Macedonia decided to open its
Embassy in New Delhi and the Government of India
appointed an Honorary Consul in Macedonia. The
Bilateral Investment Promotion and Protection
Agreement between India and Macedonia, which was
signed on 17 March, 2008 in Skopje, came into force on
17 October, 2008. The Foreign Minister of the Republic
of Macedonia visited India from 20-24 January, 2009. The
official engagement day was 20 January, 2009.

Lithuania

Malta

A new government headed by Mr. Andrius Kubilius was
formed on 9 December, 2008. Mr. Kubilius is the Chairman
of Homeland Union-Lithuanian Christian Democrats
(Conservatives). From a trade figure of Euro 21 million
in 1998, in 2007 the turnover reached to Euro 32.23
million. Bilateral trade for the first six months in 2008
has reached to Euro 100 million. The significant
development in bilateral relations was opening of a fullfledged Lithuanian Embassy in New Delhi in July 2008
and is presently headed by Cd’A. Special Secretary (AD
& CPV) as Special Envoy of Prime Minister visited
Lithuania in July 2008 and met with Undersecretary of
State in the Lithuanian Foreign Ministry seeking an NSG
waiver. Lithuania had extended its unconditional support
for India’s specific waiver at the NSG meeting. The fourth
round of Foreign Office Consultations between India and
Lithuania took place in Vilnius on 10 October, 2008.

Malta has been a Member of EU since 2004 and joined
Euro Zone in 2008. Special envoy to Prime Minister Shri
C.R.Garekhan visited Malta in July 2008 and held
meetings with President and Deputy Minister & Foreign
Minister of Malta and briefed them on India’s position on
Indo-US nuclear cooperation agreement. Malta had
supported at the NSG meeting for India’s specific waiver.
Bilateral trade has shown downward trend during 200708 due to the commencement of EU import-export regime.
The main areas of engagement are in the health sector,
IT, services and shipping. ICCR-sponsored cultural troupes
performed in Malta to packed audiences in July-August.

Netherlands
There was regular exchange of high-level ministerial visits
leading to conclusion of important bilateral agreements.
86

Europe

Cooperation Minister, Minister of Research & Higher
Education and State Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum &
Energy and State Secretary, Ministry of Defence. An MoU
on cooperation in the field of Education was signed during
the JCM. Shri K. Sibal, Minister of Science & Technology
and Earth Sciences paid an official visit to Norway in June
2008. An MoU on Cooperation in the field of Polar and
Glacial Research was signed during the visit. He
inaugurated the Indian Research Station ‘Himadri’ at Ny
Alesund. He also visited Svalbard Global Seed Vault. Dr.
Anbumani Ramadoss, Minister of Health and Family
Welfare visited Norway in November 2008. Secretary
(Health & Family Welfare) visited Norway in August 2008
to participate in the Joint Steering Committee Meeting
of the Norway India Partnership Initiative (NIPI). On 11
March, 2008 the fourth meeting of Indo-Norwegian JWG
on Hydrocarbons took place in Oslo. A Norwegian
delegation visited India in September 2008 for
negotiations on draft MoU on Social Security Agreement.
The Special Envoy of PM, Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of
Science & Technology met the Norwegian Foreign
Minister in Switzerland and sought Norway’s support for
India’s specific waiver at the NSG.

Minister of State for Food Processing Industries, Mr.
Subodh Kant Sahai, visited the Netherlands from 22-23
May, 2008 to attend an investment seminar organized by
Netherlands India Chamber of Commerce and Trade
(NICCT).
Minister of Law & Justice Shri H.R. Bhardwaj visited the
Netherlands from 17-20 September, 2008 and attended
the 115th Anniversary of the Hague Conference on Private
International Law (HccH). During the visit, Minister
Bhardwaj signed the Host Country Agreement with the
Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) to establish a
regional PCA facility in New Delhi.
Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs, Vayalar Ravi visited
the Netherlands from 4-6 June, 2008 to attend the
commemorative function to mark the 135 years of
immigration of Suriname Hindustani community from
India to Suriname.
A Festival of India in the Netherlands, envisaged as a
major cultural and economic bilateral event, was organized
in Amsterdam in November 2008. It was inaugurated on
12 November, 2008 in Amsterdam in the presence of
Princess Maxima, wife of Crown Prince Willem
Alexander; Dr. Karan Singh, President, ICCR; and six
Dutch Ministers. The inauguration was attended by close
to 2000 guests. The Festival presented 127 events/
performances by leading Indian artists, musicians, music
conductors, painters, sculptors, individual performance
by numerous style & genres, participation by high profile
Indian contemporary photography exhibitions, top fashion
designers and screening of Indian films of leading directors.
The Festival of India not only projected India’s diverse
cultural heritage but also had a mega bilateral economic
content which included the Netherlands India Business
Meet (NIBM) and CEOs Roundtable held from 20-21
November, 2008 during Finance Minister, Shri P
Chidambaram’s visit. There was an Indian business
delegation of around 30 SMEs accompanying Finance
Minister, Shri Chidambaram. 300 Dutch companies
participated in the business event.

Poland
There have been regular visits at various levels. Chief of
Indian Army, General Deepak Kapoor paid a goodwill visit
to Poland in March 2008. The Indo-Polish Joint Working
Group for Defence cooperation was held in New Delhi in
October 2008. The visit of Polish Defence Minister to
India took place in the first week of November 2008. Polish
Deputy Economy Minister, Mr. Adam Szejnfeld visited
India in May 2008 leading an official delegation to attend
the first session of the reconstituted Indo-Polish Joint
Commission meeting held New Delhi. The fifth round of
FOCs was held in New Delhi in June 2008. The Special
Envoy of Prime Minister visited Poland in July 2008 to
seek an NSG waiver. Poland extended its unconditional
support for India’s specific waiver at the NSG meeting.
Minister of State for Coal, Santosh Bagrodia led a
delegation to participate in the 21 st World Mining
Congress (WMC) at Krakow and the “Expo-Mining 2008”
from 9-12 September, 2008 at Sosnowiec, Poland.
Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests attended
an informal meeting of Environment Ministers in Warsaw
in October 2008.

Norway
There was extensive interaction at official and ministerial
levels. The Norwegian State Secretary of Defence visited
India in May 2008 and he met Raksha Mantri and NSA.
Shri Anand Sharma, Minister of State for External Affairs
visited Oslo in June 2008 to co-chair the third session of
Indo-Norwegian Joint Commission Meeting held in Oslo.
During the visit, he called on the Speaker of the
Norwegian Parliament, and held discussions with Foreign
Minister, Environment & International Development

The President of India, Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil paid
a successful State visit to Poland from 23-26 April, 2009.
The visit is significant in terms of Poland’s vibrant
economy and active membership of EU. The President
87

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

held meetings with the President and Prime Minister of
Poland. Agreements on Tourism Co-operation and Health
& Medicine were signed during the visit.

included as a partner country under ITEC Programme.
An Agreement for cooperation in the Field of Agriculture
between India and Serbia was signed in Belgrade during
the visit of Secretary (Agriculture) from 1-5 March, 2009.
Serbia has conveyed its support to India’s candidature in
the UNSC for non-permanent seat.

Portugal
Portuguese Foreign Minister Dr Luis Amado visited India
from 7-9 July, 2008, when, besides holding discussions with
EAM, addressed the opening session of the IndoPortuguese Business Meeting at FICCI.

Slovakia
Secretary (ER) visited Bratislava as a Special Envoy of
PM in July 2008 and sought support of Slovak Republic
for India’s Civil Nuclear Energy Initiative. The Slovak
Republic had supported and voted for India at the NSG
meeting held in September 2008. During 2008, two
important visits from Slovakia to India took place.
Chairman of the Slovak Parliament Pavol Paska visited
India in March 2008. Besides having detailed discussions
with Lok Sabha Speaker, he also called on Chairman of
Rajya Sabha, Shri Hamid Ansari and Minister of External
Affairs, Shri Pranab Mukherjee. Slovak Foreign Minister
Jan Kubis visited India in April 2008 and held delegation
level talks with EAM. He also called on the Speaker of
the Lok Sabha. The talks covered a range of bilateral,
regional and multilateral issues of mutual interest.
Slovakia reiterated its support for the Indian candidature
for permanent membership of the UNSC.

A ten-member business delegation from CII visited Lisbon
from 2-5 July, 2008 to explore business and investment
opportunities between Portugal and India mainly in the
areas of automobile, Information Technology and Energy
Sectors.

Romania
Following the General Elections of 30 November, 2008,
Mr. Emil Boc was nominated by President as the next
Prime Minister of Romania on 15 December, 2008. The
new Government led by Mr. Boc won the vote of
confidence in Parliament on 22 December, 2008. Earlier,
Mr. Theodor Stolojan was nominated as Prime Minister
on 10 December but he withdrew his name on 15
December, leading to the appointment of Mr. Boc.
Minister of Economy and Finance, Mr. Varujan Vosganian,
visited India from 3-4 March, 2008. Secretary (West), Shri
Nalin Surie, visited Romania on 23 July, 2008 and met
Foreign Minister Lazar Comanescu to hand over a letter
from Prime Minister to Prime Minister of Romania to
garner support for India’s civil nuclear energy initiative.
Romania extended their support for India’s specific waiver
at the NSG meeting. Secretary (West) also had meetings
with Adviser to President Mrs. Anca Ileana and Adviser
to PM Stejarel Olaru. Foreign Office Consultations with
Romania were also held during the visit.

Slovenia
MoS, Shri Anand Sharma visited Ljubljana from 30 March
to 1 April, 2008 and inaugurated the new Chancery
premises of our resident Mission in Slovenia. MoS held
discussions with his counterpart on bilateral, regional and
international issues. Secretary (ER), Shri H.S.Puri visited
Slovenia as a Special Envoy of PM seeking Slovenia’s
support to resume civil nuclear energy cooperation with
India. Slovenia extended their support at the NSG
meeting for India’s specific waiver. The Special Envoy of
the Prime Minister on climate change and nuclear issues,
Shri Shyam Saran participated as a panelist in the Bled
Strategic Forum meeting held in Bled (Slovenia) from 31
August to 1 September, 2008. Slovenia held the six-month
rotating Presidency of EU during the first half of 2008.
The Slovenian Foreign Minister Dr. D. Rupel participated
in the India-EU Ministerial Level Troika Meeting held in
New Delhi on 30 May, 2008 and also held discussions on
bilateral, regional and international issues with EAM.

Serbia
Following the elections in Serbia in May 2008, the new
government led by Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkoviæ
reiterated that Serbia would focus on developing economic
and political relations with India. Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, Vuk Jeremiæ, visited India in September
2008 and exchanged views with the EAM on bilateral,
regional and international issues. During the interactions
it was emphasised that the excellent political relations
between the two countries were not adequately reflected
in commercial ties which was much below the potential.
The other high level visit from Serbia was that of Serbian
Minister Dr. Ana Pešikan in February 2008. Serbia was

Spain
In the general elections on 9 March, 2008, Socialist Party
PSOE won 169 seats out of 350 in the Congress of
Deputies. Incumbent Prime Minister Mr. Jose Luis
88

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh and the Prime Minister of the Republic of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdogan,
at the joint press conference, in New Delhi on 21 November, 2008.

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh with the Prime Minister of United Kingdom, Gordon Brown,
during his visit to the United States, in New York on 26 September, 2008.

89

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

Rodriguez Zapatero was elected to second term on 11
April, 2008.

11-16 January, 2009. They met the members of the
Standing Committee on External Affairs of the Indian
Parliament on 12 January, 2009. Besides Delhi, the
Swedish Parliamentarians also visiting Mumbai.

Deputy Prime Minister Ms. Maria Teresa Fernandez de la
Vega visited India from 3-9 January, 2009. Among other
visits from Spain focusing on promoting trade and
economic relations were: Mr. Jose Maria Aznar Lopez,
leader of the Popular Party and a former Prime Minister
of Spain, 16-20 September, 2008; Ms Esperanza Aguirre,
President of the Madrid Regional Government, 23-26
November, 2008; Mr. Miguel Sebastian, Spain’s Minister
for Industry, Tourism and Trade, 10-12 December, 2008.

Switzerland
Chief Minister of Maharashtra, Shri Vilasrao Deskmukh
led a five-member delegation to Switzerland from 21-24
September, 2008; two MoUs were signed with (i) Reiter
Group of Switzerland for setting up a plant to manufacture
cotton spinning machinery, and (ii) Kuoni Travel (India)
Pvt. Ltd. for promoting tourism in Maharashtra. The 60th
Anniversary of the signing of the Indo-Swiss Treaty of
friendship was celebrated in 2008 by organizing cultural
events, seminars and exhibitions. Messages signed by EAM
and the Swiss Federal Councillor Micheline Calmy-Rey
were also exchanged on the occasion. Bilateral trade
crossed US dollars 2.8 billion in 2007. Foreign Secretary
visited Switzerland in July 2008 as Special Envoy for
seeking India specific waiver at the NSG.

Indian Ministers of Finance, Health and Family Welfare
and Petroleum & Natural Gas visited Spain for multilateral
events/international conferences when they used the
occasions to also have bilateral engagements.
Minister of Tourism and Culture Smt. Ambika Soni visited
Madrid from 13-15 October, 2008 to attend the Annual
Meeting of the Executive Council of World Tourism
Organization which India presently chairs. Shri Jawahar
Sircar, Secretary, Ministry of Culture attended the
inaugural function of 28th International Contemporary Art
Fair (ARCO).

Turkey
There was increased interaction between India and Turkey
in 2008-2009. The bilateral trade between India and
Turkey was US$ 2.65 billion in 2007. The Prime Minister
of Turkey Recep Tayyip Erdogan, accompanied by three
senior Ministers, MPs and approximately 120
businessmen, paid an official visit to India from 21-24
November, 2008. PM Erdogan called on the President and
the Vice President and had bilateral discussions/delegation
level talks with the Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh.
EAM, Shri Pranab Mukherjee and the leader of
opposition, Shri L K Advani called on him. Earlier, Turkish
Foreign Minister, Ali Babacan visited India from 5-10
February 2008, during which an agreement on mutual
exemption of visa requirement for holders of diplomatic
passports was signed. Turkish Minister for Foreign Trade
Kuroad Tüzmen visited India in March 2008. Foreign
Office Consultations with Turkey was held in New Delhi
in May 2008. The NSA visited Ankara in July 2008 to
seek support for India’s civil nuclear energy initiative.
During the visit, he called on President Abdullah Gül,
Foreign Minister Ali Babacan and had bilateral discussions
with the Secretary General of National Security Council
and the Foreign Policy Advisor to the Prime Minister.
Turkey extended their support for India’s specific waiver
at the NSG meeting. Air Chief Marshall Fali Homi Major
visited Turkey in March 2008 and Turkish Land Forces
Commander Gen. Idoðan Balaoðlu visited India in May
2008.

Secretary of State of Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Spain
Mr Angel Lossada visited India from 16-17 October, 2008
for attending the India-Spain Tribune Meeting.

Sweden
There were a number of Ministerial visits from Sweden
to India including Trade Minister, Ms. Ewa Börling (April
2008), Public Health Minister, Ms. Maria Larsson (in May
2008) Minister for Migration & Asylum Policy, Mr. Tobias
Billström (November 2008), and Crown Princess Victoria
(October 2008). Some of these visits were accompanied
by High Level Business Delegations from key industries.
Trade and Investment are becoming the principle drivers
of India-Sweden engagement. Bilateral trade has grown
by over 450% since 2001, and has crossed the US$ 2.4
billion mark in the year 2007. India has emerged as the
19th largest export market and third largest trade partner
after China and Japan in Asia. Minister of Science &
Technology, Shri Kapil Sibal visited Stockholm in July
2008 as a Special Envoy of the Prime Minister to seek
their support for the Indo-US Civil Nuclear Cooperation
Agreement. Sweden gave India a clear support in the NSG
to the Indo-US Nuclear deal.
The Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs from the
Swedish Parliament paid an official visit to India from

90

Europe

United Kingdom

London Stock Exchange hosts 52 Indian companies, with
a combined market cap of £9 billion. Indian firms have
raised a total of £3 billion through listings on the exchange.
In March 2008, Tatas acquired Jaguar and Land Rover
for £2.3 billion.

Prime Minister met UK Prime Minister Gordon Brown in
London on the sidelines of the G-20 summit on 1 April,
2009. The two Prime Ministers also maintained regular
telephonic contact.

The first meeting of the UK India Education Forum took
place in London on 26 September, 2008 when it was
decided to set up an official level Joint Working group to
concretize various collaborative arrangements in the field
of education.

UK Foreign Secretary David Miliband visited India from
13-15 January, 2009. India-UK Foreign Office
Consultations took place on 6 February, 2009 in London.
India & UK Joint Working Group on Counter Terrorism
was held on 2 December, 2008 and Strategic Dialogue on
3 December, 2008 in New Delhi. Defence Secretary level
Defence Consultative Group met on 20 May, 2008
preceded by the meeting of Defence Equipment SubGroup on 19 May, 2008.

The 11th India-UK Round Table was held in India from
2-5 May 2008 at Shimla.

European Union
India and the EU (European Union) are indispensable
poles in the emerging multi-polar structures. The EU is
still trying to come to terms with the Irish ‘No’ vote on
the Lisbon Treaty. While ratification of the Lisbon Treaty
by EU Member States is proceeding and completed by
most of them, its entry would have to await the result of
another referendum in Ireland likely in 2009. Lisbon
Treaty aims to reform the EU institutional structures to
cope with the pressures brought about by the rapid
expansion of the EU and to strengthen the internal
coordination mechanism for better harmonization of its
policies and more effective articulation of its external
policies.

Parliamentary linkages have been strengthened through
regular visits. All three Friends of India Groups from
Labour (10-17 February, 2008), Liberal Democratic (1-6
September, 2008) and Conservative (27 November-2
December, 2008) Parties visited India at the invitation of
the Indian government.
Ministerial visits exchanged included those of Dr. Ashwani
Kumar, Minister of State for Industry, for India Investors’
Summit (19-21 May, 2008); Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister for
Science & Technology, for the first ever India-Scotland
Business Forum (13 June, 2008), Dr. M. S. Gill, MoS for
Sports (2-4 July, 2008), Shri H.R Bhardwaj, Law Minister
to attend Commonwealth Law Ministers’ Meeting (7-10
July, 2008), Shri P. Chidambaram for the second meeting
of the India-UK Economic and Financial Dialogue and
to witness signing of an MoU to encourage sharing of best
practices in the development of PPP (Public Private
Partnerships) (11 August, 2008); Shri Kamal Nath,
Commerce and Industry Minister (11-14 September,
2008); and, Minister of Petroleum & Natural Gas Murli
Deora, to represent the Government of India at the
London Energy Ministers’ Meeting (19 December, 2009).
Among Ministers from UK visiting India were Minister
of Justice Jack Straw (13-15 September, 2008); Hazel
Blears, Minister of Communities and Local Government
(30-31 July 2008); Douglas Alexander, DFID Minister (1719 November, 2008); and, Peter Mandelson, Secretary of
Business Enterprise and Regulatory Reform (likely from
19-23 January, 2009). PM Brown was on a working visit
to India on 13 December, 2008.

The EU is India’s largest trading partner. Bilateral trade
crossed Euro 55 billion in 2007 and is targeted to reach
Euro 100 billion in five years. India and Europe have been
seeing a very dynamic investment relationship. Main FDI
(Foreign Direct Investment) source countries for India from
Europe are: UK (US$ 5.06 bn), Netherlands (US$3.41 bn),
Germany (2.07 bn), Cyprus (US$ 1.5 bn), France (US$
1.05 bn) and Switzerland (US$ 0.74 bn); the figures in
parenthesis being the cumulative FDI inflows during the
period 2000 - September 2008. Indian outward investment
too has also been growing steadily particularly in UK
(second largest in terms of acquisitions), Germany and Italy.
To improve working conditions for professionals, India
and its partner countries in Europe have been negotiating
Social Security Agreements. Belgium was the first country
to have signed such an Agreement with India, France
followed on 30 September, 2008, the Netherlands has
concluded negotiations and Germany, after signing an
Agreement on Social Insurance on 8 October, 2008, has
agreed to commence talks on a Comprehensive Social
Security Agreement. Cultural festivals, scientific and
student exchanges are being given constant attention.

UK is the fourth largest investor in India and the
cumulative investment by UK from April 2000 till
September 2008 was US$ 5,058 million. India has emerged
as the third largest foreign investor in the UK and the
second largest overseas investor in London and Northern
Ireland in terms of number of acquisitions / investments.
91

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

However, notwithstanding minor improvements, hurdles
in movement of people from India to the EU remain a
concern and yet need satisfactory resolution.

Parliament constituted a 22-member Indian Parliamentary
Friendship group for relations with the European
Parliament in June 2008; Mr. V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo
(Indian National congress) is the President of the group
while Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey (BJP) and Mr. Suresh
Kurup (CPI-M) are the vice presidents of the group. IndiaEU Strategic Dialogue was held in New Delhi on 5
December, 2008.

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh visited Marseille,
France for the Ninth India-EU Summit on 29 September,
2008. During the Summit, PM had discussions with EU/
French President Nicolas Sarkozy and European
Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso. The Summit,
inter alia, reviewed India-EU Joint Action Plan of 2005
and issued a revised plan extending the Strategic
Partnership to new areas; took note of the signature of
India-EU Horizontal Civil Aviation Agreement signed on
28 September, 2008; issued a Joint Work Program (JWP)
for cooperation in Energy, Clean Development and
Climate Change; agreed to aim towards conclusion of
BTIA (Broad-based Trade and Investment Agreement)
during 2009; and adopted a target of Euro 100 billion for
bilateral trade in the next five years. The JWP envisages
cooperation on, among others, clean coal technology,
energy efficiency, fusion energy research and renewable
energy; as also conclusion of fusion energy research
cooperation agreement between EURATOM and India.
The Summit adopted a Joint Press Communiqué. PM also
attended the India-EU Business summit titled “New
Synergies for Partnership” which was held on 30
September, 2008 in Paris.

The India-EU Security dialogue was held on 5 December,
2008 in New Delhi.
4th round of India-EU Energy Panel meeting was held on
8 September, 2008 in New Delhi when the two sides
agreed, inter alia, to explore joint R & D on solar
photovoltaics; to continue and strengthen cooperation
in the field of energy efficiency/clean coal technology; and,
to speed up the negotiations on proposed bilateral
agreement between EURATOM and India in the field of
fusion energy research; to take forward the civil nuclear
energy cooperation.
The 11th Meeting of the India-EU Joint Working Group
on Consular Issues was held in New Delhi on 23 May,
2008. The meeting discussed consular issues including
facilitation and expeditious issue of visas and work permits.
The 12th meeting of the India-EU Civil Society Round
Table took place in Paris on 15-16 July, 2008. The fifth
meeting of the India-EU ad-hoc dialogue on Human
Rights was held on 27 February, 2009.

The 19th India-EU Troika Foreign Ministerial Meeting
took place on 30 May, 2008 in New Delhi. The Indian

92

The Americas

United States of America

8

change, democracy and development and the steps taken
by the two sides to meet the global challenges of the 21st
century in keeping with their strategic partnership. Prime
Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh and President Bush
appreciated and hoped that the transformation in IndoUS bilateral relations would provide a foundation for
continued strengthening of the relationship in the future.
Prime Minister Dr. Singh expressed his gratitude to
President Bush for the support rendered by the United
States of America (USA) in getting the Nuclear Suppliers
Group (NSG) to make exemptions in its guidelines for
India. The two leaders also exchanged views on issues
of international importance including the Doha round,
global energy security and environment. PM addressed
a gathering of Indian community members in New York
on 26 September, 2008 wherein he announced the
opening of two additional Indian Consulates in Atlanta
and Seattle in the USA.

T

he year 2008 was marked by an intensification of the
bilateral engagement between India and the USA.
The signing of the Indo-US civil nuclear Agreement in
Washington on 10 October, 2008 was a culmination of
the civil nuclear energy initiative announced during the
visit of Prime Minister Shri Manmohan Singh to the USA
in July 2005. It has been a symbol of the transformed
nature of the bilateral dialogue and has added strategic
content to the relationship between the world’s oldest
and the largest democracies. It has also opened up vast
opportunities for bilateral economic and high technology
engagement. While economic and commercial ties,
defence cooperation and people to people contacts were
other priority areas of focus in the bilateral agenda, IndoUS consultations on global issues of common concern and
the dialogues, work plans and implementation groups for
bilateral initiatives in energy, education, science and
technology, health, space, agriculture among others
continued to add depth and strengthen the Indo-US
linkages.

Dr. Condoleezza Rice, US Secretary of State, visited New
Delhi from 4-5 October, 2008. External Affairs Minister
Shri Pranab Mukherjee (EAM) and Secretary Rice
reviewed bilateral cooperation in areas of mutual interest
such as high technology cooperation, education and
people to people linkages, and defence relations. EAM,
Shri Pranab Mukherjee conveyed India’s appreciation of
the US Government’s support in bringing the India-US
Civil Nuclear Cooperation Agreement to a conclusion
and in transforming Indo-US relations. They noted that
during the last few years, Indo-US relations had
strengthened and diversified significantly. The two leaders
expressed the hope that successor Governments in India
and the US would further build the bilateral relationship
on the basis of this strong foundation. They also discussed
the security situation in the region and issues of global
concern such as counter-terrorism, climate change, etc.
Secretary Rice called on Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan
Singh and held a meeting with Leader of Opposition, Shri
Lal Krishan Advani.

High Level Visits
External Affairs Minister Shri Pranab Mukherjee visited
Washington DC from 24-25 March, 2008. He met his
counterpart Dr. Condoleeza Rice and also called on
President George Bush. He interacted with a select group
of scholars at the Cranegie Foundation, a Washington
based think tank.
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh (PM) visited
Washington on 25 September, 2008 and met with
President George W. Bush. The two leaders reviewed the
entire gamut of bilateral relations and expressed
satisfaction at the achievements and progress made on
the bilateral agenda that was set out in the Joint Statement
of 18 July, 2005, issued during the visit of PM to
Washington and of 2 March, 2006, issued during the visit
of President Bush to India. They took note of the
strengthening of cooperation in the areas of energy and
environment, defence, counter terrorism, economic
partnership with focus on innovation and knowledge,
health, high technology trade, space, agriculture, climate

PM Dr. Manmohan Singh visited Washington, USA from
14-15 November, 2008 to attend the G-20 Summit. At
the Summit, the leaders of the G-20 countries pledged to
take steps to tackle the global financial crisis and expressed
93

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

Regulatory Commission, USA visited India from 17-21
November, 2008. He attended the IAEA conference on
“Topical issues in Nuclear Installation Safety” in Mumbai
and interacted with the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board
authorities to further bilateral cooperation on nuclear
safety and regulatory issues.

their determination to enhance cooperation and work
together to restore global growth and achieve the required
reforms in the world’s financial systems. A Declaration of
the Summit on Financial Markets and the World Economy
was issued on the occasion.
Dr. Condoleezza Rice, US Secretary of State, visited New
Delhi again from 3-4 December, 2008 to offer condolences
for the victims of the Mumbai terror attack and express
solidarity with India. She met with External Affairs
Minister Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Home Minister, Shri. P.
Chidambaram, and Leader of Opposition, Shri Lal Krishan
Advani and called on Prime Minister Dr. Singh. During
her interaction with the Indian leadership, she offered
the support of the US Government in investigating the
Mumbai attack and in India’s efforts to prevent such
attacks in the future. Secretary Rice reiterated her
Government’s steadfast support to India in fighting the
scourge of terrorism.

Energy Dialogue
The Third meeting of the Steering Committee of the India
US Energy Dialogue took place in New Delhi on April 4,
2008. The Working Groups focusing on (i) Oil and Natural
Gas (ii) Coal (iii) Power and Energy Efficiency and (iv)
New Technologies and Renewable Energy met in New
Delhi from 31 March-3 April, 2008. The two sides looked
forward to a series of time-bound actions in bilateral
energy cooperation towards the common objective of
clean energy, energy efficiency, and energy security while
pursuing the goal of sustainable development.
Trade and Economy
The USA continued to be the largest economic partner
of India. A delegation from the Brookings Institution,
Washington DC led by former Deputy Secretary of State,
Mr. Strobe Talbott visited India from 15-29 January 2008.
A US delegation led by Acting Assistant Trade
Representative, Mr. Clautio Lilienfield held exploratory
talks on bilateral investment treaty from 12-13 February
2008 with the Indian counterparts.

Foreign Secretary, Shri Shiv Shankar Menon visited
Washington on 2 December, 2008 and met with his US
counterpart, Mr. William Burns, Under Secretary for
Political Affairs, US State Department and reviewed IndoUS bilateral relations.
Civil Nuclear Cooperation
India successfully concluded an India specific Safeguards
Agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) on 1 August, 2008 which paved the way for the
USA to approach the 45-nation Nuclear Suppliers Group
(NSG) for an adjustment of the NSG guidelines to enable
its members to enter into civil nuclear cooperation and
trade with India. On 6 September, 2008, the NSG agreed
by consensus to such an adjustment which ended 34 years
of international technology denial and isolation imposed
by the Group on India. With this step completed, as per
the India-US understandings of July 2005 and March
2006, the US Government then took the India-US civil
nuclear agreement to the US Congress for approval. The
US House of Representatives approved the relevant Bill
on the Agreement on 28 September, 2008 and the US
Senate passed it on 1 October, 2008. On 8 October, 2008,
the US President, George W. Bush, signed the legislation
on the Indo-US Civil Nuclear Agreement, approved by
the US Congress, into law. The formal signing of the
Agreement by External Affairs Minister, Shri Pranab
Mukherjee and his US counterpart Secretary of State,
Dr. Condoleezza Rice took place on 10 October, 2008 in
Washington.

US Under Secretary, Department of Treasury, David
McCormick visited India from 22-24 April, 2008 and
discussed bilateral cooperation in the financial sector. Dan
Sullivan, US Assistant Secretary for State for Economic,
Energy and Business Affairs visited India from 21-23 May,
2008.
Commerce & Industry Minister Shri Kamal Nath visited
Washington from 11-12 June, 2008. Shri Kamal Nath met
with US Trade Representative (USTR), Ambassador
Susan C. Schwab on 12 June, 2008 and held discussions
focusing on how to move the Doha Development Agenda
forward. Shri Kamal Nath also met with US Secretary of
Agriculture Mr. Ed Schafer, US Commerce Secretary Mr.
Carlos Gutierrez, Ambassador Rob Portman, former
USTR, Congressman Gary Ackerman, Chairman of the
House Subcommittee on the Middle East and South Asia
and Congressman Jim McDermott, Chairman of the
Congressional Caucus on India and Indian Americans.
A technical level meeting of the Indo-US Financial and
Economic Forum was held in Washington in June 2008.
An Indo-US Bio Pharma Summit was organized by FICCI
in Boston from 12-14 June, 2008. Deputy Chairman

Dr. David E. Klein, Chairman of the US Nuclear

94

The Americas

Business Council (USIBC) and the Nuclear Energy
Institute, Washington visited New Delhi, Mumbai and
Hyderabd from 11-17 January, 2009 to explore business
opportunities in the civil nuclear energy sector in India.
The delegation called on External Affairs Minister Shri
Pranab Mukherjee, MoS (PMO) Shri Prithviraj Chavan
and Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy Dr. Anil
Kakodkar. The delegation attended the CII-USIBDC Joint
Working Group on civil nuclear energy meeting and met
with several Indian public sector undertakings engaged
in the energy sector.

Planning Commission, Shri Montek Singh Ahluwalia,
Indian Co-chair of the Indo-US Economic Dialogue
visited Washington from 8-10 April, 2008 and held
discussions with his counterpart Mr. Dan Price, Deputy
National Security Advisor and Assistant to the US
President for International Economic Policy.
The second round of exploratory talks on the proposed
Indo-US Bilateral Investment Treaty was held in
Washington from 11-13 June, 2008.
The second round of informal discussions on the IndoUS social security cooperation to pave the way for
negotiating a Totalisation Agreement between the US
Social Security Administration and the Indian Ministry
of Overseas Indian Affairs took place in Washington from
24-26 June, 2008.

Defence Relations
The India-US Defence Procurement and Production
Group met from 7-11 August, 2008 in Delhi to discuss
various issues related to defence procurement from USA.
Raksha Mantri, Shri A. K. Antony visited USA from 811 September, 2008, to reciprocate the visit of US Defence
Secretary, Robert Gates to India in February 2008. He
interacted with the US Defence Secretary, the US
Secretary of State and the US National Security Adviser
to review ongoing bilateral and discuss the regional
security situation.

The Sixth Indo-US Information and Communication
Technology Working Group held its meeting in
Washington from 30 June-2 July, 2008. Bilateral issues
concerning IT, ITES, E-Commerce and the broadcasting
sector were discussed at the meeting.
A Renewable Energy Trade delegation from the USA led
by Mr. David Bohigan, Deputy Assistant Secretary,
Department of Commerce visited India from 7-12
September, 2008.

India and USA conducted a joint search mission with
participation of the US Joint Pacific Action Command
(JPAC) in Arunachal Pradesh from 15 October-21
November, 2008 to retrieve remains of US airmen who
were lost in plane crashes over the area during the Second
World War. General George W. Casey, US Chief of Army
Staff visited Delhi and Agra from 16-18 October, 2008 at
the invitation of his counterpart and interacted with the
Chief of Army Staff and Defence Secretary. He visited
the 14 th Corps in Northern Headquarters. The visit
provided an opportunity to review ongoing defence
cooperation with USA.

USA was the partner country at the First Biennial Civil
Aviation Show – India Aviation 2008 held in Hyderabad
from 15-18 October, 2008. A large US delegation
including 20 US aviation companies participated in the
show exhibiting products and services in varied sectors of
the aviation industry. The second meeting of the IndiaUS Aviation Steering Committee was held on 14 October
at Hyderabad. The Federal Aviation Administration, USA
held a bilateral consultation with the Directorate General
of Civil Aviation, Government of India in New Delhi from
5-6 November, 2008. During the consultations, the two
sides discussed aviation safety issues.

India and USA held bilateral joint exercises, such as Yudh
Abhyas (Army, Hawaii, USA October-November 2008),
Vajra Prahar (Army, Vairengate, India and Guam, USA,
August 2008), Malabar (Navy, off Goa, October 2008)
and Habunag (Visakhapatnam, September 2008). India
also participated in the multilateral air exercise, RED
FLAG at the Nellis Airforce Base, USA in August 2008.

US Assistant Trade Representative Mr. Michael Delaney
visited New Delhi from 4-5 November, 2008. He
interacted with officers in the Ministries of Commerce,
Finance and External Affairs.

Admiral Michael Mullen, Chairman of US Joint Chiefs
of Staff Committee visited India from 3-4 December, 2008
and exchanged views with Raksha Mantri, Chief of Naval
Staff and the National Security Adviser.

The 7 th meeting of the Indo-US Information and
Technology Working Group was held on 10 December,
2008 in New Delhi. Discussion centred on amendments
to the IT Act 2000, implementation of a flexible, robust
Information Technology Agreement (ITA) and issues
related to taxes on computer hardware and software.

Engagement on global issues
The sixth meeting of the US-India Global Issues Forum
was held on 24 April, 2008 in New Delhi. Discussions

A civil nuclear trade delegation led by the US India
95

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

were held to strengthen cooperation on a range of global
issues of common concern such as promotion of
democracy and human rights, controlling avian flu and
mitigating a future pandemic, accelerating polio
eradication, addressing climate change, food security,
cooperation in disaster management, protecting
endangered wildlife and promoting science and
technology cooperation.

from the Ministry of Chemicals, Ministry of Health,
Department of Bio-technology and Embassy of India,
Washington participated in this meeting. The delegation
from the Ministry of Health also interacted with the US
Food and Drug Administration in Washington.
A delegation led by the Deputy Assistant Secretary, US
Department of Commerce, Mrs Holly Vineyard visited
India from 23-27 August, 2008 for strengthening
cooperation in the field of bio -technology,
pharmaceuticals and medical devices. A roundtable on
Technology Transfer was organized by the Department of
Commerce and US-India Business Council on the
occasion.

Mr. James Connaughton, Chairman, Council on
Environmental Quality, The White House, USA visited
New Delhi and Kolkata from 15-18 June, 2008 to discuss
Climate Change issues with the leadership in India. He
met with Minister of State for Environment and Special
Envoy of Prime Minister on Climate Change Shri Shyam
Saran.

Education Cooperation
An agreement between the Government of the United
States of America and the Government of India for
Financing Certain Educational Exchange Programmes was
signed on 4 July, 2008. This Agreement supersedes the
Fulbright Agreement revised in 1963 (after it was first signed
in 1950 between PM (late) Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and
the then US Ambassador to India, Mr. Loy Henderson).
The new Agreement provides for expansion of the existing
programme with, for the first time (i) a direct financial
contribution by the Government of India, (ii) Government
of India co-chairing the Board of Directors of the
Foundation and (iii) participating equally in policy and
decision making on the exchange of Indian and US scholars
under the India-US Programme. The Foundation will now
be called the US India Educational Foundation awarding
“Fulbright-Jawaharlal Nehru Scholarships and Grants”.

The Eighth meeting of India-US Joint Working Group on
Peacekeeping was held in Washington from 12-13 May,
2008. The tenth meeting of the India-US Joint Working
Group on Terrorism was held on 25 August, 2008 in Delhi.
Ambassador John Herbst, Coordinator, Office of
Reconstruction and Stabilization, US State Department
visited New Delhi from 6-7 November, 2008. He
interacted with senior officials in the Ministry of External
Affairs during which he gave a briefing on the ongoing
reconstruction and stabilization efforts of the US
Government in post conflict and conflict ridden societies
such as Iraq and Afghanistan.
Mr. John D. Negroponte, US Deputy Secretary of State,
visited India on 12 December 2008 to further Indo-US
strategic partnership and to discuss bilateral cooperation
on counter-terrorism. He called on the Minister of
External Affairs and exchanged views with Foreign
Secretary and National Security Adviser.

Science and Technology
During the visit of Minister for Science and Technology
and Earth Sciences, Shri Kapil Sibal to the Massachusetts
Institute of technology (MIT), USA on 13 June, 2008,
the possibility of cooperation between the Department of
Science and Technology (DST) and MIT in the area of
energy was discussed. MIT has established a program
called MIT Energy Initiative. The two sides have proposed
to form a group of three members each to work out the
details of this initiative. Dr. R. Ramachandaran, former
Secretary, DST has been requested to lead the Indian side.
An agreement to create an Indo-US Endowment Fund
to strengthen scientific cooperation is under consideration
of the two sides. An Memorandum of Understanding
(MoU) between the DST and the Ohio State University
is under consideration and likely to be signed soon. IndoUS science and technology cooperation continued under
the various bilateral frameworks established for the
purpose such as the Indo-US Science and Technology

Mr. Michael McConnell, Director of the US Directorate
of National Intelligence visited India from 22-23
December, 2008. He called on the Home Minister and
had discussions with the National Security Adviser on
India-US cooperation in security and counter terrorism.
High Technology Cooperation
The sixth India US High Technology Cooperation Group
(HTCG) meeting was held in New Delhi from 28-29
February. The meeting was co-chaired by the Foreign
Secretary on the Indian side and Mr. Mario Mancuso,
Under Secretary Bureau of Security and Industry,
Department of Commerce on the US side.
A mini India-US High Technology Cooperation Group
meeting was held on the sidelines of the BIO 2008
Conference in San Diego, USA on 18 June, 2008. Officials
96

Secretary of State of the United States of America, Dr. Condoleezza Rice meeting the Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh,
in New Delhi on 4 October, 2008.

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh with the President of the Republic of Chile, Dr. Michelle Bachelet at the
delegation level talks, in New Delhi on March 17, 2009.

97

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

Agreement, the Indo-US Science and Technology Forum
and the partnership between the DST and the National
Science foundation, USA.

India on 2 December, 2008. They called on the Prime
Minister and Minister of External Affairs and exchanged
views on Indo-US relations.

The Tenth Board meeting of the Indo-US Science and
Technology Forum was held on 8 December, 2008 at IIT
Kanpur. The Board discussed the achievements of the
Forum in promoting bilateral science and technology
collaboration and the agenda for future cooperation.

Agriculture Cooperation
The sixth India US Agricultural Knowledge Initiative
Board Meeting was held in New Delhi from 15-16 April,
2008. The Board discussed cooperation in areas of Human
Resources and Institutional Capacity Building, Agro
Processing and Marketing, Water Management and Biotechnology.

Congressional/Parliamentary Visits
Senators of the US Congress visited India on 20 February
for the purpose of holding consultations with Government
of India Officials and interact with Indian Experts on
South Asia.

Canada
India’s relations with Canada were substantively
reinvigorated during the year with the Canadian
Government under Prime Minister Stephen Harper
continuing to accord Canada’s relations with India the
status of a foreign policy priority.

US Speaker, Ms. Nancy Pelosi, visited India from 19-25
March accompanied by a ten member congressional
delegation. She called on the Prime Minister and met the
EAM and Special Envoy on Climate Change Shri Shyam
Sharan. She visited Dharamshala and met His Holiness
Dalai Lama.

Head of Government Interaction
Prime Minister met his Canadian counterpart, PM
Stephen Harper, on the sidelines of the G-8 Summit in
Hokkaido (Japan) in July 2008. The two leaders reviewed
the bilateral relationship in areas of mutual interest,
exchanged views on issues of common concern and
reaffirmed their commitment to broadening the scope of
the India-Canada bilateral engagement.

Three US Congressional delegations visited India in the
last week of May 2008. Senator Benjamin Nelson led a
congressional delegation from 25-26 May, 2008,
accompanied by three Congressmen. Senator Robert
Casey and Senator Russell Feingold visited India from 2830 May, 2008. These Congressional delegations interacted
with senior leadership in India including National Security
Adviser, Minister of External Affairs and Raksha Mantri
to seek our perceptions about the region.

Canadian Prime Minister telephoned PM on 3 November
2008 to discuss the global financial crisis. The two leaders
met on 15 November, 2008 on the sidelines of the G-20
meeting in Washington.

An Indian Parliamentary delegation led by Minister of
Overseas Indian Affairs and Parliamentary affairs Shri
Vayalar Ravi visited New York, Washington and Los
Angeles, USA on a goodwill mission from 13-23
September, 2008.

Visits
Canada’s Foreign Minister Mr. Maxime Bernier visited
India from 10-12 January. Canada’s Deputy Minister,
Citizenship and immigration, Mr. Richard B Fadden visited
India from 12-18 January. Minister for National Defence
and Minister for the Atlantic Canada opportunities
agency, Mr. Peter Mackay visited India from 18-22
February.

Senator John Kerry, Chairman of US Senate Foreign
Relations Committee visited India from 13-15 December,
2008 and engaged the Indian political leadership on
counter-terrorism and the future of Indo-US relations.
He called on the Prime Minister, Home Minister, Minister
of External Affairs, Leader of Opposition and the National
Security Adviser.

Secretary of State (Foreign Affairs and International
Trade) Ms. Helena Guergis visited India from 15-16 April,
2008. While in New Delhi, Secretary Guergis met with
Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Anand Sharma,
Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports, Shri M S Gill, and
Minister of State for Industry. Shri Ashwini Kumar. Issues
of mutual interest were taken up for discussion during
her visit.

Senator John McCain, the highest ranking Republican in
the Senate Armed Services Committee, Senator Joseph
Lieberman (Senior member of the Senate Armed Services
Committee, Chairman of Senate Homeland Security &
government Affairs Committee) and Senator Lindsey
Graham (member of Senate Armed Services Committee
and the Senate Select Intelligence Committee) visited

Shri M.K Narayanan, National Security Adviser, visited
Canada from 28-29 July, 2008 to seek Canada’s support
98

The Americas

Deputy Premier and Minister for International and
Intergovernmental Relations, Government of Alberta, Mr.
Ron Stevens, visited India from 7-16 January, 2009 to
attend the PetroTech 2009. He met with Minister for
Petroleum and Natural Gas and Secretary (West).

for the India-specific safeguards agreement with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the
waiver from the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) of which
Canada is a member. NSA met with Canadian Minister
of Defence, Mr. Peter MacKay, Minister for Public Safety,
Mr. Stockwell Day, and Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr.
David Emerson, besides calling on Prime Minister Stephen
Harper. India and Canada opened a new chapter in their
relations when Canada supported India’s Safeguard
Agreement with the IAEA and it also joined the NSG’s
consensus decision to allow nuclear trade with India.

Minister for International Trade, and Science &
Technology, Government of Canada, Mr. Stockwell Day,
visited India from 16-23 January, 2009. He met with
Ministers of Commerce and Industry and Science &
Technology, NSA, and Chief Ministers of Andhra Pradesh
and Maharashtra.

A delegation of 27 senior Public Service executives visited
India from 18-22 November, 2008, under the aegis of the
Canadian School of Public Service’s Advanced Leadership
Program.

Foreign Office Consultations
India-Canada Foreign Office Consultations (FOC) took
place on 12 December, 2008 in Ottawa, Canada. The FOC
was co-chaired by Secretary (West), Shri Nalin Surie on
the Indian side and by Mr. Leonard Edwards, Deputy
Minister, Department of Foreign Affairs and International
Trade on the Canadian side. Talks were held on bilateral,
regional as well as multilateral issues.

Dr. Stephen Inglis, Director General of Research &
Collection, Canadian Museum of Civilization visited India
from 24 September-7 October, 2008 under the
Distinguished Visitors Programme. During his visit, he
made presentations at the National Museum, New Delhi,
Benaras Hindu University and the Department of History,
Kolkata University and held discussions to enhance IndiaCanada linkages in heritage and culture. He also
participated in a Conference in Khajuraho on the
‘Indigenous Art and Economic Development in Canada
and India’. During his stay in India, Dr. Inglis was also
joined for a week by Dr. Victor Rabinovitch, President
and the CEO of the Canadian Museum of Civilization.

Trade and Economy
Mme Marie-Lucie Morin, Canada’s Deputy Minister of
International Trade visited India from 6-12 September,
2008, to participate in the annual Trade Policy
Consultations with the Ministry of Commerce and
Industry. Commerce Secretary and Mme Marie-Lucie
Morin co-chaired the Fifth Round of India-Canada Trade
Policy Consultations in New Delhi on 12 September, 2008.
The desire to remove Non-Tariff barriers and other
impediments to trade and promotion of relations in sectors
as diverse as diamonds, clean technologies, new and
renewable energy, coir, recognition of certificates of export
inspection agencies, mutual recognition of technical
qualifications, liberalized business visa regime, etc. were
discussed during the Trade Policy Consultations. It was
also decided to explore commercial opportunities through
participation in trade fairs, science & technology
collaboration, use of Atlantic Gateway ports, investment
in Indian SEZs, agriculture, infrastructure, civil aviation
sectors, etc. The Canadian side announced the opening
of additional trade offices in India.

Canada’s International Development Research Centre
(IDRC) organized - the India Lecture series in 2008 which
included speakers Shri M. J. Akbar (on the Art of
Turbulence), Shri Pratap Bhanu Mehta (on India’s Great
Transformation), Ms. Alka Acharya (on India-China
relations) and Shri Rajeev Bhargava (on Multiple
conceptions of Secularism).
Minister for Citizenship, Immigration and
Multiculturalism, Government of Canada, Mr. Jason
Kenney, visited India from 11-18 January, 2009. He met
with EAM, Chief Ministers of Punjab and Haryana and
the Governor of Maharashtra.
Minister for Agriculture, Government of Canada, Mr.
Reginald Ritz, visited India from 10-14 January, 2009.
During his visit, an MoU between the Ministry of
Agriculture, Government of India and the Department
of Agriculture and Agri-Food, Government of Canada,
on Cooperation in the Field of Agriculture and Allied
Sectors was signed. Mr. Ritz also met Commerce and
Industry Minister.

Mr. Ken Sunquist, Assistant Deputy Minister in Canada’s
Department for Foreign Affairs and International Trade,
who accompanied Minister Morin, reviewed bilateral
relations during his meetings with officials in the Ministry
of External Affairs.
Responding to the un-tapped potential in engaging with
Canada, a G-8 and highly resource rich trading economy
99

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

and obvious complementarities with the emerging
economy of India, the India-Canada CEOs’ Roundtable
recommended to the two Governments commencement
of negotiations for a broad based Free Trade Agreement.
The CEOs’ report was tabled on the sidelines of the Fifth
Round of Trade Policy consultations which were held in
Delhi on 12 September, 2008.
An official delegation from the Canadian Province of
Manitoba led by Mr. Barry Todd and Ms. Doris GingeraBeauchemin – the Deputy Minister and Assistant Deputy
Minister, respectively, of Agriculture, Food and Rural
Initiatives of Manitoba, visited India from 27 November1 December, 2008. The delegation met with officials in
the Ministry of Food Processing Industries, Government
of India, and the Ministries of Agriculture of the
Governments of Punjab and Haryana, to discuss the
interest of Manitoba province in pursuing, within different
regions of India, Food Development Centre projects for
food processing.
Given the economic complementarities between the two
countries, a bilateral trade target of 20 billion Canadian
dollars over five years has been set by the two countries.
While Canada is a resource-rich country and amongst
the largest producers of potash, oil seeds, oil & gas,
uranium, etc. and has cutting edge technology in life
science, mining, aviation and energy sectors, India is a
huge market and its economy is on a high growth
trajectory. During the first nine months of 2008 (Jan-Sep),
the bilateral trade between India and Canada stood at
3.07 billion Canadian dollars with India’s exports to
Canada at 1.59 billion Canadian dollars and imports at
1.48 billion Canadian dollars. The major export
commodities from India to Canada are cotton, drugs,
pharmaceuticals, fine chemicals, machinery and
instruments, garments, gems and jewellery and rice. India’s
major items of imports from Canada are pulses, wheat,
fertilizers, electronic goods, ores, metal scrap, transport
equipment and newsprint. Canadian entities - SNC-Lavlin
and Bombardier - emerged as among the major investors
in the infrastructure sector in India. Both sides increased
their presence in the financial services sector in India and
Canada. Canada opened new trade offices in India.
Science & Technology
Minister of Science and Technology, Shri Kapil Sibal
visited Canada in June 2008 and reviewed ongoing
cooperation in the area of science and technology while
interacting with senior Canadian interlocutors. During
the visit, both sides announced the launch of ten new
India-Canada Science and Technology (S&T) joint
initiatives worth $17 million. Under this eight projects

have been finalized in the fields of agriculture,
environment, food processing, health, IT, energy,
aeronautics and watershed management and two are
related to partnership development activities. Under the
latter, the University of Toronto in collaboration with Tata
Institute of Fundamental Research will undertake projects
of mutual benefits. Dr. Joseph Hulse, Canadian biochemist
and one of the world’s leading experts in bio-technology
received the Padma Shree 2008 Award from the President
of India on 8 May, 2008.
Canada was a partner country in India’s Technology
Conference with special emphasis on clean technologies
held on 5 December, 2008.
Education
Canada was a partner country at the Summit on Higher
Education organized by the Federation of Indian Chamber
of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) and held in New Delhi
from 24-26 November, 2008. Dr. R. P. Agarwal, Secretary,
Ministry of Human Resource Development visited Canada
from 11-18 June, 2008 to participate in the Annual
Meeting of the Shastri Indo-Canadian Institute. The
Indian Council of Cultural Relations, New Delhi has
approved the establishment of one chair on Indian studies
in the University of Toronto.
Pravasi Bharatiya Samman 2009
Canadian Member of Parliament, Mr. Deepak Obhrai,
visited India to attend the Pravasi Bharatiya Divas 2009,
and was awarded the Pravasi Bharatiya Samman 2009.

Latin America & the Caribbean (LAC)
Our engagement with the 39 countries and dependent
territories of the Latin American and Caribbean countries
continued to strengthen during the year. Cross-sectoral
dialogue was facilitated at various levels and a total of 14
agreements and MoUs were signed with these countries.
Bilateral trade to the tune of US$ 11.69 billion was
transacted between India and LAC countries during 200708. The signing of a JV agreement between the national
oil company (PDVSA) of Venezuela and ONGC Videsh
for oil production and development activities in the San
Cristobal oilfield in eastern Venezuela, acquisition of the
rights of Encana Corporation of Canada in ten offshore
blocks in Brazil by the BPRL-Videocon JV, waiver of
commercial debt and interest to the tune of Rs. 128 crores
owed by Cuba to India and sale of seven Advanced Light
(Dhruv) helicopters by HAL to Ecuador were among the
important milestones in our economic/commercial
relations with LAC countries. Line of Credit assistance
to the tune of US$ 160 million was announced and

100

The Americas

disaster relief to the extent of US$ 2.125 million was
disbursed. As part of our Development Partnership
initiative, IT Centres were set up in three Latin American
countries. A total of 382 ITEC scholarships were
announced and utilized by candidates from these
countries. High level dialogue was facilitated during the
visit of President of India to Brazil, Mexico and Chile in
April 2008 and during the visit of the SICA Foreign
Ministers /Vice Ministers to India in June 2008. FM of
Ecuador visited Delhi in November 2008 for bilateral talks
with EAM Shri Pranab Mukherjee. PM Dr. Manmohan
Singh met Prime Minister of Jamaica on the sidelines of
UNGA 2008 and President of Mexico on the sidelines of
G-8-05 meeting in Japan in July 2008. EAM Shri Pranab
Mukherjee also held bilateral discussions with Finance
Minister of T&T on the sidelines of UNGA 2008 in New
York.

Antigua & Barbuda
Dr. Leon Erool Cort, Minister for Finance & Economy of
Antigua & Barbuda visited India as Chief Guest at a
special function at the Manipal University in October
2008. He met MoS Shri Anand Sharma and held
discussions on various bilateral and multilateral issues.
Six Indian consultants handling matters pertaining to
treasury, finance and tax issues visited Antigua & Barbuda
in 2008. A feasibility study for setting up of an IT centre
by India was also completed. In an equity buy-out, Manipal
Education Trust established management control over the
American University in Antigua in December 2008.

Argentina
MoS for External Affairs, Sh. Anand Sharma visited
Argentina from 7-12 February. He had talks with the
Foreign Minister and the Vice Foreign Minister. During
this visit, a new Chancery of the Indian Mission in
Argentina was jointly inaugurated by the MoS and the
Argentine Foreign Minister
Minister of Textiles, Shri Shankarsinh Vaghela, led a GoI
handicrafts delegation to Argentina from 6-9 April, 2008
and held discussions with the Argentine Economy
Minister, Mr. Martin Lusteau, on 8 April, 2008.
Commerce Secretary visited Buenos Aires on 9-10 June,
2008. Besides bilateral discussions, a seminar on “Business
with India” was organized and an India-Argentina
Chamber of Commerce and Industry was launched on
the occasion.
Sports ties between India and Argentina received a boost
when senior and junior Indian women hockey teams

visited Argentina and played friendly matches there.
Indian Army polo team visited Argentina from 26
November- 6 December, 2008. Diego Maradona visited
Kolkata in December 2008, at the invitation of the Indian
Football Academy to open a Sports complex named after
him.
Bilateral trade between the two countries in 2008 touched
US$1.4 billion with Indian exports registering an increase
of 28% in 2008 and imports declining by 5% in comparison
with the trade transacted in 2007.

Bolivia
Bilateral relations with Bolivia remained cordial. Jindal
Steel and Power Limited, which had been allocated the
US $ 2.1 billion Mutun iron ore project in Bolivia,
completed preliminary exploratory, licensing and
infrastructure building processes. Government of India
provided cash assistance of US$ 100,000 to the
Government of Bolivia as disaster relief assistance in the
wake of floods due to the “La Nina” climatic phenomenon.

Brazil
EAM, Shri Pranab Mukherjee visited Brazil from 16-18
February and held detailed discussions with Brazilian
Foreign Minister, Mr. Celso Amorin on the state of
bilateral relations and the ongoing co-operation EAM also
called on President Mr. Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, and
President of the Lower House of Brazilian Parliament, Mr.
Arlindo Chinaglia. During the visit, three MoUs, on the
Co-operation in the field of infrastructure, combating
hunger and Poverty and on Co-operation in Sports and
Youth Affairs were signed.
President of India, Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil,
accompanied by Minister of State for Renewable Energy,
Shri Vilas Muttemwar and three Members of Parliament,
paid a state visit to Brazil from 13-16 April, 2008. During
the visit, President met President Mr. Luiz Inacio Lula da
Silva. Four agreements - an Extradition Treaty, an MoU
for Cooperation in Oil and Natural Gas, an MoU on Civil
Defence and Humanitarian Assistance and an MoU for
Cooperation in Agriculture and Allied Sectors, were
signed.
Brazilian Minister of Health, Mr. Jose Temporao visited
India on 28 July-1 August, 2008. During the visit, he held
talks with Minister for Health & Family Welfare, Shri
Anbumani Ramdoss.
Growing bilateral ties between the two countries received
a further boost with the visit of President Lula to India in
October 2008 on the occasion of the Third IBSA Summit.

101

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

He was accompanied by the Brazilian Minister of External
Relations, Mr. Celso Amorim, Minister of Science &
Technology, Mr. Sergio Machado Rezende, Minister for
Development, industry and Foreign Trade, Mr. Miguel
Jorge and Minister of the Secretariat for Women Policies,
Ms. Nilceia Freire.
Shri P. Chidambaram, Finance Minister visited Sao Paulo
from 6-10 November, 2008 to participate in the G-4, BRIC
and G-20 meeting of Finance Ministers and Central Bank
Governors.
The first meeting of the Trade Monitoring Mechanism
(TMM) between India and Brazil was held on 3 February,
2009. The meeting was co-chaired by Commerce
Secretary of India and Executive Secretary of the Brazilian
Ministry of Development, Industry and Foreign Trade.
Various trade-related matters were reviewed and prospects
of strengthening ongoing bilateral trade were discussed.
Trade between India and Brazil, which touched US$ 3.1
billion during January-December 2007, increased further
to US$ 4.66 billion in 2008.

Chile
President of India, Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil paid a
State visit to Chile from 20-23 April, 2008. The President
announced a one-time donation of US$ 65,000 for
maintenance of the Plaza da la India monument, where
statues of three Indian leaders are installed. During the
visit, an amount of US$ 19500 was gifted for Science Lab
to the Republic of India School, Santiago. Besides bilateral
discussions with the President of Chile, the President also
met with the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of
Santiago. The Mayor of Santiago presented our President
with a key of the city of Santiago. President also met with
Presidents of the Chilean Senate and Chamber of
Deputies. President was also conferred a Doctorate degree
by the University of Chile. Two Agreements (Air Service
Agreement and Agreement on Cooperation in Science
and Technology) and two MoUs (on Cooperation in
Sports and Joint Research in Antarctica) were signed
during the visit.
At the invitation of Rashtrapatiji, Dr. Michelle Bachelet,
President of Chile paid a state visit to India from 16-20
March, 2009. She was accompanied by Chilean Minister
of Agriculture, two vice Ministers, ten Parliamentarians
and a delegation of 25 businessmen. The visit coincided
with the 60th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic
relations between both countries. President Bachelet had
bilateral talks with PM. Vice-President of India, EAM,
Leader of the Opposition and Chairperson UPA called on

her. During the visit, four Agreements/MoUs i.e. MoU on
Cooperation in the field of new and renewable energy;
Exchange Programme on Cooperation in the field of
Education; Agreement on Cooperation in the Exploration
and Utilization of Outer Space for Peaceful Purposes; and
an MoU on Cooperation in the Field of Geology and
Mineral Resources were signed. A Joint Press Statement
was issued after bilateral talks with PM. The Chilean
delegation also had extensive interaction with the Indian
business community during business seminars at Delhi,
Mumbai and Chennai. The University of Madras conferred
an honoris causa doctorate degree on President Bachelet.

Colombia
Colombian Minister of Commerce, Industry & Tourism,
Mr. Luis Guillermo Plata, accompanied by a delegation of
businessmen, visited India from 26-30 April, 2008 and
called on Minister of Commerce and Industry, Minister
of Finance and MoS Shri E. Ahamed. Issues pertaining
to bilateral trade, investment and the finalization of the
treaties on Protection and Promotion of Investments and
Avoidance of Double Taxation were discussed.
In September 2008, the First Colombia-India Chamber
of Commerce was launched in Bogota.
Minister of Energy and Mines of Colombia, Mr. Hernan
Martinez, visited India from 3-7 September, 2008 and met
with the Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas and
signed an MoU on Cooperation in the Hydrocarbons
sector. He also met Minister of State (Mines) and Indian
businessmen. OVL of India secured three concessions for
exploring gas fields offshore in the Caribbean, and two oil
fields onshore, through the bidding process launched by
the Colombian government.
India signed an MoU on Defence Cooperation with
Colombia on 4 February, 2009. The Deputy Chief of Air
Force of Colombia visited the International Aerospace
Exposition-Aero 2009 held at Bengaluru from 11-15
February, 2009.

Costa Rica
Foreign Minister, Mr. Bruno Stagno Ugarte, visited India
as part of the delegation of SICA Foreign Ministers on 10
June, 2008. He held discussions with EAM and signed an
MoU on bilateral Foreign Office Consultations.

Cuba
In order to revive trade relations between the two
countries, Government of India waived outstanding
Cuban commercial debt and interest [to the tune of Rs.

102

President of the Republic of Chile, Dr. Michelle Bachelet meeting the President, Pratibha Devisingh Patil,
in New Delhi on 17 March, 2009.

Minister of Foreign Affairs of Ecuador, Maria Isabel Salvador, meeting the Union Minister of External Affairs, Shri Pranab
Mukherjee, in New Delhi on 17 November, 2008

103

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

128 crores] owed by Cuba to India. The waiver will
facilitate allocation of credit facilities and insurance cover
by EXIM Bank and Export Credit Guarantee Corporation
(ECGC) to Indian companies doing business with Cuba.
A 19-member Cuban business delegation led by Mr.
Eduardo Escandell Amador, Vice Minister, Ministry of
Foreign Trade visited India from 15 May-1 June, 2008. An
Indian business delegation participated in the 26th Havana
International Trade Fair from 2-5 November, 2008.
Bilateral relations in the energy sector were strengthened
with the finalization of the India-Cuba hydrocarbon
Agreement for cooperation in the oil and gas sector. This
was finalized at a meeting between the Minister of
Petroleum and Natural Gas, Shri Murli Deora and his
Cuban counterpart, Ms. Yadira Garcia Vera, Minister of
Basic Industry, on 30 June, 2008 at Madrid, Spain on the
occasion of the 19th World Petroleum Congress. ONGC
Videsh Limited (OVL) already has stakes in eight
exploration blocks in Cuba.
A three-member delegation from the Indian Department
of Bio-technology visited Cuba from 19-23 December,
2008 for discussing possibilities of strengthening ongoing
co-operation in the field of biotechnology.
Government of India approved extension of the India–
Cuba Knowledge Centre project until February 2010
where 800 Cubans have already been trained in IT
skills.

Ecuador
Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs of Ecuador, Mr. Jose
Valencia, held Foreign Office Consultations (FOC) with
Secretary (West) in Delhi on 18 July, 2008 and discussed
a wide range of bilateral matters. He also called on
MoS(EA) and MoS (Mines).
The Foreign Minister of Ecuador, Ms. Maria Isabel
Salvador, visited India from 16-17 November, 2008 and
held discussions with EAM. An MoU for promoting
Cooperation in Agriculture and the Cultural Exchange
Programme for 2009-11 were signed during the visit.
Minister Salvador also called on Raksha Mantri.
Ecuador awarded a contract to Hindustan Aeronautics
Limited for supply of seven Advanced Light (Dhruv)
helicopters to the Ecuadorian Air Force.
General Rodrigo Bohorquez, Chief of the Ecuadorian Air
Force, visited the International Aerospace ExpositionAero 2009 held at Bengaluru from 11-15 February,
2009.

El Salvador
An IT Training Centre was established in San Salvador
in May 2008. El Salvador opened its first resident Mission
in New Delhi in April 2008, and Ms. Patricia Figueroa
presented her credentials as the first Ambassador of El
Salvador to the President in May 2008.

Grenada
An MoU was signed with the Government of Grenada
on 21 October, 2008 for setting up an IT Centre at St.
George’s.

Guyana
The Fourth India-Guyana Joint Commission Meeting was
held in Georgetown, Guyana on 14 May, 2008. An
additional line of credit of US$ 50 million was extended
for promoting cooperation in new priority sectors such as
mining, energy, oil and hydrocarbons, infrastructure, high
technology, ICT and agriculture. MoS, Shri Anand
Sharma held bilateral discussions with the President and
the Prime Minister of Guyana where views on bilateral,
regional and international issues of interest were
exchanged. The Guyanese side was led by Dr. Henry B.
Jeffrey, Minister of Foreign Trade and International
cooperation.

Haiti
A 140-member Formed Police Unit (FPU) from India
joined the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) to participate in ongoing international
efforts for ensuring a safe environment in Haiti.
Under the IBSA Trilateral Initiative, a Solid Waste
Management Project was inaugurated in Haiti on 14
December, 2008. This project offers good potential for
generating employment for Haitians in accordance with
IBSA guidelines and supports India’s objectives for
promoting South-South Co-operation.

Honduras
Defense Minister, Aristides Mejia visited India from 2025 April, 2008 for discussions with Indian companies such
as BEL, BEML, Ashok Leyland and the EXIM Bank of
India which were involved in executing the US $30 million
Line of Credit offered by GoI to Honduras. An IT Training
Centre was established by GoI in Tegucigalpa in May 2008.

Jamaica
An MoU for setting up an IT center in Kingston with
Indian assistance was signed. This center is expected to
be operational in the first quarter of 2009. Possibilities of
cooperation in the solar energy sector, vocational and

104

President Pratibha Devisingh Patil meeting the President of Mexico, Felipe Calderon Hinojosa,
at the Los Pinos in Mexico on 17 April, 2008.

105

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

educational training and in the IT sector are currently
under consideration.

Mexico
President of India paid a State Visit to Mexico from 16-20
April, 2008. A CII business delegation also visited Mexico
on the occasion of President’s visit. Two agreements,
pertaining to air services and cooperation in the nonconventional energy sources, were signed during the visit.
Delegations led by Shri Dinesh Rai, Secretary, Ministry
of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, Shri Rakesh
Vaid, Chairman, Apparel Export Promotion Council
(AEPC) and Shri K. Vijay Mani, Executive Director of
Synthetic and Rayon Textiles Export Promotion Council
(SRTEPC) visited Mexico for strengthening interaction
in sectors handled by these organizations. A delegation
of the National Defence College of India headed by Air
Vice -Marshal Shankar Mani, visited Mexico for
discussions with their counterparts.
Shri Abumani Ramadoss, Union Minister for Health and
Family Welfare, Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar, Minister for
Panchayati Raj and Development of North-East Region,
Shri V. N. Kaila, Controller General of Accounts, Ministry
of Finance, Shri Ravi Dhingra, Secretary, Inter-State
Council, Ministry of Home Affairs visited Mexico to
attend international conferences on AIDS Conference
Decentralization, Local Power and Women’s Rights, Plan
Accounting and Finance Management Systems and the
fourth meeting of the Strategic Council of the Forum of
Federations.

Nicaragua
An IT Training Centre was established by GoI in Managua
in June 2008. The Centre was formally inaugurated by
Ambassador of India and the Foreign Minister of
Nicaragua on 16 June, 2008.

Panama
The IT Training Centre, set up by Government of India
in 2005, in Panama City, was handed over to local
Panamanian authorities in August 2008. During their twoyear term, three India-based TCS instructors trained more
than 1300 Panamanian nationals in basic, intermediate
and advanced computer courses.

Suriname
The Fourth India-Suriname JCM held in Paramaribo in
May 2008. MoS (AS) and the Foreign Minister of
Suriname, Mrs. Lygia Kraag-Keteldijk co-chaired the

meeting. An additional Line of Credit of US$ 30 million
was announced for strengthening cooperation in new
priority areas such as mining, infrastructure development,
pharmaceuticals and generic medicines, banking and
financial services, renewable energy, satellite linking,
agricultural research.
A fact-finding trade mission from the Association of Small
and Medium Entrepreneurs in Suriname (AKMOS) and
Suriname-India Investment & Trade Promotion
Organisation (SITPO) visited India in November/
December 2008. Besides holding a seminar on “Business
opportunities in Suriname”, it signed an MoU with the
PHD Chamber and FISME.
The Vice-President of the Republic of Suriname, Mr.
Ramdien Sardjoe, visited India as the Chief Guest at the
Seventh Pravasi Bharatiya Divas, held in Chennai from
7-9 January, 2009.
Mr. Ivan Christian Fernald, Minister of Defence of the
Republic of Suriname, attended Aero India 2009 held at
Bengaluru from 11-15 February, 2009.

Trinidad & Tobago
On the sidelines of the UNGA 2008 meetings, EAM, Shri
Pranab Mukherjee held bilateral talks with Foreign
Minister of Trinidad & Tobago (T&T) on 29 September,
2008 at New York. Besides reviewing bilateral relations,
the two leaders exchanged views on regional and
international matters of mutual interest. An Indian trade
mission, organized by the T&T High Commission in New
Delhi, visited T & T in June 2008.
ONGC Videsh (OVL) and Mittal Energy formed JV, OMEL
won rights to explore two gas blocks off the Southern east
of Trinidad and Tobago with estimated gas reserves of two
trillion cubic feet.
A production-sharing contract between ONGC Mittal
Energy Ltd (OMEL), Petrotin (a State owned oil and gas
company) and the Ministry of Energy & Energy Industries
of T&T was signed on 30 December, 2008 for offshore
exploration of oil and gas in Block NCMA 2.

Uruguay
MoS for External Affairs, Shri Anand Sharma visited
Uruguay from 7-12 February. He had bilateral meetings
with the Uruguayan President and the Foreign Minister.
A bilateral Investment Promotion and Protection
Agreement between India and Uruguay was also signed.
A delegation from ANCAP, Uruguay’s state-owned
company involved in the production of petroleum
products and portland cement, visited India in 2008 to

106

The Americas

explore opportunities for cooperation and joint ventures
for oil exploration in Uruguay.

Venezuela
Shri Murli Deora, Minister of Petroleum & Natural Gas
(P&NG), led a high-powered delegation to Venezuela from
7-10 April, 2008 for signing of a joint venture between OVL
and PDVSA on the San Cristobal oil field. During his stay
in Venezuela, Minister (P&NG) also had meetings with
President Hugo Chavez, Minister of Energy and Petroleum,
Rafael Ramirez, and Foreign Minister, Nicolas Maduro.
Shri Anand Sharma, Minister of State for External Affairs,
visited Venezuela from 18-20 May, 2008. He held detailed
discussions with President Hugo Chavez on 20 May, 2008.
He also held meetings with the Venezuelan Ministers of
Foreign Affairs, Culture, Energy, Science & Technology,
Education and Higher Education, and Vice Ministers of
Tourism and Light Industry & Commerce.

India-SICA Foreign Ministers Meeting
An India-SICA (Central American System of Integration)
Foreign Ministers’ meeting was held in New Delhi on 10
June, 2008. The meeting was co-chaired by EAM. Foreign
Ministers of Panama, Nicaragua and Costa Rica along with

Vice Foreign Ministers of Honduras, Dominican Republic
and El Salvador attended the meeting. Three Agreements
for Waiver of Visas for Diplomatic and Official Passport
holders were signed with El Salvador, Honduras and
Nicaragua. An MoU on Foreign Office Consultations was
also signed with Honduras. During the meeting, it was
agreed to establish an India-SICA Joint Technical
Committee and an India-SICA Business Forum for further
enhancing cooperation in various sectors. ITEC slots for
SICA countries were increased from 68 to 100.
India announced Line of Credit facilities of US$ 10 million
to each SICA country and a commercial Line of Credit of
US$ 10 million to CABEI (Central American Bank of
Economic Integration) through the EXIM Bank of India.

MERCOSUR (Common Market of the
South)
In March 2009, the India-Mercosur PTA was ratified by
the Parliaments and governments of the four Mercosur
member countries and the Instruments of Ratification
were deposited with the Mercosur Secretariat. The PTA
will come into effect 30 days after both sides have notified
each other about completion of ratification procedures.

107

9

United Nations and
International Organizations

I

ndia continued to play an active role in the United
Nations (UN) focusing on the ongoing process of
reforming the UN Organization with a view to enhancing
its representativeness, and credibility, and consequently,
its effectiveness. India, in collaboration with other
Member States, continued to press for taking forward the
process of reforming the Security Council, both by
expanding the membership of the Security Council and
improving its working methods; revitalizing the General
Assembly; and reforming the Economic and Social
Council (ECOSOC). In this context, strengthening the
role of the UN as the leader in international development
issues remained a key area of interest for India.
In addition, India also emphasized the need for better
implementation of other elements of the reform of the
UN system that have already been put into place. These
include the process of providing international assistance
to post-conflict societies through the Peacebuilding
Commission, ensuring more effective and result oriented
international cooperation in the protection of human
rights through the newly-established Human Rights
Council, and to ensure that effective international
assistance is provided in emergencies created by natural
disasters.
Taking into account the heavy and continuing toll of life
due to terrorism, India remained seized of the need to
conclude continuing negotiations within the UN on a
Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism
(CCIT), while simultaneously ensuring the better
implementation of the UN’s Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. UN observed the second International Day of
Non- Violence on 2 October, 2008, thus establishing this
day as an important event in the international calendar.
An informal plenary session of UN General Assembly was
held on this occasion, which was presided over by the
UN Secretary General and the President of the General
Assembly. The guests of honour were the Foreign Minister
of South Africa and the External Affairs Minister of India.
The UN Secretary General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
accompanied by his wife Mrs Yoo Soon-Tack, the UN
Secretary General for Political Affairs, Mr. B. Lynn Pascoe

and a delegation of UN officials, visited India from 30-31
October, 2008. He again visited New Delhi on 4-6
February 2009 to participate in the Delhi sustainable
development Summit.

63rd Session of the UN General
Assembly
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh led the Indian
delegation to the General Debate of the 63rd session of
the UN General Assembly during his visit to New York
from 23-27 September, 2008. In his address to the UN
General Assembly on 27 September, 2008, Prime Minister
underlined the need for progress on core elements of the
agenda of reforming the UN. He also highlighted the need
for coordinated action by the international community
in dealing with the crisis in the world financial system,
and global food and energy crisis. These challenges, the
Prime Minister noted, threaten development gains
achieved by many countries over the years. In the context
of the fact that the year 2008 marked the mid-point of
international efforts to achieve the developmental targets
set by the Millennium Development Goals, the Prime
Minister’s statement emphasized the indivisible nature of
global prosperity and welfare.
On Climate change, Prime Minister mentioned thatthis
issue required a collaborative and cooperative
international effort. Recalling the challenge posed by
stockpiles of weapons of mass destruction, Prime Minister
reiterated India’s vision of a global, non-discriminatory
and universal nuclear disarmament regime, first put
forward by Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi two decades ago.
He added that the opening of international civil nuclear
energy cooperation with India was a vindication of India’s
impeccable record of non-proliferation. He also referred
to the global menace of terrorism, exhorting the world to
strengthen international cooperation in this regard, and
reaffirming the need for the early conclusion of a CCIT.
During his visit to New York, the Prime Minister attended
the plenary segment of a High Level Event on Mid-term
Review of the Millennium Development Goals. On the
margins of the UNGA Session, Prime Minister also met
the Premier of the State Council of the People’s Republic

108

United Nations and International Organizations

of China, Mr. Wen Jiabao, the President of Pakistan, Mr.
Asif Ali Zardari, the Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Mr.
Gordon Brown, the President of Namibia, Mr. Hifikepunye
Pohamba, and the President of the World Bank, Mr.
Robert Zoellick. Prime Minister also held brief interactions
with the Prime Minister of Jamaica, Mr. Bruce Golding,
and the Prime Minister of the Netherlands, Mr. Jan Peter
Balkenende.
Following PM’s visit, the External Affairs Minister, Shri
Pranab Mukherjee visited New York from 28 September2 October, 2008 and participated in the 63rd Session of
the UN General Assembly. During his visit, EAM led the
Indian delegation to the informal plenary of UN General
Assembly held on 2 October, 2008 to commemorate the
Second International Day of Non-Violence. He also
attended the annual working meeting of Foreign Ministers
of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
(SAARC), the Fourth Political Dialogue between India
and the Gulf Cooperation Council, a Ministerial meeting
of the India-Brazil-South Africa (IBSA) group, and the
Midterm Review Conference of the Almaty Programme
of Action for landlocked developing countries. EAM also
met his counterparts from the Czech Republic, Jordan,
Nepal, Nigeria, Russia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Trinidad
and Tobago, and the President of the 63rd UN General
Assembly, and the UN Secretary-General.
Shri P Chidambaram, former Finance Minister (currently
Home Minister), visited the UN for participating in the
High Level Event on Midterm Review of the Millennium
Development Goals held on 25 September, 2008 as PM’s
special representative. In addition to attending the plenary
of the MDG Midterm Review with the Prime Minister,
the Finance Minister made an intervention on poverty
alleviation at the round table on Poverty and Hunger. The
Finance Minister also participated in a special
Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting
(CHOGM) convened by the President of Uganda, as well
as the regular Commonwealth Ministerial meeting that is
annually convened on the margins of the General
Assembly session.
Shri Anand Sharma, Minister of State for External Affairs,
visited UN from 22-28 September 2008 and represented
India at a High Level Plenary Event on Africa’s
Development Needs, a Ministerial Meeting of the Brazil,
Russia, India and China (BRIC) group, and a Ministerial
Meeting of the G-77. Shri E Ahamed, Minister of State
for External Affairs visited UN from 3-10 December 2008
and represented India at a special high level event on

“Culture of Peace”, convened by H.M. the King of Saudi
Arabia. The Minister also participated in a high-level
event relating to the Central Emergency Response Fund
(CERF), where he pledged a multi-year contribution from
India amounting to US$ 1.5 million.
In addition, 21 Indian dignitaries including 18
Parliamentarians, participated in the 63rd session of the
General Assembly as members of the non-official
delegation of India and delivered statements on India’s
position on a number of topical issues.
Political, Economic and Social issues in the
General Assembly
India made statements in the UNGA Plenary and its
committees on the issues of revitalization of the General
Assembly, Peacekeeping, Peacebuilding, Migration and
Development, Human Security, Reform of the Security
Council, the administration of Justice, on MacroEconomic policy questions including the eradication of
poverty, the question of Self-Determination and the
Financial Situation of the United Nations and the report
of the UN Secretary General on the work of the
Organization. Interventions were also made on social
issues such as human rights, and on political issues such
as the situation in Afghanistan and on the situation in
the Middle East.
Middle East: India remained engaged in the consideration
in the UN of the Middle East issue in the UN General
Assembly (both in the Fourth Committee and at the
Plenary). India underscored its belief in the need for
progress to be made in the bilateral Israel-Palestine
dialogue process that was resumed by the Annapolis
Conference in November 2007. Following Israel’s military
operations in Gaza between December 2008 and January
2009, the President of the 63rd UNGA called for the
resumption of the Tenth Emergency Session of the UNGA
in the third week of January 2009 which was suspended
since December 2006, to press for an immediate ceasefire
by Israel in line with the UNSCR 1860 of January 2009.
India’s statements continued to reflect the balanced
position of the Government of India on the larger situation
in the Middle East, and on the primacy of humanitarian
concerns in the immediate context of the conflict in Gaza.
India’s long-standing, historic and consistent affirmation
of support for the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people was underlined at all occasions, while reiterating
its resolute opposition to all acts of terror and violence.
India’s discomfort with disproportionate responses by
Israel to acts of terror was also conveyed. India has
consistently stressed the need for an early end to the cycle

109

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

of violence and counter-violence. India continued to
contribute funds to the UN Relief Works Agency for its
relief work in the occupied Palestinian territories.
Second International Day of Non-Violence: An informal
plenary session of the UN General Assembly was held on
2 October, 2008 to mark the Second International Day
of Non-Violence. The event witnessed statements by the
President of the General Assembly (PGA), Mr Miguel
d’Escoto Brockmann, Secretary General of the United
Nations (SG), Mr Ban Ki-moon, Foreign Minister of South
Africa, Ms Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma and External Affairs
Minister, Shri Pranab Mukherjee. The speakers paid
special homage to Mahatma Gandhi and urged Member
States to emulate his teachings. In his address to the
plenary, EAM highlighted the continued relevance of
Mahatma Gandhi and his message in the present world
troubled with problems of poverty, inequality, violence,
armament and terrorism. He called on member states to
use Mahatma Gandhi’s inspirations to achieve world peace
and harmony.

UN Security Council
India intervened in discussions in the UN Security Council
only on specific issues of concern, and when permissible
under the Rules of Procedure of the Council. Main issues
upon which India intervened include the situation in
Afghanistan, the issue of the Nepalese request for
assistance from the UN, Threats to International Peace
and Security caused by terrorist acts, Peacebuilding, reform
of the working methods of the Security Council, and the
Situation in Somalia.
Reform of the UN Security Council
India continued to press for a comprehensive reform of
the UN Security Council, including expansion in both
permanent and non-permanent categories, and
improvement in its working methods. The Open-Ended
Working Group (OEWG) of the General Assembly on
the Question of Equitable Representation on and Increase
in the Membership of the Security Council and other
Matters held a number of meetings during 2008. However,
no substantive progress could be made, including towards
commencing intergovernmental negotiations on the
subject. In September 2008, India, with the support of
other G-4 countries (Brazil, Germany, Japan) and other
like-minded African, Asian, Caribbean and Pacific Island
States led the demand for urgent commencement of
intergovernmental negotiations in an informal plenary of
the General Assembly. Following the efforts of G-4
countries and others for early implementation of the
UNGA decision, the President of the UN General

Assembly announced the launch of intergovernmental
negotiations from 19 February 2009. The first round of
negotiations on five key issues of the UNSC reform started
on March 2009 and took place in several meetings held
during March-April 2009, to be followed by a second
round of negotiations.
Terrorism: Building up effective international cooperation
in countering terrorism remains a key priority for India in
its efforts in the United Nations. In this context, India
continued to press hard for early finalization of a
Comprehensive Convention against International
Terrorism and its adoption. Though substantive provisions
of the Draft Convention have already been agreed, further
progress on the Convention has been stalled by objections
raised by some countries on the definition of terrorism
and the scope of the Convention. Meanwhile, India
continued to fully support implementation of the Global
Counter Terrorism Strategy adopted by the UN General
Assembly in 2006. The General Assembly conducted a
review of the Strategy in August 2008, that gave Member
States an opportunity to outline national experiences and
to share best practices in countering terrorism.
Following the terrorist attack on Mumbai from 26-30
November, 2008, India successfully pressed for the
inclusion of the Jamaat-ud-Dawah, and its founder Hafiz
Muhammad Saeed, among others, in the Consolidated
List of entities and individuals linked to Al Qaeda and
the Taliban, who are subject to sanctions under UN
Security Council resolution 1267. Minister of State for
External Affairs, Mr. E. Ahamed, addressed the thematic
debate on terrorism held by Security Council on 9
December, 2008. In his address, MOS emphasized that
all those who were in any way responsible for the Mumbai
terrorist attacks, wherever they might be, should be
brought to justice. He stressed that the international
community needs to determinedly pursue and eliminate
terrorist organisations to prevent further attacks. He
reiterated that Comprehensive Convention on
International Terrorism that India tabled in 1996 needs
to be adopted immediately to provide a framework of
international law against terrorism.
Peacekeeping: India continues to be one of the oldest,
largest and consistent contributors to the UN
peacekeeping operations. In 2008, India was the third
largest troop contributor with approximately 8,500 troops,
located in ten different peacekeeping missions. The largest
Indian presence was in the UN Mission in Democratic
Republic of Congo (4,696), followed by UN Mission in
Sudan (2,704). India came in for high praise for providing
the first full Female Formed Police Unit, which has been

110

United Nations and International Organizations

assisting the UN Mission in Liberia. India actively
participated in the 2008 session of Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations held at UN Headquarters from
10 March-4 April, and on 3 July, 2008. India was in the
forefront on issues relating to restructuring; safety and
security; conduct and discipline besides strengthening
cooperation with Troop Contributing Countries of UN
Security Council and Secretariat.

UN Democracy Fund
The UN Democracy Fund (UNDEF) launched in 2005
has received voluntary contributions of USD 86.8 million
from 35 countries/made. India is the second largest
contributor to UNDEF with US$ 15 million. UNDEF has
committed approximately US$ 60 million for 205 projects,
of which, 15 projects were completed. These projects
aimed at supporting democratic institutions and processes.
On 15 September, 2008, the First International Day of
Democracy was organised by the UNDEF. The highest
governing body of the UNDEF, i.e. the Advisory Board,
held two meetings in March 2008 and October 2008. It
was recommended that UNDEF launch the third round
of funding for new projects. India has had a prominent
role in this body since its inception, besides being one of
its founding members. Within the Fund, India has focused
on monitoring the effective utilization and disbursement
of the Fund and has also supported the evolution of
methodologies to streamline UNDEF’s internal processes.

Non Aligned Movement (NAM)
As mandated by the Heads of State and Government of
the Non-Aligned Movement at their XIV Summit
Meeting in Havana in 2006, the Ministers of the NAM
convened their 15th Ministerial Meeting in Tehran, from
27-30 July. The Ministers issued a Communique at the
end of the meeting, which reflected the Movement’s
position on global developments, including international
political, economic, social and humanitarian issues. The
Ministerial meeting also issued a Declaration on Palestine;
on Iran’s nuclear issue, and on the situation in Zimbabwe.
The Indian delegation to the Inter-summit NAM
Ministerial meeting was led by External Affairs Minister
Shri Pranab Mukherjee. His statement outlined India’s
position on the continuing relevance of NAM, in the
context of current international challenges facing
developing countries in particular. He noted that the
Movement needs to overcome social and economic
difficulties arising out of the simultaneous impact of crises
in food, fuel and finances, as well as threats to our political
and security systems. Taking this into account, EAM

underlined that “these and other challenges facing the
international community make it more imperative than
ever before that our Movement collectively focus on issues
that unite us”.

The Commonwealth
Largest among the 53 member-states of the
Commonwealth, India is fourth largest contributor to its
budget. From British Pound (GBP) 800,000 in 2005-06,
India increased its annual contribution to the
Commonwealth Fund for Technical Cooperation (CFTC)
by GBP 50,000 every year to reach GBP 950,000 in 200809. India also provides the largest number of technical
experts after UK under the CFTC for providing assistance
to developing Commonwealth countries. India is the
largest contributor (with a commitment of Euro 1 million)
to the Commonwealth Connects Special Voluntary Fund
created at CHOGM 2005 in Malta to bridge the digital
divide in the Commonwealth Countries. It provides 5075 slots in select courses under ITEC and SCAAP and up
to five ICT experts for periods upto six months under
Commonwealth Connects Programme. It is also a member
of the Steering Committee established to carry forward
Commonwealth Connects action programme. India has
also proposed to undertake the responsibility for upgrading
the physical infrastructure of the CYP Asia Centre in
Chandigarh and the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of
Youth Development, Sriperumbudur, which is estimated
to cost approximately £1 million out the total project cost
of £2 million. India has supported and ensured approval
of US$ 260,000 by the UNDEF through its advisory board
to the Commonwealth Local Government Forum for its
project on Councillor training for local democracy and
good governance in South Asia. India continues to be
one of the principle supporters and contributors of the
Commonwealth Joint Office in New York and has also
agreed, in principle, to support the establishment of Small
States Permanent Mission in Geneva.
India successfully hosted the Third Commonwealth Youth
Games in Pune from 12-18 October, 2008. Minister of
State for Youth Affairs and Sports (Independent Charge)
had participated at the Seventh Commonwealth Youth
Ministers Meeting in Colombo from 27-30 April, 2008.
The 54th Commonwealth Parliamentary Association
(CPA) Conference was held in Kuala Lumpur from 1-10
August 2008 in which the Speaker of the Lok Sabha led
the Indian delegation. Minister of Law and Justice
participated at the Commonwealth Meeting of the Law
Ministers from 7-10 July, 2008 in Edinburgh, Scotland.
Shri Kamalesh Sharma, former High Commissioner of

111

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

India to the United Kingdom who was elected as the
Secretary General of the Commonwealth in November
2007, assumed office on 1 April, 2008. He paid an official
visit to India from 16-22 October, 2008.

Economic issues
India worked actively in order to ensure that development
remains at the core of the United Nations agenda,
particularly against the backdrop of the global financial
crisis, coupled with the food and energy crisis. In this
regard, the need for developed countries to fulfil their
commitments to provide enhanced aid, greater market
access, debt relief and technology transfer to developing
countries was emphasized, so that the Internationally
Agreed Developed Goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals, could be achieved. India also pushed
for an enhanced role of the United Nations and for an
enhanced voice and participation of the developing
countries towards ensuring a greater development focus
in the international regimes on trade, finance and
economic bodies.
India participated in a High-Level Event on the
Millennium Development Goals, which was jointly
convened by the President of the UN General Assembly
and the UN Secretary-General on 25 September, 2008.
Prime Minister Manmohan Singh participated in the
opening plenary session, while Finance Minister, P.
Chidambaram addressed the Round Table on “Poverty and
Hunger”. Chief Minister of Delhi Smt. Sheila Dikshit was
the lead discussant at the Round Table on “Environmental
Sustainability” at the invitation of the UN.
India participated in the thematic debate of the UN
General Assembly on the Millennium Development
Goals, titled “Recognizing the achievements, addressing
the challenges and getting back on track to achieve the
MDGs by 2015”, which was convened by the President of
the UN General Assembly from 1-4 April, 2008.
India participated in the special plenary meeting of the
UN General Assembly on the “Global food and energy
crisis”, which was convened by the President of the UN
General Assembly on 18 July, 2008.
India participated in the Follow-up International
Conference on Financing for Development to Review the
Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus, held in
Doha from 29 November-2 December, 2008. Minister of
State for External Affairs Shri E. Ahamed led the Indian
delegation. India was also active in coalescing the Group
of 77 positions during the negotiations for the Doha
Declaration.

India participated in the 12th Session of the
Intergovernmental Follow-up and Coordination
Committee on Economic Cooperation among Developing
Countries of the Group of 77 (IFCC-XII), held in
Yamoussoukro, Cote d’Ivoire from 10-13 June, 2008. Joint
Secretary (Technical Cooperation), Ministry of External
Affairs led the Indian delegation.
Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC)
The substantive session of the Economic and Social
Council (ECOSOC) for 2007 was held in July 2008 in
New York. The highlight was the holding of the first
session of the Development Cooperation Forum, which
is a new event mandated by the strengthening of the
ECOSOC in 2006. The Spring High-level Meeting of the
ECOSOC with the Bretton Woods institutions, the World
Trade Organization and the United Nations Conferences
on Trade and Development was held in New York on 14
April, 2008. Chief Economic Adviser, Department of
Economic Affairs represented India at the meeting as
Observer. India participated in the Special Meeting of the
ECOSOC on the Global Food Crisis, held in New York
from 20-22 May, 2008.
Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD)
India participated actively in the work of the Commission
on Sustainable Development, the high-level commission
within the UN system for sustainable development with
the role of reviewing and promoting the implementation
of Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation. The 16th session of the Commission,
which was a review session of the two -year
implementation cycle, was held in New York from 5-16
May, 2007. The session focused on the thematic cluster
of Agriculture, Rural development, Land, Drought,
Desertification, and Africa. Secretary, Ministry of
Environment and Forests led the Indian delegation.
United Nations Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and Pacific (UNESCAP)
The 64 th annual session of UNESCAP was held in
Bangkok, Thailand from 24-30 April, 2008. The theme
of the session was ‘Energy Security and Sustainable
Development in Asia and the Pacific’. The Indian
delegation was led by Shri Kamal Nath, Minister of
Commerce & Industry.
During the period April- November, 2008 the first Sessions
of the Committees on Social Development, Transport and
Information & Communication Technology were held in
Bangkok, wherein India was represented by the high level
officials of the concerned Ministries/ Departments besides
the Embassy officials.

112

United Nations and International Organizations

Humanitarian Issues
India participated actively in oversight processes
concerning the working of the Office of Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the Central
Emergency Response Fund (CERF). India piloted on
behalf of the Group of 77 a resolution entitled
“International Cooperation in Humanitarian Assistance
for Natural Disasters, from Relief to Development.”
Central Emergency Response Fund
Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri E. Ahamed
participated at the High Level Meeting on the Central
Emergency Response Fund held in New York on 4
December, 2008. India made a commitment of US$ 1.5
million to the Fund, to be disbursed over three years.
United Nations Operational Activities for
Development
India supported the ongoing efforts in reforming the
development operations of the United Nations directed
at making them more responsive to the needs of
developing countries. We participated actively in the
ongoing debate on System wide Coherence in the United
Nations.
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR)
During the visit of UN High Commissioner for Refugees
Mr. Antonio Guterres to India in December 2006 the two
sides had agreed to initiate regular wide-ranging bilateral
consultations. The first formal bilateral consultations were
held at the UNHCR headquarters in Geneva on 31
January with the Indian side being led by Additional
Secretary (Pol & IO) and UNHCR by High Commissioner
Mr. Antonio Guterres.
Disaster Risk Reduction
India maintained close contact with the two main
organizations based in Geneva in the area of Disaster Risk
Reduction, namely, Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and United Nations
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UN/ISDR).
A high-level delegation led by Smt. V. Radhika Selvi,
Minister of State for Home Affairs, participated at the
2008 International Disaster and Risk Conference, held
in Davos, Switzerland, from 25-29 August, 2008.
Human Rights Council
The United Nations Human Rights Council largely
completed its institutional-building mandate and
addressed a number of thematic and country-specific
issues of concern to the international community. The

Council held three regular and two special sessions (on
the situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territories and
the world food crisis). In keeping with its traditional
commitment to the human rights and values, India
actively participated in the process of institution-building
of the Council as well as in the consideration of
substantive human rights issues.
The Council operationalized the Universal Periodic
Review Mechanism. India was reviewed under this
Mechanism on 10 April, 2008. The discussion, while
positively recognizing our efforts for the promotion and
protection of human rights, also identified some concrete
suggestions on further measures.
The Human Rights Council began the preparatory process
for the Durban Review Conference on Racism which is
scheduled to be held in Geneva in April 2009. India has
actively contributed to the preparations for this
Conference inter alia as a Member of the Bureau of the
Preparatory Committee.
India was one of the main-sponsors of the proposal to
renew the mandate of the Special Representative of
UNSG on the issue of human rights and transnational
corporations and other business enterprises which was
adopted without a vote and co-sponsored by 50 States.
India’s combined second to fifth periodic reports under
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural (ESC) Rights were considered by the UN
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights from
7-8 May, 2008, at its 40th session in Geneva. The InterMinisterial delegation from India was led by our
Permanent Representative and included the Solicitor
General of India as a member.
India assumed the coordinatorship of the Asian Group
on human rights issues in October 2008 for a period of
one year.
A number of eminent Indians continued to serve with
distinction as members of important Treaty Monitoring
Bodies and human rights mechanisms. These include Shri
P. N. Bhagwati (Member of the Human Rights
Committee), Shri Chandrashekhar Dasgupta (Member,
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights),
Shri Dilip Lahiri (Member of the Committee on
Elimination of Racial Discrimination), and Shri Arjun
Sengupta (Chairperson, Inter-Governmental Working
Group on the Right to Development). Ms. Indira Jaisingh
was elected as our new Member to the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women. Shri
Anand Grover was appointed as Special Rapporteur on

113

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

the right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest
attainable standard of physical and mental health.
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme (KPCS)
India was the Chair of the KPCS for 2008. Under India’s
chairmanship, the UN General Assembly adopted, by
consensus, a draft resolution which expressed support for
the efforts of the Kimberley Process.
Further, India hosted a plenary meeting of the Kimberley
Process in New Delhi from 3-6 November, 2008.
Elections
India continued to witness success in its electoral efforts
at the United Nations. The following elections were
contested successfully by India in the year under review:
ECOSOC: India was elected by the UN General
Assembly for a three-year term (2009-2011) to the
ECOSOC on 22 October, 2008.
Dr. P Chandrasekhara Rao was elected to the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea
(ITLOS) at the elections held during the 18 th
Meeting of the States Parties to the Convention on
the law of the Sea on 13 June, 2008.
Ms. Indira Jaising was elected to the Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women
(CEDAW) at the elections held during the 15th
Meeting of the States Parties to the Convention on
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
Women on 31 July, 2008.
During the Congress of the International Union for
Conservation of Nature (IUCN) held in Barcelona
on 11 October, 2008 Mr. Ashok Khosla was elected
as President of the IUCN.
Climate Change Negotiations and United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC)
The 29th Session of Inter Governmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) was held in Geneva from 27 August-4
September, 2008. Shri Rajendra Pachauri was re-elected
as Chairman of the IPCC.
Negotiations under the UNFCCC Bali Action Roadmap,
including both the Ad Hoc Working Group on Long Term
Cooperative Action (AWG-LCA) and the Ad Hoc
Working Group on further commitments by Parties under
the Kyoto Protocol (AWG-KP), were held in Bangkok
(31 March-4 April, 2008), Bonn (4-13 June, 2008), Accra
(21-27 August, 2008) and in Poznan (1-12 December,
2008). India participated actively in these meetings and
has made detailed submissions on Adaptation, Mitigation,

Technology Transfer, Financing, MRV (Measurable,
Reportable and Verifiable) issues and on REDD (Reducing
Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation).
Secretary, Ministry of Environment & Forest led the
Indian delegation to the 14th Conference of Parties (COP)
to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) and the Fourth Meeting of Parties
to the Kyoto Protocol (COP/MOP) in Poznan, Poland
f
r
o
m
1-12 December, 2008. The delegation included officers
of the Ministry.
Prime Minister participated in a Summit level meeting of
the world’s largest economies under the rubric of the Major
Economies Meeting (MEM) in conjunction with the G8
Summit in Hokkaido Toyako, Japan on 9 July, 2008. Prime
Minister Manmohan Singh made a strong intervention
outlining India’s position on climate change and
sustainable development. After the Summit, a Major
Economies Meeting (MEM) Declaration was issued.
The Programme & Implementation Committee of the
Asia-Pacific Partnership for Clean Development and
Climate met twice in the year, in Seattle, USA from 1920 May, 2008 and in Vancouver, Canada from 29-30
October, 2008 to carry forward its work. Considerable
work has been done on the various projects in the eight
task forces in the APP and many of the projects have
been completed on schedule.
International Organization on Migration (IOM)
The period witnessed enhanced engagement on part of
India at the international level on migration issues. Most
notably, India became a member of the International
Organization on Migration (IOM) in June 2008. A full
membership will enable us to develop a closer relationship
with this principal organization dealing with the issue of
migration.
Global Forum on Migration and Development
(GFMD)
A high-level inter-ministerial delegation led by Special
Secretary (PP&R), MEA, represented India in the second
meeting of the Global Forum on Migration and
Development, held in Manila from 29-30 October, 2008.
Universal Postal Union (UPU)
An Indian delegation led by Secretary, Department of
Posts, Ministry of Communication and IT attended the
24th Congress of the UPU held in Geneva (23 July-12
August, 2008). India was elected to the Council of
Administration of the Union (CA) and Postal Operations
Council (POC) of the Universal Postal Union (UPU).

114

United Nations and International Organizations

International Telecommunication Organization
(ITO)
Secretary, Ministry of Communication and IT led a
delegation to attend the 2008 Session of ITU Council
was held in Geneva from 12-21 November, 2008. He
attended the High Level Segment as a panelist during a
session on 13 November, 2008 on the topic “Adapting to
Climate Change: The role of emergency
telecommunications.”
Internet Governance Forum (IGF)
India hosted the Third Internet Governance Forum (IGF)
in Hyderabad from 3-6 December, 2008. About 1300
participants from 94 countries representing Governments,
Civil Society, the private sector and the internet
community attended the meeting. The overall theme of
the Hyderabad IGF was ‘Internet for all’.
United Nations Human Settlement Programme
(UN-HABITAT)
India is a founding member of UN-HABITAT and has
been its active partner since its inception in 1978. As
part of India’s long standing cooperation with this
organization, it participated in the Fourth Session of the
World Urban Forum organised by the UN-HABITAT was
in Nanjing, China from 3-6 November, 2008 The theme
of this meeting was “Harmonious Urbanisation: The
Challenge to Balanced Territorial Development”. The
Indian delegation was led by Kumari Selja, Minister of
State (IC) for Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation,
who is also currently Chairperson of the Governing
Council of UN-HABITAT. Kumari Selja also participated
as a panelist in the Ministerial Round Table at the World
Urban Forum.
International Institute for Democracy and
Electoral Assistance (IDEA)
India, which is a founding member of the intergovernmental organisation International Institute for
Democracy and Electoral Assistance (International
IDEA) based in Stockholm, continued to play a prominent
and effective role within the organisation during the year.
India held the Chair of the Governing Council of
International IDEA for the period June 2007 to June 2008.
Under India’s Chairmanship, strategic evolution of
International IDEA took tangible shape with its
programmatic focus addressing issues such as Democracy
in Development, Democracy in Diversity, Gender
Empowerment and recognising the contribution of SouthSouth Cooperation.
As the Chair of the Council, India hosted the annual

meeting of the Governing Council of International IDEA
in New Delhi from 17-18 June, 2008. A Round-table on
‘Democracy and Development’ was also hosted in New
Delhi on the occasion of the Council meeting, which was
inaugurated by Shri Jairam Ramesh, Minister of State for
Commerce and Power. During the year, the cooperation
between the Election Commission of India and the
International IDEA also continued wherein the Election
Commission contributed with its expertise on electoral
processes towards the development of International
IDEA’s knowledge base.
Inter Parliamentary Union (IPU)
The 119th Assembly of the IPU was held in Geneva from
10-12 October, 2008. An Indian delegation of
Parliamentarians headed by Deputy Speaker of Lok Sabha,
Shri C. S. Atwal participated in the deliberations.
Important items of agenda included (i) Debate of
emergency item pertaining to current global financial
situation; and (ii) Panel discussions on Advancing nuclear
non-proliferation and disarmament, and securing the entry
into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty;
The Role of Parliaments, Freedom of Expression and the
Right to Information; and Climate Change, sustainable
development models and renewable energies. A Workshop
on ensuring transparency in parliamentary processes was
also held.
A four-member Parliamentary delegation led by Shri
Rupchand Pal, MP Lok Sabha visited Geneva to attend
the annual session of the Parliamentary Conference on
the WTO.
Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan MP attended the third Conference
of the members of Parliamentary Committees on the
Status of Women and other Committees dealing with
Gender Equality from 6-8 December, 2007.

Disarmament and International Security
Affairs
India’s commitment to the goal of general and complete
disarmament, including global nuclear disarmament
continued to be expressed in all policy pronouncements
and diplomatic initiatives. India’s stand on disarmament
and international security issues was based on India’s
national security interests and its tradition of close
engagement with the international community to promote
cooperative efforts in dealing with these challenges.
The year 2008 marked the 20th anniversary of the “Action
Plan for Ushering in a Nuclear-weapon free and Non-

115

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

including the risks of accidental nuclear war, dealerting of nuclear weapons to prevent unintentional
and accidental use of nuclear weapons.

Violent World Order” proposed by Prime Minister Rajiv
Gandhi to the Third Special Session on Disarmament of
the General Assembly. India’s commitment to universal,
non-discriminatory nuclear disarmament leading to the
total elimination of nuclear weapons was reiterated by
Prime Minister on 9 June, 2008 at the Conference
“Towards a world Free of Nuclear Weapons” organized in
New Delhi as a Track-II initiative to mark the Anniversary
of Rajiv Gandhi Action Plan.
India participated actively in the meetings of ASEAN
Regional Forum (ARF) and Conference on Interaction
and Confidence Building Measures in Asia (CICA).
Regular contacts were maintained with non-governmental
organizations in the field of disarmament to disseminate
India’s views on various issues. Outreach activities were
carried out with the Indian industry and other
stakeholders on India’s export control laws and
implementation of Weapons of Mass Destruction Act of
2005.
UNGA
In a statement to the United Nations General Assembly
on 23 September, 2008 Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan
Singh recalled India’s longstanding commitment to
nuclear disarmament that was global, universal and nondiscriminatory in nature. Prime Minister recalled the
Action Plan, which was spelt out by former Prime Minister
Rajiv Gandhi in the General Assembly twenty years ago.
Prime Minister also reiterated India’s support for a Nuclear
Weapons Convention prohibiting the development,
production, stockpiling and use of nuclear weapons and
providing for their complete elimination within a specified
time frame.
During the General debate at the First Committee of the
General Assembly India’s Permanent Representative to
the Conference on Disarmament underlined India’s
commitment to nuclear disarmament and suggested a set
of practical measures to stimulate debate and promote
consensus on the way forward. These measures had
already been put forward in General Assembly and the
Conference on Disarmament and include:
Reaffirmation of the unequivocal commitment of
all nuclear-weapon States to the goal of complete
elimination of nuclear weapons;
Reduction of the salience of nuclear weapons in the
security doctrines;
Taking into account the global reach and menace
of nuclear weapons, adoption of measures by
nuclear-weapon States to reduce nuclear danger,

Negotiation of a global agreement among nuclearweapon States on ‘no-first-use’ of nuclear-weapons;
Negotiation of a universal and legally-binding
agreement on non-use of nuclear- weapons against
non-nuclear-weapon States;
Negotiation of a convention on the complete
prohibition of the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons;
Negotiation of a nuclear weapons convention
prohibiting the development, production,
stockpiling and use of nuclear weapons and on their
destruction, leading to the global, nondiscriminatory and verifiable elimination of nuclear
weapons with a specified time-frame.
In the first Committee, India’s resolution on ‘Measures to
prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction’, which was first introduced in 2002, was again
adopted by consensus, highlighting the unanimity in the
international community on the need to avert such a
danger. The resolution called upon UN Member States to
take measures aimed at preventing terrorists from acquiring
weapons of mass destruction and underlined that the
international response to this threat needed to be inclusive,
multilateral and global. This year, the resolution was cosponsored by 64 States showing the importance the
international community accorded to this resolution.
India again tabled the resolution ‘Convention on the
prohibition of use of nuclear weapons’. The operative part
of the resolution reiterated the call to the Conference on
Disarmament to commence negotiations to reach
agreement on an international convention on prohibiting
the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons under any
circumstances.
India’s resolution on ‘Reducing Nuclear Danger’
highlighted the importance of de-alerting and other
measures required to mitigate the accidental use of nuclear
weapons. The operative part of the resolution called for a
review of nuclear doctrines, as also immediate steps to
reduce the risk of unintentional or accidental use of
nuclear weapons, including through the de-alerting and
de-targeting of nuclear weapons and requests the Nuclear
Weapon States to take measures to implement the
suggested steps.
The two resolutions were adopted by the First Committee
with a considerable majority of member states voting in

116

United Nations and International Organizations

the favour of the resolution. In the General Assembly,
118 countries voted in favour of the resolution ‘Reducing
Nuclear Danger’, while 121 countries voted in favour of
the resolution ‘Convention on the prohibition of use of
nuclear weapons’.
The First Committee and the General Assembly adopted
without a vote a draft decision proposed by India on “Role
of science and technology in the context of international
security and disarmament”.
The Conference on Disarmament
The Conference on Disarmament (CD) is the ‘sole
multilateral disarmament treaty negotiating body’ and
comprises of 65 States. In 2008 Session, it met at Geneva
from 21 January-28 March, 13 May-27 June and 28 July12 September. The 2008 session saw no consensus on the
CD’s Programme of Work, as differences amongst States
persisted on the priorities for negotiations. The Indian
delegation worked with other delegations to make progress
towards the common goal of reaching a consensus on a
Programme of Work so as to enable the CD to move
forward. India’s approach was predicated on arriving at
common understandings on fundamentals and clarity on
mandates to ensure the smooth and successful conduct
of negotiations and the need to respect the rules of
procedure. India’s approach was to be supportive of the
commencement of substantive work on the basis of a
Programme of Work, including negotiations on an FMCT.
UN Disarmament Commission
The three-week 2008 Session of the UN Disarmament
Commission was held in New York from 7-24 April. The
UNDC’s 2008 session was the third in a three-year cycle
focusing on two agenda items, namely, ‘Recommendations
for achieving the objective of nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons’ and ‘Practicalconfidence building measures in the field of conventional
weapons.’ The UNDC was unable to reach consensus on
the two agenda items.
Biological Weapons Convention (BWC)
Pursuant to the decision of Sixth Review Conference of
the States Parties to the BWC held at Geneva in 2006, to
hold an annual Meeting of Experts to be followed by
annual Meeting of States Parties till the next review
conference scheduled in 2011 on topics identified by it, a
Meeting of Experts (18 - 22 August) and a Meeting of the
States-Parties (1-5 December) were held in Geneva. The
meetings discussed and promoted common understanding
and effective action on (i) National, regional and
international measures to improve bio-safety and

biosecurity including laboratory safety and security of
pathogens and toxins (ii) Oversight, education, awareness,
raising, and adoption and/or development of codes of
conduct with the aim of preventing misuse in the context
of advances in bio-science and bio-technology research
with the potential of use for purposes prohibited by the
Convention.
India participated actively in the deliberations at the
Meeting of Experts and Meeting of States Parties. India
was one of the few countries whose delegations at the
Meeting of Experts included industry representative. India
made two presentations at the Meeting of Experts, one
on India’s “Bio-industry Overview” and the other on
“Education, awareness raising and Codes of Conduct”.
At the Meeting of States Parties, India contributed
substantively to the discussions and played a constructive
role in the drafting of Chairman’s Report.
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons
(CCW)
India is a High Contracting Party to the Convention on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons, Which may be Deemed to be
Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects
(CCW) and has ratified all five of its protocols, including
Amended Protocol II on prohibitions or restrictions on
the use of mines, booby traps and other devises and
Protocol V on Explosive Remnants of War. India has also
ratified the Amendment to Article 1 of the Convention.
The annual meeting of the High Contracting Parties to
the Convention on CCW was held at Geneva from 13-14
November, 2008. In 2007, the States Parties Meeting had
requested a Group of Governmental Experts (GGE) to
negotiate a proposal to address urgently the humanitarian
impact of cluster munitions, while striking a balance
between military and humanitarian considerations and
present it before the 2008 meeting. The GGE met five
times during 2008 for a total of seven weeks, reporting
that it was unable to conclude its negotiations. The annual
meeting decided that the GGE would continue its
negotiations and make every effort to conclude it as rapidly
as possible and report to the next meeting of High
Contracting Parties (2009). The GGE was mandated to
meet for up to two weeks in 2009 for this purpose. An
Indian delegation consisting of officials from Ministry of
External Affairs and Ministry of Defence participated in
the GGE meeting on cluster munitions held from 16-20
February, 2009.
The Second Annual meeting on Protocol V of CCW on
Explosive Remnants of war, which entered into force in

117

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

November 2006, was held on 10 November, 2008 in
Geneva. While Lithuania chaired the meeting as the
President, India and Australia served as Vice-Presidents.
India coordinated one of the subjects for the 2008 meeting
of MSP. India has been designated as President for Protocol
VMSP in 2009.
The Annual Meeting of the States Parties to the Amended
Protocol II to the Convention on CCW on prohibitions
or restrictions on the use of mines, booby traps and other
devises was held at Geneva on 12 November, 2008. India
informed the Meeting about the steps taken by it to
implement the provisions of Amended Protocol II and its
commitment to the vision of a world free of landmines.
India is not a State party to the “Convention on the
Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and
Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and Their Destruction”
or the Ottawa Convention as it continues to regard
landmines, when used responsibly by States, as a legitimate
tool for defence. However, India shares the vision of the
United Nations for a mine-free world, and is ready to
replace landmines with alternative technologies, when it
becomes available. With this spirit, India has been
attending the meetings of the Convention, as an observer,
since the first Review Conference of the Convention held
at Nairobi in December 2004. India attended, as an
observer, the Ninth Annual Meeting of the States Parties
to the Ottawa Convention in Geneva from 24-28
November. Likewise, India also participated as an observer
in the Standing Committee Meetings of the Convention
held in Geneva from 2-6 June, 2008.
Small Arms and Light Weapons
The United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects (UNPOA) adopted in
July 2001 provides for a comprehensive set of national,
regional and global measures to achieve its goal. India
has supported international co-operation to achieve this
goal multilaterally, regionally and bilaterally. In 2008, India
participated in on Biennial Meeting of States (BMS) held
in New York from 14-18 July, 2008 which adopted a
substatnative document for implementation of UNPOA
and the International Tracing Instrument.
IAEA
As Member of the Board of Governors of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), India took active part in
the deliberations of the IAEA and made substantial
contribution towards the attainment of the Agency’s
objectives, including through various training programmes
conducted on behalf of the Agency under the technical

cooperation programme, and Resolutions on substantive
issues such as promotion of nuclear power, nuclear power
applications in food and health, nuclear security,
strengthening of Agency’s safeguards system etc, adopted
at the annual General Conference of the IAEA .
At its special session held on 1 August, 2008, the Board
of Governors (BoG) of the IAEA approved by consensus
a India Specific Safeguards Agreement between India and
the Agency. On 2 February, 2009, India and IAEA signed
the “Agreement on Application of Safeguards to Civilian
Nuclear Facilities” (ISSA) in Vienna. On 3 March, 2009,
the IAEA BoG approved by consensus the text of an
Additional Protocol negotiated by India and IAEA.
The India-specific Safeguards Agreement builds on the
IAEA’s INFCIRC 66 provisions and covers civilian nuclear
facilities that have been offered by India under the India
Separation Plan and those which may be built in the future
for which materials/technology/equipment is received
from abroad. India’s strategic nuclear programme is outside
the ambit of the Safeguards Agreement and the Additional
Protocol negotiated by India with the IAEA. As per India’s
Separation Plan, facilities which are offered by India for
IAEA Safeguards have been identified and the application
of safeguards will commence in a phased manner once
India has notified these facilities. The India-specific
Safeguards Agreement will facilitate implementation of
relevant bilateral or multilateral civil nuclear cooperation
arrangements.
India’s delegation at the 52nd General Conference (GC)
of IAEA, held from 29 September-4 October, 2008, was
led by Dr Anil Kakodkar, Secretary DAE and Chairman,
Atomic Energy Commission, who besides delivering the
national statement at the plenary also chaired the
presentation on the utilisation of thorium as a resource
for nuclear energy. India’s exhibition during the GC also
focussed on the potential of thorium for addressing the
challenges of fulfilling the energy needs of the world
cleanly, safely, securely, sustainably and expeditiously.
Nuclear Suppliers Group
On 6 September, 2008 the NSG adopted a statement on
civil nuclear cooperation enabling full civil nuclear
cooperation with India. India welcomed the NSG decision
as forward-looking and momentous, for it will open a new
chapter in India’s cooperation with other countries in
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and in helping India meet
its energy and developmental requirements. This will be
of significance to global energy security, and one which
would also contribute to meeting the challenges of climate
change. More importantly, the NSG’s decision ending 30
years of technology denial in the nuclear field, is a

118

United Nations and International Organizations

recognition of India as a country with advanced nuclear
technology and its responsible record on nuclear nonproliferation.

has been set up in the Ministry to oversee the work related
to strategic exports control.

Legal and Treaty Division
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC)
India continued to play an active role at the Organization
for the Prohibition of the Chemical Weapons (OPCW) at
The Hague during the year. India played a key role both at
the Second Review Conference of the CWC held from 7-18
April, 2008 and at the 13 th Conference of
the States Parties to the CWC held from 2-5 December,
2008 at The Hague. India continued to fulfil all its obligations
under the Convention in line with its commitments.
Conference on Interaction and Confidence
Building Measures in Asia (CICA)
India hosted the CICA Special Working Group/Senior
Officials Committee meeting in New Delhi from 18-20
February, 2009. Earlier, Minister of State for External
Affairs, Shri Anand Sharma attended the Third CICA
Ministerial Meeting in Almaty, 25 August, 2008. India
expressed its belief that CICA can help contribute to the
development of a cooperative and pluralistic security order
in Asia, based on mutual understanding, trust and
sovereign equality.
ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF)
Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Anand Sharma
led the Indian delegation at the 15th ARF Meeting held
in Singapore from 23-24 July, 2008. India and Indonesia
co-hosted the Sixth Inter-sessional Meeting (ISM) on
Counter-Terrorism and Transnational Crime at Semarang
(Indonesia) from 21-22 February, 2008. The Indian Coast
Guard organized two training programmes on maritime
security for ARF members in Chennai. The first
programme was held from 24-29 March, 2008. Based on
the success of the first programme, an advanced training
module was organized from 17-22 November, 2008. The
module covered themes of anti-piracy, search & rescue,
offshore and port security, anti-smuggling and narcotics
control and anti-poaching operation. India also
participated in various other ARF activities including on
disaster relief and terrorist use of the internet.
Strategic Exports Control
India has been exercising control over exports of sensitive
goods and technologies which can have direct or indirect
application for weapons of mass destruction or their means
of delivery. Industry outreach activities, as envisaged in
the Weapons of Mass Destruction and their Delivery
Systems Act enacted in 2005, were organized in
cooperation with industry associations. A Technology Unit

The important activities of the L&T Division for the year
2008 are as follows:
Agreement on Draft Convention by BIMSTEC
JWG-CTTC
The L&T Division organised the Fourth Meeting of the
BIMSTEC Joint Working Group on Counter Terrorism
and Transnational Crime (JWG-CTTC) which was held
at New Delhi from 22-23 October, 2008. The Meeting
was Chaired by Mr. Narinder Singh, Joint Secretary
(L&T), MEA. The Meeting considered the Draft
BIMSTEC Convention in Combating International
Terrorism, Transnaional Organised Crime and Illicit Drug
Trafficking along with the reports of the Lead Shepherds
on the progress of work of their respective Sub-Groups
i.e. (i) Intelligence Sharing; (ii) Combating of Financing
of Terrorism; (iii) Prevention of Illicit Drug Trafficking in
Narcotic Drugs, Psychotropic substances and precursor
chemicals; & (iv) Legal and Law Enforcement Issues.
The JWG-CTTC also agreed on the Draft BIMSTEC
Convention in Combating International Terrorism,
Transnaional Organised Crime and Illicit Drug Trafficking
and recommended it for adoption at the BIMSTEC Summit.
The Convention will provide a strong legal basis for
cooperation among the law enforcement agencies of
BIMSTEC Member States. It will provide a much needed
thrust to the enforcement agencies of the BIMSTEC
Member States to effectively cooperate in areas such as
intelligence sharing and capacity building and make joint
efforts with a view to counter terrorism and fight organized
crime and illicit drug trafficking amongst the BIMSTEC
Member States. The Convention would thus provide an
enabling mechanism for the law enforcement agencies to
effectively locate persons/links/networks operating from
other countries and engaged in carrying out such offences.
Once adopted, Member States would be in a position to
provide each other the widest possible measure of mutual
assistance in the prevention, investigation, prosecution
and suppression of such crimes pursuant to this
Convention. It would also send a signal to the perpetrators
of terrorist and organized crimes that any country in the
BIMSTEC region cannot be used as safe haven.
Oceans and the Law of the Sea
The Legal and Treaties Division examined issues related
to the law of the sea on agenda of different international
forums. At its 63rd session, the United Nations General

119

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

Assembly (UNGA) adopted two resolutions 63/111 and
63/112 on the agenda items “Oceans and Law of the Sea”
and “Sustainable fisheries, including through the 1995
Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of
the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of
Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks,
and related instruments.”
Emphasizing the universal character of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1982, which sets out
the legal framework for all activities to be carried out in
the oceans and seas, GA stressed the need for the
harmonization of national legislations with the
Convention for the purpose of implementation of its
provisions. It called upon the donor agencies and
international financial institutions to ensure the
availability in all States, particularly in developing States,
of the economic, legal, navigational, scientific and
technical skills necessary for full implementation of the
Convention. The GA also called upon States to provide
technical assistance to developing States to prepare their
submissions to the Commission on the Limit of the
Continental Shelf (CLCS). It recognized the decision of
the Meeting of States Parties to the Convention to the
effect of submitting to the Secretary-General preliminary
information indicative of the outer limits of the
continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles and a
description of status of preparation and intended date of
submission of claims. Expressing serious concerns over
the problem of piracy and armed robbery at sea off the
coast of Somalia, the GA has urged the States to fully
implement all legal measures adopted by the IMO and
the United Nations to combat piracy.
On matters relating to fisheries, the GA urged the States
to exercise effective control over their nationals, including
beneficial owners, and vessels flying their flags, in order
to prevent and deter them from engaging in illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing. The GA called upon
the States to apply the precautionary and ecosystem
approach to the conservation, management and
exploitation of fish stocks, including straddling fish stocks
and highly migratory fish stocks in accordance with the
Fish Stocks Agreement and to harmonize their national
laws with the provisions of the Agreement.
United Nations Convention on Contracts for the
International Carriage of Goods Wholly or Partly
by Sea
At its 63rd session, the GA adopted the United Nations
Convention on Contracts for the International Carriage
of Goods Wholly or Partly by Sea by resolution 63/122.

The GA authorized a signing ceremony for the
Convention in Rotterdam, Netherlands in September
2009. The Convention will be known as “Rotterdam
Rules”.
The Convention aims to create a harmonized and uniform
legal regime for the international transportation of goods.
The scope of the Convention is not limited to the portto-port but covers door-to-door transportation with
applicability over the land transportation preceding and
subsequent to the sea carriage. An international sea leg is
a mandatory requirement for a contract of carriage under
the Convention. Additionally, there are many innovative
features which the Convention incorporates to the benefit
of the parties to a contract of carriage, which would
balance their interests and promote the development of
international trade. These features include the
introduction of new concepts such as the electronic
transport records, the performing party, the controlling
party, transfer of rights and other technical features to fill
the perceived gaps in the existing transport regimes.
The Convention creates a practical balance between the
shipper and the carrier protecting adequately the interests
of both sides. It creates a negotiations based regime and
no party to a contract of carriage could impose its
viewpoint on the other unilaterally.
The harmonized and modernized legal regime under the
Convention will lead to an overall reduction in transaction
costs, increased predictability when problems are
encountered, and greater commercial confidence when
doing business internationally. It would help ensure the
safe reaching of the goods at their destination. It reflects
the progressive development in the evolving process of
international law in the field of international
transportation of goods, which in most part of the world
dates back to the 1920s or earlier.
The Legal and Treaties Division actively participated in
negotiations of the Convention from inception in the years
2002 through its completion in 2008. India is one of the
major maritime powers of the world. The greater part of
India’s international trade is carried through the sea. The
delicate balance established between the ship and cargo,
the broader scope of application, freedom of contract, and
introduction of the new and technical concepts to give a
practical approach to the international carriage of goods,
will benefit the shipping industry.
Extradition and other international Judicial
Assistance
The Legal and Treaties Division participated in bilateral
negotiations for concluding extradition treaties,
agreements on mutual legal assistance in criminal and in

120

United Nations and International Organizations

civil matters with foreign countries. Following successful
negotiations of Extradition Treaties with Belarus,
Mauritius and Ukraine, the procedure for their entry into
force and effectiveness was completed in the year 2008.
Treaties with Egypt and Iran were also negotiated and
signed during 2008, which are pending the process of entry
into force. Negotiations on Extradition Treaty with
Malaysia and Israel also took place.

work for the progressive unification of the rules of private
international law or conflict of laws. This objective is
carried by finding internationally agreed approaches to
issues such as jurisdiction of courts, applicable law, and
recognition and enforcement of judgments in a wide range
of areas such as commercial laws, international civil
procedures and matters relating to child protection,
marriage and personal issues.

The Legal and Treaties Division prepared the Draft
SAARC Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal
Matters. On successful negotiations, the SAARC
Convention was adopted and signed during the 15th
SAARC Summit at Colombo, Sri Lanka on 3 August,
2008. The Convention will enter into force after
ratification by all SAARC member States. Bilateral treaty
in this area was negotiated with Egypt and has been signed.
Text of the Treaty has also been negotiated and finalized
with Bosnia Herzegovina. Negotiations were also held in
this area with Malaysia, Oman, and Israel.

The Hague Conference has so far adopted a total of 39
conventions/protocols relating to civil procedures, family
law and commercial law.

The Legal and Treaties Division examined extradition
requests and other requests for international cooperation
received from the domestic as well as foreign jurisdictions
and rendered legal advice therein.
International Institute for the Unification of
Private Law (UNIDROIT)
UNIDROIT is an independent inter-governmental
organization with its seat in Rome. Its purpose is to
examine ways of harmonization and coordinating the
private law of States and Groups of States and to prepare
gradually for adoption by the various States of uniform
rules of private law. It performs in the field of private
international law the same function the International Law
Commission does in the field of public international law
and UNICITRAL in the field of international trade law.
Elections to the Governing Council of the UNIDROIT
were held during the 63rd session of the UNIDROIT
General Assembly on 11 December, 2008. India had
nominated Mr. B. Sen for re-election to the Governing
Council, who got elected by securing the highest number
of votes.
Hague Conference on Private International Law
India became a member of the Hague Conference in
March 2008. Presently, 69 States/Regional Economic
Integration Organisations are Members of the Hague
Conference.
The Hague Conference on Private International Law is
an inter-governmental organization, whose purpose is to

The work undertaken under the auspices of the Hague
Conference is of great relevance to India in view of the
increasing legal issues that arise when Indian citizens
engage in foreign trade activities, or in disputes when one
party to the dispute is resident outside India, and also in
case of family disputes involving persons of Indian origin
settled abroad or other foreign nationals, especially when
they enter into family relationships with Indian citizens,.
As a Member State of the Hague Conference, India would
be entitled to participate as of right in all the meetings
and conferences of the Hague Conference, and would also
have a role in deciding on the work programme of the
conference, especially in deciding on the new areas of
work to be taken up for codification as well as examination
of the working of existing conventions.
Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA)
India signed the Host Country Agreement with the PCA
at The Hague on 19 September, 2008 for establishing a
Regional Facility of PCA in New Delhi.
The PCA administers arbitration, conciliation and fact
finding in disputes involving various combinations of
states, private parties and intergovernmental
organizations. Not only do states more frequently seek
recourse to the PCA, but international commercial
arbitration can also be conducted under PCA
auspices. Although initially conceived as a body for
settling State-to-State disputes, the PCA has adopted
Rules for arbitration in cases where only one party is a
State.
The PCA Regional Facility in New Delhi would provide
a forum for international arbitrations concerning disputes
arising in the region, both in disputes between two States
and between a State and a non-State entity, such as foreign
companies, which have made investments in the region
and where the parties have agreed to settle their disputes
through arbitration. Besides, the costs of international

121

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

arbitrations will be reduced which would also encourage
more frequent recourse to arbitration as a means of settling
disputes. Parties to a dispute will have opportunity for
selecting the persons of their own choice, who are
knowledgeable in the field, as arbitrators for the amicable
settlement of their dispute. It will further strengthen the
policy of the Government of India of promoting alternative
methods of dispute resolution. It would also enable more
legal experts from India to participate in arbitrations
conducted under the auspices of the Regional Facility and
to acquire expertise in this field, which would also have a
beneficial effect on domestic arbitrations.
To meet the increasing demand for arbitration and other
alternate dispute resolution methods, the PCA has also
established Regional Facilities in Lebanon, South Africa,
Singapore and Costa Rica.

47th Session of Legal Sub-Committee of
United Nations Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
(UNCOPUOS)
Indian delegation to this Committee actively participated
in the debates on all the agenda items of the Legal SubCommittee. The focus of this session was on national
legislation relevant to the peaceful exploration and use
of outer space. Under this agenda item, statements were
made by a number of States as to how a national legislation
could be fashioned in providing national authorities to
have jurisdiction regulating the space activities, licensing
procedures, liability, indemnification procedure and
insurance for the space objects launched from the State.
According to a decision reached in this Session, in
addition to the current agenda items, the 48th Session will
have a new agenda item on “national mechanisms on
space debris mitigation measures”.
Group of Governmental Experts (GGE) of the High
Contracting Parties to the Convention on Prohibition
or Restrictions on the use of certain Conventional
Weapons which may be deemed to be excessively
injurious or to have indiscriminate effects: During 2008
the Group of Governmental Experts (GGE) met five times
in Geneva to negotiate a proposal to address urgently the
humanitarian impact of cluster munitions, while striking
a balance between military and humanitarian
considerations. India played an active role in the
negotiations by tabling a number of proposals. Although,
by the end of the fourth session, the Chairman of GGE
prepared a text for the fifth meeting of the GGE to
consider, negotiate and complete the process of agreeing
to a text protocol on cluster munitions, agreement could

not be reached on the text during the Fifth Meeting of
the GGE. This process will be continuing on a fresh
mandate in 2009 also.

SAARC (South Asian) University
This Division has actively participated in drafting an
Agreement for the Establishment of the South Asian
University (SAU), which was eventually signed on behalf
of the Member States of the South Asian Association for
Regional Co-operation on 4 April, 2007. Pursuant to this
Intergovernmental Agreement, the SAU was established
in Delhi. Thereafter an Headquarters Agreement between
the Government of the Republic of India and the SAARC
Secretariat for the establishment of the South Asian
University was signed on 30 November, 2008. To
implement the intergovernmental agreement and to
operationalize the University, a draft legislative bill was
prepared by this Division in consultation with the Ministry
of Law & Justice. The bill was introduced in both Houses
of the Parliament on 23 December, 2008. The Bill has
received the assent of the President of India on 11 January,
2009 which is being published in the Gazette of
India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 1, dated 13 January,
2009.

International Civil Aviation Organisation
(ICAO)
This Division has actively participated in the ICAO
Special Sub Committee of the Legal Committee meeting,
Montreal, 19-21 February, 2008 to discuss the proposed
amendments to the Hague Convention, 1970 and the
Montreal Convention 1971. The amendments, in essence,
reflect the idea of advancing both counter-terrorism and
counter-proliferation goals. It is proposed to add various
acts which States would have to make punishable under
their domestic laws. This includes: Use of civil aircraft as
a weapon; Use of civil aircraft to unlawfully spread
biological, chemical and nuclear substances; Attacks
against civil aviation using biological, chemical and
nuclear substances; Threats to commit any of these acts;
and acts contributing to such acts including abetment,
participation, organizing, delivering etc would be
punishable as offences prohibited under the Convention.
This Division also participated in the 33rd Session of the Legal
Committee Meeting of the ICAO to be held at Montreal
from 21 April-25 May, 2008. The Committee discussed the
Draft Convention on Compensation for Damages caused by
Aircraft to Third Parties, in the case of Unlawful Interference
(Unlawful Interference Convention) and also the Draft
Convention on Compensation for Damage Caused by
Aircraft to Third Parties (General Risks Convention) with a

122

United Nations and International Organizations

view to approving a final draft on each Convention. The
texts as finalized during the 33rd Session would be adopted
at the Diplomatic Conference to be held at Montreal in the
year 2009.

Investments
During the period, the instrument of ratification regarding
Bilateral Investment Promotion Agreements (BIPA) with
Iceland has been exchanged in Delhi for bringing the
Agreement into force. Negotiations with Iran have been
completed and final text is ready for signing. The
exploratory talks with United States of America are
completed and negotiations are underway. Negotiations
on amending the existing BIPA’s with Bulgaria, Romania
and Czech Republic were completed so as to
accommodate their respective EU obligations in the
respective bilateral investment agreements with India.

Participation in Meetings
During the year, negotiations on Bilateral Investment
Promotion Agreements (BIPA) with Hong Kong, Estonia
and Azerbaijan were initiated and negotiations were
completed with Mexico and the Agreement was signed.
Negotiations with Canada are still going on. The Division
also participated in the negotiations on Free Trade
Agreements with Japan, Korea, Sri Lanka, Mauritius,
European Union and ASEAN.
The Legal and Treaties Division examined a number of
defence co -operation agreements, agreements on
international co-operation on peaceful uses of nuclear
energy, science and technology agreements.
India has signed/ratified many multilateral/bilateral
treaties/agreements with foreign countries during the year.
These inter alia include: The International Convention
for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance; the Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities Agreement for the Establishment of
SAARC University; SAARC Agreement on Establishing
the SAARC Food Bank; Intergovernmental Agreement
on Trans Asia Railway Network; and the International
Convention against Doping in Sports and India-Bhutan
Friendship Treaty.
The officers of the L&T Division also participated in
various meetings in India and abroad, including in the
following meetings:
The XXXI Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Committee Meeting (ATCM), Kiev, Ukraine, from
2-7 June, 2008.
Fifth Meeting of the Ad Hoc Open-Ended Working
123

Group on Liability and Redress in the context of
Article 27 of the Cartegena Protocol, held in
Cartegena, Colombia, from 12-19 March, 2008.
Friends of the Chair Meeting on Liability and
Redress and the Fourth Meeting of the Conference
of Parties (COP-MOP-4) to the Cartegena Protocol
on Biosafety, Bonn, Germany from 7-9 May and 1216 May 2008.
Meeting of Senior Government Officials Expert in
Environmental Law for the Preparation of a Fourth
Programme for the Development and Periodic
Review of Environmental Law (Montevideo
Programme IV), Nairobi, 29 September-3 October,
2008.
Negotiations on Extradition Treaty, MLAT in
Criminal Matters and MLAT in Civil and
Commercial Matters between India and Iran, in
Tehran from 22-24 June, 2008.
The Intergovernmental Working Group of the
Human Rights Council to prepare an Optional
Protocol to the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 31 March-4
April, 2008, Geneva.
The First Session of the Intergovernmental
Negotiation Body (WHO Framework Convention on
Tobacco Control), Geneva, from 11-16 February,
2008.
The Second Session of the Intergovernmental
Negotiating Body (INB-2) on a Protocol on Illicit Trade
in Tobacco Products, Geneva, 20-25 October, 2008.
47th Session of Legal Sub-Committee of United
Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space (UNCOPUOS)
Group of Governmental Experts (GGE) of the High
Contracting Parties to the Convention on
Prohibition or Restrictions on the use of certain
Conventional Weapons which may be deemed to
be excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate
effects.
India-Sri Lanka CEPA Negotiations, Colombo, 2-4
January, 2008.
India-ASEAN Trade Negotiating Committee
(TNC) 18th Meeting, Bhopal, 7-9 January, 2008
India-Thai TNC 16th Meeting, Bangkok, 31 January1 February, 2008
India-ASEAN TNC 19th Meeting, Vientiane, Lao
PDR, 13-15 February, 2008

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

India-Korea CEPA Legal Vetting, Second Meeting,
Delhi, 5-6 November, 2008

SAFTA Meeting on DSM, Delhi, 1-2 March, 2008
BIMST-EC TNC Meeting, Delhi, 17-18 March,
2008

India-SACU Trade Negotiations, Delhi, 26-28
November, 2008

India-Japan Investment Group Meeting, Delhi, 2526 March, 2008
India-Korea Investment Group Meeting, Delhi, 2-4
April, 2008
India-Sri Lanka CEPA Negotiations, Colombo, 7-9
April, 2008
India-Japan Jt. Task Force Sixth Meeting, Tokyo,
10-14 April, 2008
India-Malaysia Second TNC Meeting, Delhi, 16-18
April, 2008
7th India-Japan Joint Task Force Meeting, Delhi, 1215 May, 2008
India-Korea Jt. Task Force Tenth Meeting, Seoul,
29 May-2 June, 2008
12th Session of Indian Ocean Tuna Commission,
Muscat, 7-9 June, 2008
India-US Bilateral Investment Agreement Meeting,
Washington, 10-13 June, 2008, India-ASEAN TNC
20th Meeting, Kuala Lumpur, 16-18 June, 2008
India-ASEAN TNC 21st Meeting, Jakarta, 26-27
June, 2008
India-Sri Lanka CEPA Negotiations, Colombo, 812 July, 2008
8th India-Japan Jt. Task Force Meeting, Tokyo, 1417 July, 2008
India-Korea Jt. Task Force 11th Meeting, Delhi, 2931 July, 2008
India-Korea Jt. Task Force 12th Meeting, Seoul, 2225 September, 2008
Indo-Nepal Negotiations on Trade Agreement
Revision, Delhi, 16-17 October, 2008
India-ASEAN TNC Special Meeting, Manila, 2022 October, 2008

India-Thailand 17th TNC Meeting, Delhi, 22-23
December, 2008
In addition to the above meetings, the Division also
participated in the negotiations of bilateral agreements,
with Honk Kong, Israel and Korea on transfer of prisoners/
sentenced persons. Division also participated in the
bilateral negotiations on combating international
terrorism, transnational organized crime and drug
trafficking with Azerbaijan, Vietnam, Turkey, Malta,
Maldives, Tunisia and Taiwan.
The Division also gave valuable inputs during the
finalization of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention)
Amendment Act, 2008.
The Legal and Treaties Division also examined and vetted
a number of agreements and MoU’s received from various
Ministries/Departments of the Government of India. The
Division also examined various proposals from
international law angle on projects in India and abroad.
The Division also gave legal opinions on various court
cases involving MEA and on passport and consular issues.
The Division also gave inputs and opinions on various
RTI requests addressed to the MEA. The Division
processed for the payment of India’s annual contribution
to the international organizations like Hague Academy
of International Law, Permanent Court of Arbitration,
International Institute for the Unification of Private Law
(UNIDROIT) and AALCO.
The list of various Treaties/Conventions/Agreements
concluded or renewed by India with other countries in
2008, list of instruments of Full Powers processed by the
L&T Division in 2008, and the list of instruments of
ratification/accession processed by the L&T Division
during 2008 is given in the Appendices.

India-Korea CEPA Legal Vetting, First Meeting,
Seoul, 23-25 October, 2008

124

Multilateral Economic Relations

A

gendas of the multilateral fora, during the year, were
generally under the shadow of international financial
turmoil, high food prices and volatile energy prices.
Conscious of the global risks of the economic downturn
despite its high-growth trajectory, India continued its
active engagement with ASEM (Asia-Europe Meeting),
BIMSTEC (Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi Sectoral
Technical and Economic Cooperation), BRIC (Brazil,
Russia, India and China), G8-05, G-20, IBSA (India,
Brazil and South Africa), IOR-ARC (Indian Ocean Rim
Association for Regional Cooperation), ACD (Asia
Cooperation Dialogue) etc. where it presented its
perspective on financial crisis and other critical issues such
as, food security, energy security, climate change and
sustainable development.
India hosted the Second BIMSTEC and the Third IBSA
Summit in New Delhi during 2008. The year under
reference also saw India’s first highest level participation
with Prime Minister leading Indian delegations to the
ASEM Summit in Beijing, the G-20 Summit in
Washington and an informal interaction of Heads of State/
Government of BRIC member countries. Conclusion of
the negotiations on the Agreement on ‘Trade in Goods’
under the Comprehensive Economic Cooperation
Agreement (CECA) between India and ASEAN, which
continued for almost four years, is yet another milestone
in India’s ‘Look-East’ policy.
Prime Minister attended the G8-Outreach Sessions in
Toyako, Japan on 9 July. Following the conclusion of the
India-US Civil Nuclear Cooperation Agreement, the G8
countries expressed their willingness to work with India
in this field. At the Leaders’ Meeting of Major Economies
on Climate Change on the sidelines of G8 Summit,
bringing together the G8, India, China, Mexico, Brazil,
South Africa, Australia, Indonesia, South Korea, the
European Commission and the UN, Prime Minister
reiterated the importance of the provisions and principles
of common but differentiated responsibilities and
respective capabilities under UNFCCC. Prime Minister
underscored that there must be new and additional
resources made available to developing countries to help
them in their efforts to tackle the challenges of climate
change.

10

At the G-20 Summit convened by US President in
Washington on 15 November, 2008, Prime Minister
emphasized the importance of broad-based multilateral
approaches in tackling the global financial crisis.

SAARC
The South Asian Association of Regional Cooperation,
(SAARC) was created in 1985, as an expression of the
region’s collective decision to evolve a regional
cooperative framework. Presently, there are eight-member
countries in SAARC namely Afghanistan, Bangladesh,
Bhutan, India, Nepal, Maldives, Pakistan and Sri Lanka.
India was the Chair of SAARC in 2007-2008 (since the
14th SAARC Summit held in New Delhi from 3-4 April,
2007 upto the 15th Summit held in Colombo from 2-3
August, 2008). The period was the most productive that
SAARC has ever known with SAARC transforming from
declaratory to implementation phase. Each of PM’s
announcements at the 14th Summit in Delhi has been
implemented, with India discharging its responsibilities
in a non-reciprocal (asymmetric) manner. The landmark
projects include operationalization of the SAARC Food
Bank; the establishment of the SAARC Development
Fund (SDF); setting up of the project office of the South
Asian University; the institutionalization of the SAARC
Cultural Festival; the launching of negotiations to bring
services into SAFTA; signing of the Convention of Mutual
Assistance in Criminal Matters and our unilateral grant
of zero duty access to SAARC. Regional and sub-regional
project in Women’s Empowerment, Maternal and Child
Health Care, including Immunisation are under
implementation.
Consequently, the 15th SAARC Summit, held in Colombo
(2-3 August, 2008), where Sri Lanka took over as Chair
was a resounding success with the signing of the four key
agreements at the Summit:
(i)

125

Charter of SAARC Development Fund with three
windows – social, economic and infrastructure. India
has voluntarily committed US$100 million to the
social window, in addition to its assessed
contribution of US$ 100 million.

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

(ii) Agreement establishing the South Asian Regional
Standards Organization in Bangladesh to harmonize
standards in SAARC.
(iii) SAARC Convention on Mutual Assistance in
Criminal Matters. This Convention provides for
mutual legal assistance in investigations, prosecution
and resulting proceedings in criminal matters
including terrorism.

Protocol on accession of Afghanistan to
agreement on South Asian Free Trade
Area.
The 15th Summit also agreed to accord Observer status
to Australia and Myanmar thereby increasing the number
of Observers to nine (China, ROK, Japan, US, Iran,
Mauritius, EU, Australia and Myanmar). The Summit
finalized the modalities of cooperation with (a) Observers;
& (b) Inter Governmental Organizations; and decided to
impose moratorium on the admission of new Observers
for three years. It was decided that Inter Governmental
Organizations will interact with SAARC through signing
of MoUs after approval of the Standing Committee and
the Council of Ministers.
In continuing with its commitment to discharging its
responsibilities in SAARC in a non-reciprocal manner,
India hosted the first meeting of SAARC Ministers of
Science & Technology (15-16 September, 2008) and the
Extraordinary Meeting of SAARC Agriculture Ministers
(5 November, 2008). Both the Meetings identified a
number of concrete, focused regional projects that are in
various stages of implementation.
The Project Office for the South Asian University is fully
functional with the appointment of the Officers to assist
the CEO in his functions, the necessary Intergovernmental
experts, Convenors of Task Forces and the Task Forces
themselves, in the areas of Academics, Business plan,
Governance and Legal Structure and Infrastructure. 100
acres of land for the University are being acquired in New
Delhi. The Headquarters Agreement between
Government of India and SAARC Secretariat has been
signed on 30 November 2008. The Bill for establishing
the South Asian University was passed by the Parliament
in December 2008 and will become an Act after receiving
Presidential Assent. The Headquarters Agreement on
establishing the University was signed between
Government of India and the SAARC Secretariat on 1
December, 2008.
The Third Meeting of SAARC Energy Ministers will be
held in Colombo from 28-29 January, 2009. India hosted

the Expert Group Meeting to prepare a concept paper on
SAARC Energy Ring (21 November, 2008, New Delhi)
and the Meeting of the Task Force to evolve a common
template on Technical and Commercial Aspects of
Electricity Grid Interconnections among SAARC Member
States (4 December, 2008, New Delhi). The Energy
Ministers Meeting will discuss issues related to energy
cooperation in the region.
The Meeting of SAARC Ministers of Parliamentary Affairs
will be held in Colombo from 10-11 February, 2009. The
Meeting will discuss issues related to good governance
through Parliamentary Democracy and cooperation
between Ministers of Parliamentary Affairs in the region.
The 31st Session of the Council of Ministers will be held
on 27-28 February, 2009 in Colombo. The Meeting will
be preceded by the 36th Session of the Standing Committee
(25-26 February, 2009) and the 35 th Session of the
Programming Committee (23-24 February, 2009). The
Meetings will review the progress of implementation of
decisions taken during the 15 th SAARC Summit
(Colombo, 2-3 August, 2008) including issues related to
the South Asian University and the SAARC Development
Fund.
The Inter-Governmental Meeting to establish the
permanent premises of the SAARC Museum of Textiles
and Handicrafts held in New Delhi (11-12 November,
2008) decided that the Museum will be based in Dilli Haat,
Pitampura with funds for premises provided by India and
running costs provided through the assessed contribution
of Member states. India will also be organising another
bands festival and a students exchange programme this
2008.
India has paid its assessed contribution of US$ 89.8 million
and the first instalment of its voluntary contribution of
US$ 33.9 million for the SAARC Development Fund
(SDF). A consultant has been appointed by Government
of India for implementing the projects on maternal and
child healthcare under SDF.
A manifestation of SAARC’s transformation from
declaratory to implementation is the successful
implementation of the SAARC telemedicine project
funded by India, in Bhutan, through a hub-and-spoke
mechanism. The other spokes of the Project are being
implemented in Sri Lanka and Afghanistan. The SAARC
tele-education project starting with Sri Lanka, the
SAARC Rain water harvesting projects starting with Sri
Lanka and Bhutan, the SAARC Project on strengthening
of the SAARC Terrorist Offences Monitoring Desk

126

President, Pratibha Devisingh Patil with the Heads of State of BIMSTEC Summit,
in New Delhi on 13 November, 2008.

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh, the President of Brazil, Lula da Silva and the President of South Africa, Kgalema
Motlanthe witnessing the signing of the trilateral Agreements/MoUs, at the Third Summit of the India, Brazil & South Africa
(IBSA) Dialogue Forum, in New Delhi on 15 October, 2008.

127

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

(STOMD) and SAARC Drug Offences Monitoring Desk
(SDOMD) based in Sri Lanka and the SAARC Project
on networking of National Police Authorities of Member
States, are also under implementation using the hub-andspoke design, and are funded by Government of India.
Due to India’s dynamic commitment to SAARC, to engage
neighbouring countries on core developmental aspects of
Health, Education and Infrastructure, the number of
SAARC activities/meetings held per annum has made a
quantum jump from 33 to 75. The 34th Session of the
Programming Committee, at its meeting in Kandy from 1920 November, 2008 has scheduled 133 more activities and
meetings for 2009 until 2010, reflecting the new dynamic
SAARC that is being increasingly seen as the premier
vehicle of regional economic cooperation to bring the fruits
of development to the people of South Asia.

Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi Sectoral
Technical and Economic Cooperation
(BIMSTEC)
Under India’s Chairmanship since August 2006,
BIMSTEC (which brings together Bangladesh, Bhutan,
India, Myanmar, Nepal, Sri Lanka and Thailand)
registered significant progress in its activities. The Second
BIMSTEC Summit – held in New Delhi on 13 November,
2008 – was attended by Heads of States/Governments
from all BIMSTEC partner countries. The Summit
signalled India’s continued commitment to BIMSTEC,
which is integral to our ‘Look East’ policy.
Prime Minister called for a comprehensive review of
BIMSTEC activities and for providing a blue print for
future cooperation in priority areas having maximum
potential, for producing visible results. BIMSTEC being
a bridge between South Asia and South East Asia, the
need to focus on transport, infrastructure and logistics,
marine resources, disaster management and people-topeople contacts, was emphasised. Prime Minister
announced 150 scholarships to BIMSTEC partner
countries in addition to the 300 scholarships already
available to BIMSTEC countries.
The Summit noted the finalisation of BIMSTEC
Convention on Combating International Terrorism,
Transnational Organized Crime and Illicit Drug
Trafficking, Memorandum of Association (MoA)
regarding BIMSTEC Energy Centre in India,
Memorandum of Association (MoA) regarding BIMSTEC
Weather and Climate Centre in India and Memorandum

of Understanding (MoU) on BIMSTEC Cultural
Industries Commission and BIMSTEC Cultural Industries
Observatory in Bhutan. Summit provided further
momentum to early conclusion of BIMSTEC FTA for
‘Trade in Goods’ which has registered substantial progress.
Retreat focused on international financial crisis, energy
security, food security and climate change.
Other BIMSTEC events/meetings hosted by India during
the year 2008 included the Second Expert Group Meeting
on Agriculture Cooperation (24-26 April, 2008), 12th
Senior Officials Meeting and Tenth Ministerial Meeting
(from 26-29 August, 2008), the fourth meeting of
BIMSTEC Joint Working Group (JWG) on Counter
Terrorism and Transnational Crime (CTTC) (22-23
October, 2008), a BIMSTEC Business Summit - jointly
organised by apex chambers – CII, FICCI and
ASSOCHAM (12 November, 2008) with focus on Energy
including hydel-power, transportation and connectivity,
and agribusiness including fisheries and a ‘curtain raiser’
to the Second BIMSTEC Summit on 8 November 2008
in Kolkata by Indian Chamber of Commerce organized at
which External Affairs Minister was the Chief Guest.

India – ASEAN
India has been following a conscious “Look East” policy
since early 1990s. India’s engagement with ASEAN
through India – ASEAN mechanism and our participation
in the East Asia Summit are integral to this approach and
reflect our growing ties with larger Asia-Pacific
community. Therefore, we see our continued and
increasing participation in both ASEAN and EAS as
supplementing, at the regional level.
As a consequence of India’s increasing economic
engagement and integration with the East Asia region,
the ASEAN-India bilateral trade had already reached US$
30 billion in 2007-08 and is expected to achieve the target
of US$ 50 billion in 2010.
Making tangible progress on various commitments made
by Prime Minister during Sixth India – ASEAN Summit,
India established an India-ASEAN S&T Fund with (an
initial contribution of US$ 1 million and hosted the first
batch of 50 students from ASEAN member countries. The
annual special training course for ASEAN diplomats has
been conducted in August/September where 24 young
ASEAN diplomats participated. MoS(AS) participated
in the Post Ministerial Meeting of ASEAN in July in
Singapore. India hosted the 14th ASEAN-India Working
Group Meeting in New Delhi on 30 October.

128

Multilateral Economic Relations

India ASEAN Free Trade Agreement
The negotiations for the agreement on ‘Trade in Goods’
under the Comprehensive Economic Cooperation
Agreement (CECA) between India and ASEAN which
commenced in the year 2004 were concluded following the
Seventh ASEAN – India Economic Ministers Meeting held
on 28 August in Singapore and the Senior Economic
Officials Meeting held in Pattaya, Thailand, on 7 November.

Mekong Ganga Cooperation (MGC)
Mekong Ganga Cooperation (MGC) is another building
block of our Look East policy. India continued to provide
annual scholarships to MGC Member countries.

Brazil, Russia, India and China (BRIC)
The year 2008 saw the first Standalone meeting of BRIC
Foreign Ministers hosted by Russia in Yekaterinburg in
May. The idea of quadrilateral cooperation in BRIC format
was first mooted by the then Russian President Putin in
2006. Secretary (ER) led the Indian delegation to the
preparatory meeting of BRIC Deputy Foreign Ministers
held in Rio de Janero from 10-11 March, 2008 to prepare
the roadmap for the first formal meeting of BRIC Foreign
Ministers meeting in Russia in May 2008. Indian
delegation to the Meeting was led by External Affairs
Minister, Shri Pranab Mukherjee. A Joint Communiqué
was issued following the first standalone BRIC FMs’
Meeting. The Joint Communiqué inter alia emphasized
the prospects of the BRIC dialogue based on mutual trust
and respect, common interests and the similarity of
approaches toward the pressing problems of global
development. It set forth BRIC’s position that today’s
world order should be based on the rule of international
law and the strengthening of multilateralism with the
United Nations playing the central role and reaffirmed
the need for a comprehensive reform of the UN with a
view to make it more efficient so that it can deal with the
current global challenges more effectively.
Another significant development in cooperation in BRIC
format was the first informal meeting of BRIC Heads of
State/Government hosted by the Russian President on
the sidelines of G8 Summit in Toyako, Japan on 9 July.
Prime Minister attended this meeting. BRIC Finance/
Economic Ministers also held their first meeting on the
margins of G-20 Meeting in Sao Paulo on 7 November.

G8 – Outreach Sessions
Prime Minister attended the G8-Outreach Sessions in
Toyako, Japan on 9 July. India was invited as one of the
Outreach countries. Issues discussed at the G8 – Outreach

Sessions included Heiligendamm Process, world economy,
climate change, environment and development with focus
on Africa and Regional issues. India’s participation in the
G8 – Outreach Sessions afforded us an opportunity to
present India’s perspectives on a wide range of issues in a
forthright manner. G8 countries expressed willingness to
work with India in the field of Civil Nuclear Cooperation.
Chair’s Summary of the 2008 G8 Summit included a para
to this effect.
At an exclusive session as expanded G8 – Outreach
Session (called Leaders Meeting of Major Economies,
bringing together G8, India, China, Mexico, Brazil, South
Africa, Australia, Indonesia, South Korea, the European
Commission and the UN) devoted to Climate Change,
Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh emphasised that
given the critical importance of sustained and accelerated
economic growth for all developing countries, for the
present, developing countries cannot consider
quantitative restrictions on their emissions. He
underscored that there must be new and additional
resources made available to developing countries to help
them in their efforts to tackle the challenges of climate
change. Following the Meeting a Declaration of Leaders
Meeting of Major Economies on Energy Security and
Climate Change was issued.
O-5 (Brazil, China, India, Mexico & South Africa)
Leaders met on 8 July prior to G8 – Outreach Sessions
and held discussions covering a wide range of issues
including world economy, food security, climate change,
energy security and South-South Cooperation. A Political
Declaration was issued following the meeting.

Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM)
India participated in various Senior Officials and other
meetings of ASEM during the year leading up to the
Seventh ASEM Summit in Beijing from 24-25 October.
Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh led the Indian
delegation to the Summit. This was India’s first Summit
participation at the highest level after the consensus
decision to invite India to join was taken at the Sixth
ASEM Summit held in Helsinki in September 2006. The
Seventh ASEM Summit took place in the backdrop of
prevailing international financial turmoil. Prime Minister
intervened in the first Plenary Session on the International
Economic and Financial Situation and the Third Session
on Sustainable Development. The Summit resulted in
release of Chair’s Statement of the Seventh ASEM
Summit, Beijing Declaration on Sustainable Development
and a Statement on International Financial Situation.

129

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

G-20 Summit
Prime Minister attended the G-20 Summit convened by
US President in Washington on 15 November. Prime
Minister emphasized that the future global economic
architecture must be designed to deal with failure of
regulatory and supervisory mechanisms, inadequate
appreciation and management of systemic risks and
inadequate transparency in financial institutions, which
led to the current global financial turmoil. He also
emphasised the importance of broad based multilateral
approaches in this regard including with broader
representation in the specialized forums dealing with
financial stability, notably the Basle Committee on
Banking Supervision and the Financial Stability Forum
than they have at present. The Group of Twenty (G-20)
brings together the following countries, namely,
Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, France,
Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Russia,
Saudi Arabia, South Africa, South Korea, Turkey, the
United Kingdom and the United States of America.

India, Brazil and South Africa (IBSA)
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh chaired the Third
India, Brazil and South Africa (IBSA) Summit held in
New Delhi on 15 October. President of Brazil and the
newly appointed President of South Africa attended the
Summit.
The Third IBSA Summit focused upon implementation
of agreements by drawing up programmes of cooperation
and resolving connectivity problems and strengthening
of civil society involvement as highlighted by the Prime
Minister during the Second IBSA Summit in Pretoria
(October 2007) and as also accepted by Brazil and South
Africa. The Third Summit also addressed the critical
current issues on the international agenda which have a
major bearing on the three countries, e.g.: the Financial
Crisis, Energy and Food Security issues, WTO, Climate
Change and Terrorism. A trilateral trade target of USD
25 billion has been set to be achieved by 2015. It was
agreed that the negotiations on the proposed IndiaMERCOSUR-SACU trade arrangement would be pursued
in a time-bound manner.
MoUs/Action Plans/Agreements in seven areas, viz.
Tourism, Trade Facilitation for Standards, Technical
Regulations & Conformity Assessment, Environment,
Human Settlements Development, Five Year Action Plan
for Maritime Transport, Five Year Action Plan for Civil
Aviation and Women’s Development and Gender Equality
Programmes were signed at the Summit.

The Summit was preceded by 14 Working Groups held in
India during September-October, 2008 and meetings of
the Academic, Business Summit, Editors’ and Women’s
Forums, which are important segments of the evolving
IBSA process and represent civil society outreach. Actionoriented work programmes were drawn during the
Working Group meetings. The areas of cooperation under
IBSA are diverse and relevant to socio-economic
development. India also organized the IBSA Cultural
Festival and the first Food Festival during the Summit
and an IBSA Film Festival is on the anvil.

Indian Ocean Rim Association for
Regional Cooperation (IOR-ARC)
The First IOR-ARC Film Festival was held in New Delhi
from February-March 2008 as part of Indian initiative
announced at the Seventh IOR-ARC Council of Ministers
(COM) meeting held in Teheran in March 2007.
Australia, Bangladesh, India, Iran, Kenya, Mautitius,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Tanzania and Thailand
participated in the Festival.
MoS Shri E. Ahamed led the Indian delegation to the
Eighth Council of Ministers (COM) meeting of Indian
Ocean Rim Association of Regional Cooperation (IORARC) was held in Tehran on 4 May. The Council of
Ministers called for the implementation of the Action Plan
and the need to prepare a ten-year road-map for future
direction of the Association, expedite the Track II
mechanism to enhance private sector involvement in the
activities of the Association in the areas of business, trade
and economic cooperation and called for strengthening
of the Secretariat including its financial capacity, salary
and allowances of personnel to make the Secretariat
efficient and dynamic.
The Eighth COM meeting was an important milestone in
the history of the organization and particularly for India. A
3-4 year Plan of Action cycle has been prepared wherein
six priority areas have been highlighted pertaining to the
areas of (1) Trade and Investment, Finance and Energy;
(2) Education, Culture and Technology; (3) Fisheries; (4)
Tourism; (5) Disaster Management and Risk reduction ;
and (6) Information and Communication Technology
(ICT). India proposed that over and above the six identified
areas, any new areas having a bearing on the Indian Ocean
and which would be unique to the organization bringing
value to regional cooperation could also be taken up as
priority areas. The Chair of Indian Ocean Studies has been
filled up by selection. An Indian candidate Prof. Rao from

130

Multilateral Economic Relations

Osmania University, Hyderabad has been selected for the
post.
India offered training and scholarships to strengthen
capacity building according to the requirements of
member countries, under the Indian Technical and
Economic Cooperation (ITEC) Programme. Under the
General Agreement agreed by the UMIOR and Academic
Group, wherein funding for two students per member
country by respective countries has been proposed, India
offered, in the first year of its implementation, a total of
36 scholarships under the Indian Council for Cultural
Relations (ICCR) for postgraduate studies in India. India
also offered training for IOR-ARC Secretariat staff under
the ITEC Programme as well as training on IORNET with
FICCI. India also offered a Specialized Training Course
for Foreign Diplomats for IOR-ARC member countries
to be organized by the Foreign Service Institute of the
Ministry of External Affairs. India also reiterated its offer
to host a Film Festival every two years after the success of
the First IOR-ARC Film Festival hosted by India in
February 2008.

Asia Cooperation Dialogue
The Seventh Asia Cooperation Dialogue (ACD)
Ministerial Meeting (AMM) was held in Astana on 16
October. The items on the agenda for discussion by the
Ministers were ACD Progress, its future directions, issues
relating to lifting of the temporary moratorium for ACD
membership, regional and international issues of interest.
Meeting agreed to Kyrgyz Republic’s membership as 31st
country, and accepted Morocco as ACD Partner for
Development. The Ministers adopted a declaration at the
end of the meeting reviewing the progress of ACD and
expressing concern about the challenges of Food, Energy
and Financial Crisis. The Ministers also recognized cultural
cooperation as the 20th area under ACD framework with
Iran as Prime Mover and India as Co-Prime Mover. India’s
active role in the ACD process and its initiatives to host
the Track II seminar, fourth ACD Tourism Business Forum
in 2009 as well as its initiative to be Co-Prime Mover for
Cultural Cooperation Project was commended by all the
delegations.

131

11

Technical & Economic Cooperation and
Development Partnership

T

he Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation
(ITEC) Programme and the Special Commonwealth
Assistance for Africa Programme (SCAAP), focussing on
sharing of experiences, transfer of technology and capacity
building, formed a very important component of India’s
development partnership and cooperation with the
developing world. The usefulness and relevance of these
cooperative interactions in different countries was
reflected in the increasing number of participants in the
programmes confirmed by high level representatives from
developing countries in Africa, Asia, Eurasia, Latin
America and the Caribbean at bilateral meetings with
their Indian counterparts and at various bilateral and
multilateral fora.
ITEC and SCAAP continued to draw large numbers of
participants to the training programmes conducted by
institutions in India, both Government and in the private
sector, under the civilian and defence training
programmes. Around 5000 professionals, in Government
and other sectors from 158 developing countries (Serbia
and Montenegro became partner countries in 2008),
attended the courses in areas of interest and advantage
to them. The website launched last year for ITEC and
SCAAP applicants has been working efficiently and has
resulted in marked improvement in the implementation
of the ITEC Programme. A brochure of the training
programme was brought out in English and five other
foreign languages, namely, Arabic, French, Portuguese,
Spanish and Russian. (List of 158 ITEC partner countries
is at Annexure XIII.)

Civilian Training Programme
The civilian training programme, fully sponsored by the
Government of India with 43 institutions on the panel,
conducted around 200 courses, primarily short-term, for
working professionals on a wide and diverse range of skills
and disciplines. The most sought after courses were in
the field of information technology and linguistics
(English). Training was imparted to Government officials
in areas such as finance & accounts, audit, banking,
education, planning & administration, parliamentary
studies, crime records, etc. Others availed of training

facilities in technical/specialised courses such as textiles,
rural electrification, tool design and ophthalmologic
equipment. In addition, general courses pertaining to rural
development, SMEs and entrepreneurship development
also attracted many participants. List of institutions
offering civilian training courses under ITEC and SCAAP
programmes of the Ministry of External Affairs is at the
Appendices.
The ITEC Programme is essentially bilateral. However,
in recent years the scope of ITEC’s activities has increased
and it has also been associated with regional and
multilateral organisations. These organisations and
groupings include the Association of South East Asia
Nations (ASEAN), G-15, Bay of Bengal Initiative for
Multi Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation
(BIMSTEC), Mekong Ganga Cooperation (MGC),
African Union (AU), Afro-Asian Rural Development
Organization (AARDO), Pan African Parliament,
Caribbean
Community
(CARICOM),
the
Commonwealth and World Trade Organisation (WTO).
Apart from the regular courses, the Technical Cooperation
(TC) Division also organizes special courses and study
visits. In the wake of the India-Africa Forum Summit held
in April 2008, outreach programmes for 70 African women
and youth were organized. The women’s group having
representatives from 28 African countries visited Bhuj,
Ahmedabad, Hyderabad, Agra, Jaipur and Delhi to get a
glimpse of both rural and modern India. Interactive
sessions were organized with women self-help groups in
Bhuj, Ahmedabad, Hyderabad and Jaipur. The youth
group visited Anand near Ahmedabad to see the White
Revolution of India and Infosys, Biocon, Indian Institute
of Science in Bangalore before heading to Guwahati and
Shillong in the North East where a friendly football match
was played between the local University students and
members of the African youth group.
Pursuant to the India-Africa Forum Summit, this year the
focus was Africa-centric. A special course on ‘Auditing in
IT Environment‘ for Africa, IOR-ARC countries and
Afghanistan was conducted through International Centre
for Information Systems & Audit (ICISA), NOIDA.

132

Technical & Economic Cooperation and Development Partnership

Courses for the year 2009-10 were finalized and conveyed
to both ITEC-participating Missions as well as ITECempanelled Institutes. Country-wise slots were finalized
and conveyed to all ITEC participating Missions.

Defence Training
Growing interest in defence training was evident with the
three wings of the Defence Services, i.e. Army, Navy and
Air Force accepting 757 officers/trainees in various
defence training institutions, showing an increase from
572 participants in the previous year. The courses were
general and specialized in nature and included security
and strategic studies, defence management, artillery,
electronics, mechanical engineering, marine hydrography,
counter insurgency and jungle warfare as also foundation
courses for young officers in the three services.
Applications to the premiere defence courses at the
National Defence College (NDC), New Delhi, and the
Defence Services Staff College (DSSC), Wellington, were
oversubscribed and saw officers from developed countries
also attending them on a self-financing basis. The
increasing interaction attests to the importance attached
to defence training in India by developing and developed
countries. Distribution of slots for DSSC (Defense Services
Staff College) course was finalized and conveyed to the
concerned Missions.

Deputation of Experts
At the request of Governments and international
organizations, 45 experts in the civilian and defence fields
were on deputation to advise and provide expertise in
areas including information technology, auditing, legal
expertise, diverse agricultural fields, pharmacology,
statistics and demography, public administration and
textiles. The services of defence teams were availed of by
Lao PDR, Lesotho, Seychelles and Zambia in training and
advisory capacities.

Other Assistance
During the year, wheat seeds were presented to Mongolia.
Study Tour
(i) At the request of Mongolia, two experts from
International Statistical Education Centre, Kolkata,
were deputed to Mongolia for a week to organize a
short-term training programme for the staff of
Mongolian National Statistical Office.
(ii) At the request of Nigeria, a team of four experts
from the Planning Commission of India was deputed
to Nigeria to attend a workshop on ‘Effective
formulation of development plans in Nigeria for the

federal and state government senior planning
officers’.

Development Partnership & Projects
Cooperation
A number of bilateral projects were undertaken in 200809 notably in the field of information technology and small
and medium enterprises, civil construction and vocational
training. The focus of the projects under the bilateral
cooperation programme was on setting up the requisite
physical infrastructure and capacity building to ensure
long-term sustainability of the projects.
The main projects under implementation included the
following:
Lao People’s Democratic Republic (Lao PDR):
Information Technology project to strengthen capacity
building in IT sector in Lao PDR was run for the second
year by the implementing agency, i.e. NIC.
Indonesia: A feasibility study was being undertaken by
the Administrative Staff College of India, Hyderabad, at
Aceh, Indonesia for establishment of an Administrative
Staff College at Aceh.
Latin & Central American Countries: In the information
technology field, three IT Training Centers in Latin and
Central American countries of El Salvador, Honduras, and
Nicaragua have been set up and training has already
started. An agreement has been signed to set up an IT
Centre in Jamaica by NIIT Limited. These Centres aim
at capacity building as also strengthening the IT
infrastructure in the respective countries.
Maldives: The civil construction work on the ‘India
Maldives Friendship Faculty of Hospitality and Tourism
Studies’ has commenced and is expected to be completed
in 2009.
Zimbabwe: Following the bilateral agreement with
Zimbabwe in 2006, the project on Small & Medium
Enterprises (SMEs) was in an advanced stage of
implementation. Equipment and machinery has been
supplied. 19 Zimbabwean personnel have been imparted
training in India.

Aid to other developing countries
IT Centres in EI-Salvador, Nicaragua and Honduras were
set up and training commenced. IT Centre in Jamaica
was set up and training commenced. Conservation and
restoration work at the Wat Phou Temple complex Project
in Lao PDR commenced. Funds released to Archeological
Survey of India for Phase I work.

133

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

Feasibility studies

Aid for Disaster Relief

Several other projects in the field of consultancy services
for setting up infrastructure projects are at various stages
of implementation, notably the feasibility study for setting
up of software technology park in Antigua & Barbuda.
Feasibility study for setting up an IT centre in Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia has been conducted by the experts from CDAC. Similar feasibility study for setting up of an IT centre
in Syria was under implementation. Feasibility study for
setting up an IT Centre in Syria completed. Feasibility
study in Antigua & Barbuda for sewerage treatment plant
completed. Feasibility study for establishing
Administrative Staff College in Aceh (Indonesia)
commenced in March 2009.

India rendered immediate disaster relief assistance to
countries affected by natural calamities. 5000 MTs of Sugar
and 5000 MTs of Rice to Mongolia were supplied. Medical
relief for cyclones and floods affected areas in Belize, Haiti
and Dominican Republic was provided. Flood relief to
Kyrgyzstan, Malawi, Zambia and Mozambique was
provided. Humanitarian assistance was extended to
countries like China, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Cuba, Lao
PDR and Haiti affected by earthquake, cyclones, floods
etc. Flood relief to Lao PDR granted. Generator sets &
other equipments supplied to Tajikistan. Earthquake Relief
Assistance provided to China.

134

Investment and Technology Promotion

L

12

ines of Credit (LoC) are an important instrument of
our foreign policy. Requests for Lines of Credit from
friendly foreign Governments were processed by the ITP
Division in consultation with the concerned Territorial
Divisions. The LoCs helped project our growing economic
strength and capabilities, as well as our willingness to
contribute to infrastructure development and capacity
building in the recipient countries. During the period April
2008-December 2008, 15 LoCs amounting to a sum of
US$ 672.68 million were approved. The policy governing
our LoCs was also reviewed for more effective
implementation and to bring about greater transparencies
in the processing and award of contracts by the borrowing
governments in LoC funded projects.

publication projected a comprehensive picture of India’s
economic growth, sectoral development and was useful
as an aid to promote business and investment
opportunities. Our Missions/Posts used this book to widely
publicize the country’s economic strengths, financial
viability and prospects business and investment returns
in India.

ITP Division supported FICCI in organizing the IndiaAfrica Business Partnership Summit in New Delhi in
January 2009. The President of Rwanda, Mr. Paul Kagame
was the Chief Guest at this Summit, which was attended
by over 250 delegates from 32 African countries, more
than half of which were represented by Ministers. The
Summit focused on key sectors including, Railways, Road
and Construction; Healthcare and Pharma; ICT; Power;
Mining; and, Agriculture. Earlier, in partnership with the
Confederation of Indian Industries (CII), the first of a
series of seminars titled ‘India-Latin America and
Caribbean: Opportunities for Trade and Investments’ was
organized in September 2008 in Hyderabad. The seminar
was conceived and organized outside the capital so as to
expand the outreach and sensitize Indian business houses
located in our states about the commercial opportunities
available in the different parts of the world.

As the Indian economy grows, energy issues become an
increasingly important focus of our diplomacy. With the
approval of the External Affairs Minister, an Energy
Security Unit (ESU) was established in September 2007,
to facilitate our multifaceted global engagement in pursuit
of our interests in the energy sector. ESU serves as the
nodal point in MEA for energy security issues and
maintains close coordination with the concerned Energy
Ministries in order to support their international
engagement through appropriate diplomatic interventions
and an active interface with our Missions.

ITP Division remained actively engaged in the meetings
of the Foreign Investment Promotion Board, Reserve Bank
of India, WAPCOS, EXIM Bank, other trade bodies and
in the bilateral civil aviation talks conducted by the
Ministry of Civil Aviation. Trade promotion bodies and
delegations, both at the centre and state-level were
assisted in their external interface. Trade and investment
issues relating to important products like fertilizer and
ayurvedic products were also taken up in this period.
An updated edition of ‘India-Dynamic Business Partner:
Investor Friendly Destination’ was published in October
2008 and circulated to all Missions/Posts abroad. This

The ITP Division’s website: www.indiainbusiness.nic.in
hosts comprehensive information on commercial and
investment opportunities in India. The website was useful
in providing information to potential foreign investors and
trade partners.

Energy Security Unit

The unit was actively involved in energy security related
seminars and conferences hosted by other Ministries and
Departments, including apex Chambers of Commerce. On
several occasions, the Unit actively interceded on behalf
of Indian companies to resolve difficulties faced in their
dealings with energy-surplus countries.
ESU worked closely with the Ministry of Petroleum and
Natural Gas in organizing the India-CIS Roundtable on
Hydrocarbons in November 2008 and Petrotech 2009. The
unit hosted/co-hosted seminars on India’s energy options,
commissioned studies on energy surplus countries and
regions and extended assistance to Indian companies
dealing with overseas energy collaborations and
opportunities. The Unit also took the initiative in setting
up a Working Group on Energy with senior representatives
of oil and infrastructure PSUs.

135

13

Policy Planning and Research

T

he Policy Planning and Research Division served as
a nodal point for interaction with the University
Grants Commission (UGC) and its affiliates and the Area
Study Centers (ASC) located in various universities,
specializing in research on various regions of the world.
The Division extended financial assistance to various
academic institutions/think-tanks located in different
parts of the country for holding conferences, seminars,
preparation of research papers, exchange of scholars on
issues related to India’s external relations and security. A
list of seminars/conferences/meetings/NGOs partly funded
by the Policy Planning and Research Division is given as
Appendix. A computerized database of experts and
institutions specializing in policy research and analysis has
also been developed by the Division and is updated on
regular basis.
National Interest Project is funded by MEA through PP
& R Division. It is conducting studies on 20 important
issues, which have bearing on India’s national interests
and foreign policy. Few studies have already been
completed.
Policy Planning and Research Division continued issuing
Monthly Summary for the Cabinet. This covers the broad
spectrum of India’s relations with different countries of
the world during the month.
The Division continued to edit and publish the Annual
Report of the Ministry. The Report serves as a
compendium of India’s interaction with the rest of the
world in the political, economic, and cultural fields,
including the views of the government on various facets
of international relations.
The Division reviewed the functioning of Business Centers
set up in some of the Indian Missions and Posts abroad as
also content, scope and frequency of reporting by the
Missions.

Situation Room
The Situation Room is a multifaceted, multi facility state
of the art complex of the Ministry. Set up in 2007, it has
the requisite communication connectivity and display

panels which would be required for handling any crisis
situation. Besides its primary role as a Crisis Management
Cell of the Ministry, the complex has been effectively
utilized by all Divisions for various purposes such as
presentations & conferences including telephone /video
conferences etc. The role of the Situation Room is as given
below:
(a)

Act as a multi facility complex facilitating
conferences, presentations, periodic briefings, video/
telephone conferences with Head of Missions,
discussions on maps and images as required by
various Divisions of the Ministry.

(b)

Act as a Crisis Management Cell (Control Room)
in case of crisis.

Activities During the Period of the Report
Situation Room as Crisis Management Cell: A 24-hour
operational Control Room was set up in the Situation
Room during the recent Mumbai Crisis from 27 November
to 1 December, 2008. The Control Room operated in
coordination with another Control Room set up at
Mumbai. This Control Room was facilitated and
coordinated the information flow to all countries across
the globe regarding the well being of foreign nationals
affected by the incident. Help Lines were set up in the
complex wherein the queries of Indians as well as foreign
nationals were taken and promptly responded to.
Establishment of Video Conferencing Facility in
Missions. In consonance with the vision of the FS to add
a new dimension of communication, ‘Video Conferencing’
in the Ministry, video conferencing facility is being
established in selected Missions in a phased manner. As
part of Phase 1, the facility was established in Missions at
Paris, Brussels and London in June 2008, Dhaka &
Colombo in November 2008 and Beijing in December
2008. The facility was established in Missions at New York,
Washington, Moscow, Geneva and Vienna by March 2009.
In addition, it is proposed to establish the facility in
Missions in other SAARC countries in near future. The
technical feasibility of communication connectivity
required for video conferencing facility in these Missions
is being ascertained, once these are obtained the facility
would be installed in these Missions.

136

Policy Planning and Research

Alternate Means of Communication to Selected
Missions. An INMARSAT terminal was installed in the
Situation Room Complex in May 2008. This terminal is
being utilized as an alternate means of communication
with few Indian Missions (10) where normal land line
communication is not reliable.

Boundary Cell
1.

The functions of Boundary Cell, established as part
of PP&R Division, is enumerated as under:
(a)

(b)

(c)

Examine all aspects of India’s external
boundaries, scrutiny of map sheets involving
international boundaries of boundaries of India
in coordination with the Survey of India, for
publication.
Provide cartographic advice and technical
support on border related matters to Territorial
Divisions.

2.

(b)

Attended Inter Ministerial meeting joint
working group convened by Ministry of Home
Affairs.

(c)

Participated in Inter Ministerial meeting on
Bangladesh in July 2008 convened by JS (BSM).

(d) Participated in Inter Ministerial meeting on
Bangladesh convened by JSG, Ministry of
Defence on 18 July, 2008.
(e)

Attended Inter Ministerial meeting on
continental shelf with Ministry of Earth
Sciences.

(f)

Attended Inter Ministerial meeting convened
by JS (Navy), Ministry of Defence on baseline
system of India on 21 July, 2008.

(g)

Participated in Inter Ministerial meeting on
status of Land & Maritime boundary of India
convened by Special Secretary (PP) on 12
September, 2008.

Assist in collection, collation and digitization
of the available cartographic strip/Basis maps.

(d) Liaise with Survey of India/State Government
regarding joint boundary survey work
including maintenance/repairs of Boundary
pillar and on reports of any encroachment into
Indian Territory (maintaining database etc.)
(e)

and provided requisite as directed by the CSG
in the month of May held on 22 May, 2008.

Assist in the collection, collection and
digitization of information pertaining to the
maritime boundary, Exclusive Economic Zone
(EEZ) and delineation of the Continental
Shelf.

(f)

Scrutinize restricted map sheets - in
coordination with the Ministry of the Defencerequested by various Government and semiGovernment Organisations, for the purpose of
development work.

(g)

Liaise with the Naval Hydrographic Office and
Department of Ocean Development.

(h) Participated in India Pakistan NSA level talks
on 13 October, 2008.
(j)

Participated in Inter Ministerial meeting on
India-Myanmar and India-Bangladesh
boundary convened by JS (BSM) on 22
October, 2008.

k)

Visited Land records Department of
Government of West Bengal for collection of
records pertaining to International Boundary
(West Bengal sector).

l)

Convened Inter Ministerial meeting for
relocation & reconstruction of missing and
maintenance of existing International
boundary pillars on India-Pakistan Boundary,
to be undertaken during the current field
season 2008-2009 and coordinated the same
with various Central/State Government
agencies.

(h) Be a repository of all maps/documents/
information pertaining to India’s international
borders.

(m) Preparation of CCS note on baseline system
of India.

(j)

(n) Provided inputs (maps) for CCS note on
Extended Continental Shelf claims of India.

Scrutinize inaccurate maps published in
foreign magazines, journals and atlases and
take necessary action for getting these maps
corrected.

Boundary Cell has participated in various Internal/
Inter Ministerial meetings on International Land &
Maritime Boundary of India as given below:
(a)

Participated in China study group meetings
137

(o)

(p)

Provided inputs to Inter ministerial meeting
on Continental Shelf claim of:
(i)

Myanmar

(ii)

Sri Lanka

Briefing to NSA on Continental Shelf and
Baseline System.

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

(q)
3.

Desktop exercise on India- China Boundary
(Sikkim Sector).

(e)

In addition to the above, the following tasks were
carried out during the year:-

Authentication of IB in Topographical maps
being published by SOI and trans-frontier
maps being published by Ministry of Defence.

(f)

Presentation given on India boundary issues.

(a)

Building data base for boundary strip maps
covering the external boundary of India.
(Bhutan, Pakistan Completed)

(a)

India’s High Commissioner to Pakistan on Sir
Creek.

(b)

Ambassador Designate to Bhutan

(b)

Archival and Digitization of boundary strip
maps.

(g)

Clearance of Archival Maps on Assam
Nagaland Boundary.

(c)

Archival of Topographical Maps, in digital and
hard copy form, published by Survey of India
covering International Boundary of India.

(h) Afghanistan map indicating India’s assistance.

(d) Provided cartographic support to various
Divisions of the Ministry on need basis.

138

(j)

Presentation given to IFS Probationers on
surveying and mapping technologies.

Protocol

R

eflecting India’s active engagement with the world,
there were 62 incoming visits during 2008 at the level
of Head of State, Vice President, Head of Government,
and Foreign Minister; and 27 outgoing visits at these levels
during the year. Three Summits were held in Delhi- the
India-Africa Forum Summit in April 2008; the Third
India-Brazil-South Africa (IBSA) Dialogue Forum
Summit in October 2008; and the Bay of Bengal Initiative
for Multi-Sectoral Technological and Economic
Cooperation (BIMSTEC) Summit in November 2008.
Five countries opened Resident Missions during the AprilDecember 2008 period and these included Lithuania,
Macedonia, Madagascar, Gabon, and El Salvador. New
Consulates General were approved for five countries in
2008: Turkey in Kolkata, Chennai, Mumbai, and
Hyderabad; France in Kolkata and Bangalore; Iraq in
Mumbai; Argentina in Mumbai; and Japan in Bangalore.

14

12 countries: Botswana, Dominican Republic, El Salvador,
Finland, Ghana, Ivory Coast, Lithuania, Maldives, Poland,
Russian Federation, Switzerland, and Zambia were
accorded permission to open Honorary Consulates in
2008. Sweden and New Zealand opened trade
representations in Mumbai in 2008. New guidelines have
been framed for setting up trade representations and four
new cases are being processed. 143 new posts were created
by foreign missions and international organizations in
2008.The Conference Cell of the Division, besides
assisting in the three Summits, also facilitated the Systema
Integracion de Centro America (SICA) Foreign Ministers
Conference in New Delhi (June 2008); the BIMSTEC
Ministerial Meeting (August 2008); the IBSA Focal Points
and Foreign Ministers Meeting (October 2008) and the
14th ASEAN Working group meeting (October 2008).

State Visits by Head of State/Government/Vice President and equivalent level
S.No.

Dignitary

Dates

1

H.E. Mr. Kostas Karamanlis, Prime Minister of Greece

January 10-13

2.

H.E. Mr. Ferenc Gyurcsany, Prime Minister of Hungary

January 16-19

3.

Rt. Hon Gordon Brown, Prime Minister of United Kingdom

January 20-21

4.

H.E. Mr. Nicolas Sarkozy, President of France

January 25-26

5.

H.E. Mr. Anders Fogh Rasmussen, Prime Minister of Denmark

February 04-08

6.

H.E. Mr. Maumoon Abdul Gayoom, President of Maldives

February 06-12

7.

H.E. Mr. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of Uganda

8

H.M. Sultan Haji Hassanal Bolkiah of Brunei Darussalam

May 20-23

9.

H.E. Mr. Bashar Al Assad, President of Syria

June 17-21

10.

H.E. Lyonchen Jigmi Y Thinley, Prime Minister of Bhutan

11.

H.E. Mr. Hamid Karzai, President of Afghanistan

12.

H.E. Mr. Anand Satyanand, Governor General of New Zealand

13

H.E. Mahmoud Abbas, President of Palestine

14

Their Majesties King Albert II and Queen Paola of Belgium

April 07-11

July 14-17
August 03-05
September 08-14
October 06-09

139

November 03-12

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

15

H.E. Mr. Mohamed Hosny Mubarak, President of Egypt

November 17-19

16

H.E. Mr. Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Prime Minister of Turkey

November 20-24

17

H.E. Mr. Dmitry A Medvedev, President of Russia

December04-06

Summits
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18

Prime Minister of Burkina Faso
[India-Africa Forum Summit]

April 08-09

President of Congo
[India-Africa Forum Summit]

April 08-09

Prime Minister of Ethiopia
[India-Africa Forum Summit]

April 08-09

President of Ghana
[India-Africa Forum Summit]

April 08-09

Vice President of Nigeria
[India-Africa Forum Summit]

April 08-09

President of Senegal
[India-Africa Forum Summit]

April 08-09

President of South Africa
[India-Africa Forum Summit]

April 08-09

President of Tanzania
[India-Africa Forum Summit]

April 08-09

President of Uganda
[India-Africa Forum Summit]

April 08-09

Vice President of Zambia
[India-Africa Forum Summit]

April 08-09

President of Brazil
(IBSA Summit)

October 14-16

President of South Africa
(IBSA Summit)

October 14-16

H.E.Lyonchhen Jigmi Y. Thinley, Prime Minister of Bhutan
(BIMSTEC Summit)

November 12-13

H.E. Dr. Fakiruddin Ahmed, Chief Advisor, Bangladesh
(BIMSTEC Summit)

November 12-13

H.E.Gen Thein Sein, Prime Minister of Myanmar
(BIMSTEC Summit)

November 12-13

H.E. Mr.Pushpa Kamal Dahal ‘Prachanda’, Prime Minister of Nepal
(BIMSTEC Summit)

November 12-13

H.E.Mr. Mahinda Rajapaksa, President of Srilanka
(BIMSTEC Summit)

November 12-13

H.E. Mr. Somchai Wongsawat, Prime Minister of Thailand
(BIMSTEC Summit)

November 12-13

140

Protocol

Official/Working visits by Head of State/Government/Vice President and equivalent level
1.

H.E. Mr. Navinchandra Ramghulam, Prime Minister of Mauritius

January 6-10

2.

H.E. Mr. Jens Stoltenberg, Prime Minister of Norway
[Delhi Sustainable Development Summit]

February 5-7

H.E. Mr. Matti Vanhanen, Prime Minister of Finland
[Delhi Sustainable Development Summit]

February 6-8

3.
4.

H.E. Dr. Olafur R Grimsson, President of Iceland
[Delhi Sustainable Development Summit]

February 6-10

5.

H.E. Mr. Victor A Zubkov, Chairman of the Government of Russian Federation

February 12-13

6.

H.R.H. Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn of Thailand

March 17-22

7.

H.E. Dr. Ali Mohamed Shein, Vice President of Tanzania

March 18-25

8.

H.H. Aga Khan

9.

H.E. Mr. Pushpa Kamal Dahal Prachanda, Prime Minister of Nepal

May 12-19
September 14-18

Official visits by Foreign Minister and equivalent level
1

H.E. Mr. U Nyan Win, Foreign Minister of Myanmar

January 01-04

2

Hon. Maxime Bernier, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Canada

January 10-12

3

H.E. Rashid Meredov, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Turkmenistan

January 20-22

4

H.E. Mr. Ednan Karabaev, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Kyrgyz Republic

February 04-06

5

H.E. Mr. Ali Babacan, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Turkey

February 05-10

6

His Royal Highness Prince Saud Al-Faisal, Foreign Minister of Saudi Arabia

February 28-29

7

H.E. Mr. Antipas Mbusa Nyamwisi, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Congo
Foreign Minister of Kenya [India-Africa Forum Summit]

8

Minister of African Affairs of Libya [India-Africa Forum Summit]

April 08-09

9

H.E. Mr. George Yeo, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Singapore

April 21-25

10

H.E. Mr. Jan Kubis, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Slovak Republic

11

H.E. Dr. Dimitrij Rupel, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Slovenia
[EU Troika meeting]

May 30-31

H.E. Ms. Rama, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of France
[EU Trioka Meeting]

May 30-31

12

SICA Ministerial Meeting (9-11 June, 2008)
1

Costa Rica
H.E. Mr. Bruno Stagno Ugarte, Minister of Foreign Affairs

2

El Salvador
H.E. Mrs. Marisol Argueta de Barillas, Minister of Foreign Affairs

3

Guatemala
H.E. Mr. Rodas Haroldo, Minister of Foreign Affairs

4

Nicaragua
H.E. Mr. Samuel Santos Lopez, Minister of External Relations
141

March 12-14
April 08-09

April 29-May 01

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

5

Panama
H.E. Mr. Samuel Lewis Navarro, First Vice-President and Minister of External Relations

6

Dominican Republic
H.E. Ms. Clara Quinones de Longo, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs

7

Honduras
H.E. Mr. Eduardo Enrique Reina Garcia, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs

June 09-11

8

H.E. Mr. Rohitha Bogollagama, Foreign Minister of Sri Lanka

June 15-16

9

H.E. Mr. Makhdoom Shah Mahmood Qureshi, Foreign Minister of Pakistan

10

H.E. Dr. Luis Amado, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Portugal

11

H.E. Mr. Masahiko Koumura, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Japan

12

H.E. Mr. Yang Jiechi, Foreign Minister of China

September 07-09

13

H.E. Mr. Stephen Smith, Foreign Minister of Australia

September 08-12

14

H.E. Mr. Vuk Jeremic, Foreign Minister of Serbia

September 18-20

15

H.E. Mr. Abdulla Shahid, Foreign Minister of Maldives

September 19-20

16

H.E. Dr. Condoleezza Rice, Secretary of State, USA

17

H.E. Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Foreign Minister of Sierra Leone

18

H.E. Mr. Mahmud Ali Durrani, NSA of Pakistan

October 11-15

19

H E. Shri Kamalesh Sharma, Secretary General, Commonwealth

October 19-22

20

H.E. Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Russian Federation

October 19-20

21

Secretary General of UN

October 30-31

22

Secretary General of Arab League

23

Foreign Minister of Ecuador

November 14-17

24

H.E. Dr. Frank Walter Steinmeier, Foreign Minister and Vice Chancellor of Germany

November 19-21

25

Foreign Minister of Estonia

26

H.E. Ms. Condoleezza Rice, Secretary of State, US

June 27
July 7-10
August 03-05

October 04-05
October 7-11

Nov 29- Dec 02

November 24
December 03-04

Private/Transit visits of Heads of State/Government/Vice President and First Ladies and equivalent
level
1

H.E. Dr. Navinchandra Ramgoolam, Prime Minister of Mauritius [Guest of Govt. of Bihar]
Patna, Jaipur, Agra

2

H.E. Alhaji Ali Mahama, Vice President of Ghana [CII Conclave]

3

Former President of Sri Lanka

February 17-24
March 18-22
May 27-30

Visits abroad of President/Vice-President/Prime Minister of India
1

Prime Minister’s visit to China

January 12-15

2

Vice President’s visit to Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan

3

President’s visit to Brazil, Mexico and Chile

April 4-10
April 12-25

142

Protocol

4

Prime Minister’s visit to Bhutan

May 16-17

5

Prime Minister’s visit to Japan

6

Prime Minister’s visit to Sri Lanka

7

Prime Minister’s visit to USA and France

8

Prime Minister’s visit to Japan & China

October 21-25

9

President’s visit to Bhutan

November 5-8

10

Prime Minister’s visit to Oman and Qatar

11

Vice-President’s Visit to Maldives

November 10-12

12

Prime Minister’s visit to USA

November 13-17

13

President’s visit to Vietnam and Indonesia

July 7-10
August 1-3
September 22- October 1

November 8-11

November 24 –December 01

Visits abroad of Minister for External Affairs
1.

Oman

January 13-14

2.

Brasilia & South Africa

February 16-19 and February 20-23

3.

Washington and London

March23-27

4.

Saudi Arabia

April 19-20

5.

South Africa

May 09-16

6.

Pakistan

May 20-21

7.

China

June 04-07

8.

Australia

June 21-24

9.

Colombo

July 30-August 03

10.

New York

September 28-October 02

11.

Washington

12.

Iran

13.

Bhutan

November 05-07

14.

Kathmandu

November 24-26

October 10-11
October 31-November02

List of Conferences organized/assisted by the Conference Cell (from 1 April, 2008-31 January, 2009)
1.

Central America Integration System Foreign Ministers Meeting

10 June 2008

2.

BIMSTEC Ministerial Meeting

3.

3rd Summit of the IBSA Dialogue Forum

13-15 October 2008

4.

14th ASEAN-India Working Group Meeting

30-31 October 2008

5.

3rd BIMSTEC Summit

11-13 November 2008

6.

Conference of Indian Heads of Mission(s)

22-24 December 2008

29 August.2008

143

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

Scheduled Conferences/Meetings
7.

Ministers’ Meeting for Mekong-Ganga Cooperation (MGC)

8.

Conference on Interaction and Confidence Building Measures (CICA)

January 2009
February 2009

List of Foreign Ambassadors/High Commissioners who Presented their Credentials during the Period
1.4.2008 to 30.11.2008
S.No.

Name

Presentation of Credentials

1

H.E. Mr. Marco Antonio D. Brandao, Ambassador of Brazil

4 April 2008

2

H.E. Mr. Durgesh Man Singh, Ambassador of Nepal

4 April 2008

3

H.E. Mr. Desire Koumba, Ambassador of Gabon

4 April 2008

4

H.E. Mr. S.J. Claude Apithy, Ambassador of Benin (Non-Resident)

4 April 2008

5

H.E. Mrs. Angel Patricia Figueroa Rodriguez, Ambassador of El Salvador

16 May 2008

6

H.E. Mr. Hj. Sidek Ali, High Commissioner of Brunei

16 May 2008

7

H.E. Mr. Levent Bilman, Ambassador of Turkey

16 May 2008

8

H.E. Mr. Rainer Imperti, Ambassador of Monaco (Non-Resident)

16 May 2008

9

H.E. Mr. Khalid Salman, Ambassador of Lebanon

10 July 2008

10

H.E. Mr. Andi Muhammad Ghalib, Ambassador of Indonesia

10 July 2008

11

H.E. Mr. Voroshilov Enkhbold, Ambassador of Mongolia

10 July 2008

12

H.E. Mr. Manuel Picasso, Ambassador of Peru

10 July 2008

13

H.E. Mr. Humaid Bin Ali Al-Maani, Ambassador of Oman

14

H.E. Mr. Zady Gbaka Richard, Ambassador of Cote d’ Ivoire

10 November 2008

15

H.E. Mr. Joseph Caron, High Commissioner of Canada

10 November 2008

16

H.E. Mr. Roberto Toscano, Ambassador of Italy

10 November 2008

17

H.E. Mr. Francisco L. Benedicto, Ambassador of Philippines

10 November 2008

18

H.E. Mr. Kenneth Thompson, Ambassador of Ireland

10 November 2008

3 November 2008

Following countries opened their resident Missions in New Delhi during the period from 1/04/2008
to 30/11/2008
1

Lithuania

2

Macedonia

3

Madagascar

4

Gabon

5

El Salvador

144

Consular, Passport and Visa Services

Passport Offices

T

here are presently 37 Passport Offices and 15 Passport
Collection Centres in India. During the year 2008
three new Passport Offices were opened at Amritsar,
Dehradun, and Coimbatore. All Passport Offices are
computerized and they issue machine-printed and
machine readable passports as per the guidelines laid down
by the International Civil Aviation Organisation. Passport
applications are being scanned and stored electronically.

Passport Services
There has been a significant increase in the number of
passports issued over the years. A total of 53.10 lakh
passports were issued in 2008, an increase of approximately
7.45% over the corresponding figure in 2007. A total of
54.11 lakh applications were received in 2008, an increase
of approximately 10.52% over the corresponding figure
in 2007. The total revenue generated from all Passport
Offices also increased to about Rs. 617 crores, an increase
of 8.81% compared to the total revenue in 2007. The
Ministry has been taking a number of measures to make
the passport issuance system simpler and speedier for the
comfort and convenience of the public. Some of the
important steps are delineated as under:
Decentralization through District Passport Cells
and Speed Post Centres
With a view to taking the passport issuance and related
services nearer to the doorsteps of the applicants, District
Passport Cells (DPCs) have been opened at the district
level where the office of the District Magistrate/
Superintendent of Police receives passport applications
and after scrutiny and police verification, forwards them
to the concerned Passport Office for issuance of passports.
Currently, there are 463 DPCs. The passport applications
are also received through the network of 1095 Speed Post
Centres.
Online Applications
Online submission of passport applications has been
introduced in all Passport Offices. The District Passport
Cells referred to above and Speed Post Centres have also
been allowed to file applications on-line and transfer the

15

data to the Passport Offices which facilitates quicker
turnaround in the issuance of passports.
Infrastructure
During 2008, Passport Offices at Lucknow, Jaipur, Bareilly
and Surat shifted to newly constructed Government owned
buildings. Construction is nearing completion in respect of
the Passport Office at Bhubneswar and the office is expected
to shift in June 2009. Construction for the new office at
Visakhapatnam is expected to begin by mid 2009.

Public Grievance Redressal Mechanism
Steps have been taken to strengthen the public grievance
redressal mechanism in all Passport Offices. Facilitation
Counters and Help Desks have also been set up to assist
applicants and also to attend to grievances/complaints
expeditiously. A public grievance redressal mechanism has
also been set up in the CPV Division under the close
supervision of the Joint Secretary (CPV) and Chief
Passport Officer.

Passport Adalats
Passport Offices have been holding Passport Adalats
periodically to redress the grievances of passport
applicants. These Adalats have been very useful in
disposing of old cases.

Right to Information Act (RTI)
A Central Public Information Officer and Assistant Public
Information Officers have been appointed in every
Passport Office to provide information to applicants under
the RTI.

Website
The website of CPV Division www.passport.nic.in, which
was established in 1999, is being updated from time to
time to make it more user-friendly. It has detailed
information on passports, visas, consular matters and PIO
cards. It also has downloadable forms. In 2008, the CPV
Division website has been launched in Hindi. The main
website also provides status enquiry check of passport
applications submitted at all the Passport Offices.

145

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

Consular Attestation

accessible, reliable manner. The Government
accepted the NISG report as a result of which
“Passport Seva Project” has been launched.

During the year (April 2008-March 2009) 2,50,958
personal and educational documents and 2,23,017
commercial documents were attested by the Ministry.

The proposal is to have 77 Passport Seva Kendras
all over the country where the non-sovereign
functions, involved in the passport issuance process,
such as initial scrutiny of the application forms,
acceptance of fee, scanning of the documents, taking
photos, etc., will be performed by Tata Consultancy
Services, the Service Provider. The sensitive
activities such as granting will be performed by the
Government staff. The project is expected to result
in the issue of passports within three days, and where
police verification is required, within three days after
completion of the verification process. The pilot
project is expected to begin at Chandigarh and
Bangalore by June 2009 and the Project is expected
to be implemented fully to cover the entire country
by the beginning of 2010.

Issuance of Visas
Over the years, the procedure for grant of visas by our
Missions and Posts has been simplified including
computerisation of the issuance system. Most Missions
and Posts grant visas either across the counter on the same
day or at the most within 48 hours.

Visa-Waiver Agreements
During 2008, visa-waiver agreements were signed with
Egypt, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, South Africa
and Turkey.

Issuance of Diplomatic/Official Passports
CPV Division issued 2,775 diplomatic and 22,948 official
passports in 2008, as compared to 1,950 diplomatic and
24,867 official passports in 2007. CPV Division issued
8,754 visas to foreign diplomatic and official passports
holders in the year 2008.

(iv) Outsourcing of Visa Work
Fifty one Indian Missions/Posts abroad have been
authorized to outsource visa application collection
work out of which 30 Indian Missions/Posts at Seoul,
Tokyo, Kuala Lumpur, Washington, New York,
Chicago, Houston, San Francisco, Tel Aviv,
Bangkok, Paris, Canberra, Sydney, Melbourne,
Frankfurt, Hamburg, Colombo, Singapore, The
Hague, Beijing, Shanghai, Guanzhou, London,
Birmingham, Edingburgh, Islamabad, Dhaka,
Chittagong, Milan and Kabul have already
outsourced the work.

New Projects
The Ministry has embarked on several projects with a view
to modernizing and upgrading the passport/visa issuance
system. These are as follows:
(i)

Centralized Printing of Passports
The Ministry has successfully implemented the
project for centralised printing of Machine Readable
Passports (MRPs) at CPV Division, New Delhi in
respect of 140 Indian Missions/Posts abroad.

(v) Launch of Apostille Convention Project
In view of the convenience of the thousands of
people coming from all over India to Delhi for
attestation, the attestation and apostille of the
documents was also started at Branch Secretariat
Offices of the Ministry at Chennai, Guwahati,
Hyderabad and Kolkata with effect from 15 June,
2008. 1,11,331 documents were apostilled for use
abroad in the members countries.

(ii) Issuance of E-Passports
The President launched the issuance of e-passports,
also known as bio-metric passports on 25 June 2008.
All diplomatic and official passports are now being
issued as e-passports as part of the pilot project.
Based on the experience gained from the pilot
project, it is proposed to start issuance of e-passports
in the ordinary category by end 2009.
(iii) Passport Seva Project
The Government had entrusted the National
Institute of Smart Government (NISG), Hyderabad,
with the task of undertaking a time-bound study on
the passport issuance system, including its IT
aspects with the objective to deliver passport related
services to the citizens in a timely, transparent, more

Extradition Cases and Legal Assistance
The Ministry has been pursuing actively with various
countries for negotiating bilateral agreements to provide
a legal and institutional framework to combat
international terrorism, organized crime including
financial frauds and drugs trafficking. These consular
agreements include Treaties on Extradition, Mutual Legal
Assistance in Criminal Matters, Mutual Legal Assistance

146

President, Pratibha Devisingh Patil receiving her “E-Passport” from the
Union Minister of External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee at Rashtrapati Bhavan in New Delhi on 25 June, 2008.

Union Minister of External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee presenting an E-Passport to the
Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh, in New Delhi on 25 June, 2008.

147

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

in Civil and Commercial Matters and Transfer of
Sentenced Prisoners.
During the visit of the President of India to Brazil, an
Extradition Treaty was signed between the two countries
on 16th April 2008. External Affairs Minister signed
Extradition Treaty with Australia on 23 June, 2008 and
with Iran on 2 November, 2008, during his visit to those
countries. An Extradition Treaty was signed between India
and Egypt in New Delhi on 18 November, 2008, during
the visit of the President of Egypt to India.
The instrument of ratification was exchanged between
India and Mauritius on 23 June, 2008 at Port Louis, Mexico
on 18 December, 2008 at Mexico and Tajikistan on 18
February, 2009 at Dushanbe and all the Extradition
Treaties came into force from the date of exchange of

instrument of ratification. The Agreement on Extradition
between the Republic of India and the Portuguese
Republic has entered into force with effect from 13
November, 2008. During the year, an Indian official
delegation visited Iran and an Israeli delegation visited
India to negotiate Extradition and Mutual Legal
Assistance Treaties.
During the year, six persons were extradited from India
to various foreign countries and four person were
extradited from foreign countries to India. A number of
warrant/summons/notices and Letter Rogatories (LRs)
received from various Judicial Authorities/State
Governments/Investigation Agencies in India were
forwarded to the concerned authorities abroad for
execution.

148

Administration and Establishment

16

T

here are 171 resident Indian Missions and Posts
abroad. In the year reported upon, one Indian
Mission was opened namely Embassy of India, Reykjavik,
Iceland. three new missions will be opened shortly in
Niamey, Bamako and Guatemala City. 514 new posts have
been sanctioned for induction in the Ministry in a phased
manner over a period of ten years.

The current strength of Ministry is 3551. Details are given
in Appendix I. These Personnel are deployed in India and
in 171 Missions/Posts abroad. This includes officials from
Indian Foreign Service(IFS), Indian Foreign Service,
Branch “B”, Interpreters’ Cadre, Legal and Treaties Cadre
and the Library Cadre, but excludes Group ‘D’ and excadre posts.

With a view to streamline the administrative machinery
of the Ministry, constant efforts are on to achieve greater
decentralization of decision making and simplification of
process. Keeping in view the hard living conditions in
Afghanistan and Iraq, separate set of Home Leave Fare
rules has been issued and an insurance cover of up to
Rupees 30 Lakhs has been provided to each India-based
personnel posted in these two countries. Compilation of
“Guide to Selective Administrative/Establishment Rules
and Procedures” is under process and is at the stage of
final proof-reading. After implementation of Sixth Pay
Commission, the process of pay fixations of all cadres in
the Ministry at Head Quarters has been completed and
due arrears have been disbursed. A process for relevant
amendments to IFS (PLCA) Rules in light of Sixth Pay
Commission has been initiated with special focus on
elimination of ambiguities in interpretation and updating
the Rules to suit the changed scenario. Cases, where
relaxation of Rules was necessary, have been processed
and relief has been provided to deserving officials after
obtaining approval of the competent authorities, keeping
in view the human and welfare approach to their problems.

Recruitment made to various groups in the Ministry on 1
April-30 November, 2007 through Direct Recruitment
(DR), Departmental Promotion (DP) and Limited
Departmental Examination (LDE), including against
reserved vacancies, are given in the table at Appendix II.
The table at the Appendix III gives details of language
proficiency of officers of the Ministry.

Indents for fresh recruitment were placed on time and
review of deployment of manpower at all levels was
conducted periodically. A comprehensive exercise to
review deployment of manpower in all the Missions and
Posts has been initiated.
Management of different cadres in the Ministry was
undertaken through regular Departmental Promotion
Committee meetings, and through implementation of
provisions under Assured Career Promotion Scheme.
Regular meetings of Joint Consultative Machinery were
also held to consult the Staff Associations on issues of
concern to them, and consider the possible ways to
addressing the same.

Gender Issue
Gender equality has been a key element of Ministry’s
overall policy. In keeping with this, equal opportunities
are provided to women officers to take up important
responsibilities. There are 53 officers of the rank of
Director and above in the Ministry. (8 at Head Quarters
and 38 at Missions abroad). Out of 38 lady officers posted
abroad 25 are HOMs/HOPs.

Persons with Disability
Ensuring adequate opportunity to persons with disability
and to have suitable representation of persons with
disability among its personnel is an important objective
of the Ministry. Towards this goal, the Ministry has
identified posts suitable for appointments of persons with
disability, including in Indian Foreign Service.

A&RM Division
After having digitized all records stored in RM Section in
the first quarter of 2008, the project entered into the next
phase i.e. Phase-III, whereby fresh records being received
from Headquarters and Missions/Posts are being digitized.
A&RM division has also called for the services of an
official from National Archieves of India (NAI) for
appraisal of pre-1983 records with a view to transferring
of appraised records to NAI and destruction of records
which have outlived their life. So far a total of 1727 records

149

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

have been transferred to the NAI and 1820 destroyed.
The process of de-classification, review and destruction
of records continues.

were taken to identify appropriate premises for locating
the Indian Embassies, empanelment of hospitals, hotels
and schools and fixation of allowances.

The Browsing Room to scan documents of the Ministry
meant for use by Select public was inaugurated by Foreign
Secretary on 9 January, 2009.

As part of the inspection of Indian Missions abroad, our
missions in Santiago, Sao Paulo, Buenos Aires, Suva,
Brunei, Port Moresby, Tashkent, Dushanbe, Bishkek,
Kuwait, Abu Dhabi, Dar-es-Salaam, Johannesburg,
Kampala, Canberra, Singapore and Bangkok were
inspected by a high level team of inspectors. Their reports
helped considerably in streamlining the functional as well
as administrative issues in these missions.

Implementation of Official Language
Policy and Propagation of Hindi Abroad
World Hindi Day was celebrated on 10 January, 2008.
Hindi Essay Competition was organized for foreign
students studying Hindi at Kendriya Hindi Sansthan,
Delhi University and Jawaharlal Nehru University.

Establishment Division
The charge of the Establishment Division primarily
includes renting and maintenance of properties, fixation
of foreign allowance and representational grant, purchase
supply and maintenance of office equipment, furniture
and official vehicles, supply of Object d’ arts, management
and maintenance of MEA housing complexes and hostels,
maintenance of Toshakhana and purchase and supply of
stationery.
During the year efforts continued to streamline the rules,
regulations and procedures governing some of these issues
in order to make them simple and transparent. As part of
this exercise, rules governing foreign allowance, special
grants, allotment of housing, maintenance of equipments
at Headquarters, and Car Code were reviewed and made
more transparent.
Annual review of the foreign allowance was undertaken
under the indexation scheme by a joint team of the
Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of Finance.
For the first time since 1954, the basket of goods and
services determining the foreign allowance was revised
and made more realistic keeping in tune with the modern
lifestyle.
A landmark decision on slab deduction for officers posted
abroad was taken with the approval of Ministry of Finance.
Since a large part of basic pay of officers posted abroad
used to be taken away in the form of slab deduction, there
was considerable resentment on this account. With effect
from 1 September, 2008, the system of slab deduction has
been done away with, to address the long pending
grievance of officers posted in Indian Missions abroad.
The Division undertook preparatory work for opening of
four new Missions in Iceland, Mali, Niger and Guatemala.
For this purpose following the visit of property teams, steps

Renovation of External Affairs hostel at K G Marg and
Gole Market which was initiated last year continued
during the current financial year. As a result, considerable
improvements have taken place in the living conditions
in these hostels. Similarly, further steps were taken to
improve the living conditions in the MEA housing
complex in Dwarka. As a result, the occupancy rate in
the complex has gone up over 90%. Steps were also taken
for renovation of Jinnah House in Mumbai which was
halted due to ongoing litigation concerning this property.
After legal opinion, the process of renovation has been
restarted.
The Division initiated the task of taking over the
Chanakyapuri Housing Complex of MEA. For this purpose
an integrated building management company was
appointed to take over the complex and detect
construction defects so that they could be rectified within
the defect liability period. After obtaining Completion
Certificate of the building, housing complex was made
functional in the last week of March. This will go a long
way in addressing the housing problem of the Ministry.
The exercise initiated for digitalization of all Od’A items
in the Ministry is near completion. For the first time digital
records of almost all Od’A items in the Ministry have
been created in the form of a software and an internal
website. The recording system and the stock registers for
Od’A items purchased by the Ministry have already been
considerably modernized and made foolproof. A video
camera has already been installed in the Od’A cell to
monitor movement of people and objects.
The new policy governing mobile phones and residential
phones facilities was implemented facilitating smooth
functioning of our Missions abroad. Similarly, steps were
taken to update the provision of crockery, cutlery and
kitchen wares supplied to HoMs for representational use.
Before introducing these improvements a committee had
been setup to suggest changes in these items keeping in

150

Administration and Establishment

view of the changing needs of representational obligations
abroad.
The deficient areas regarding replacement and
maintenance of official vehicles abroad were identified
following a comprehensive exercise. Thereafter a proposal
was moved to bring the Car Code in tune with the needs
of modern times. After seeking Ministry of Finance’s
approval, the Car Code has since been amended which
will facilitate the functioning of our Missions abroad.
The Division also introduced a new system for better
maintenance of Government as well as rented properties
abroad to avoid unnecessary litigation and financial loss
to the Government. New policy guidelines on these issues
were issued to all Missions and Posts.
Further steps were taken at Headquarters to improve
cleanliness and maintenance of Government Offices,
particularly South Block, Akbar Bhawan and Patiala House.
Steps were also taken to further streamline the purchase
and maintenance of office equipment for all MEA offices.

Vigilance
Details of cases as on 1 April, 2008
Number of cases pending as on 31.3.2008 : 162
Number of cases received during the period
01.04.2008 to 31.3.2009 : 50
Total number of cases up to 31.3.2009 : 212 (162+50)
Number of cases closed with imposition of formal
penalty up to 31.3.2009 : 28
Number of cases closed without imposition of formal
penalty, on account of VRS, death etc up to
31.3.2009 : 50
Total number of cases closed up to 31.3.2009 : 78
(28 + 50)
Total number of cases pending as on 31.3.2009 :
134 (212-78)
Vigilance Awareness Week was observed from 3 November7 November. All Indian Missions/Posts abroad and various
departments in Ministry of External Affairs administered
the pledge prescribed by the Central Vigilance Commission.
During the the year, various circulars on incurring
expenditures within delegated financial powers,
constitutional provisions on acceptance of titles, CVC
guidelines regarding tendering process etc. were issued.

e-Governance and IT
During the year, computerization of Passport & Visa
services at Moscow, Doha, Washington, San Francisco,
Chicago and Houston was completed. Outsourcing of

passport services at Jeddah was completed. Outsourcing
of passport and visa services at Dubai, Abu Dhabi, Kuwait,
Riyadh, Kuala Lumpur is underway.
Ministry has developed a Management Information
System (MIS) to store and make available information
regarding Personnel, Budget, Foreign Visits and Parliament
Questions. The software has been put to use and is
operating satisfactorily. Outsourcing of Passport and Visa
services was completed in our Mission in Singapore in
January 2009.

Projects Division
Projects Division is responsible for reconstruction of
buildings and purchase of land and buildings in India and
abroad for the use of Ministry of External Affairs for its
offices and residences for employee. Repairs and
renovation of Government owned buildings in stations
abroad are also handled by Projects Division. As of now,
80 Chancery buildings at 77 stations abroad ,residences
for Heads of Missions/Posts at 91 stations abroad and 634
residences for Officers/staff in 47 stations abroad are
owned by the Ministry of External Affairs. In addition,
properties for Cultural Centers in two stations and one
Liasion Office in one station are also owned by the
Government. Currently, over 40 construction/redevelopment/rennovation projects are at different stages
of implementation.
Amongst projects abroad, construction work on Chancery
and residences in Beijing, Tokyo & Kathmandu and
residences in Singapore is presently going on. Work is also
going on for renovation of three properties in Karachi,
renovation of Chanceries in Bogota, Colombo, Prague
.Construction projects in Budapest, Brasilia, Dhaka,
Islamabad, Kabul, London, Tashkent and Warsaw are at
tendering stage.
Built-up properties have been acquired for Chancery in
Bogota, residences for Ambassadors in Sofia &Tripoli,
residence for Consul General in Hamburg and five staff
residences in Milan in 2008-09. Vacant plots of land for
construction of Chancery & residences has been acquired
in Gabarone. The Ministry is making continuous and
vigorous efforts to acquire built-up properties at as many
stations as possible and priority in this regard is accorded
to stations where expenditure on payment of rents is
higher. Major proposals under process for purchase of builtup properties include Colombo, Dublin, Hanoi, Pretoria,
Rome, and Santiago. Proposals are also under process for
purchase of land at Brunei &Wellington for Chanceries
&residences and in New Delhi for South Asian University.
Three surplus properties in Aden (Joshi Building), Dar-

151

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

es-Salaam (vacant flat) and Buenos Aires (old Chancery)
have been disposed off through sale.
Among projects in India, construction work for future
headquarters of the Ministry of External affairs i.e. Jawahar
Lal Nehru Bhawan and transit accommodation at
Canning Lane, New Delhi is in full swing. Construction
work has been completed for Residential complex for
officers of the Ministry of External Affairs and building
for headquarters of Afro-Asian Legal Consultative

Committee and residence of its Secretary General in
Chanakyapuri New Delhi and Regional Offices of ICCR
in Kolkata.
A budget of Rs. 300 crores has been allocated for
construction/acquisition of properties under Capital
Outlay in approved budget allocations for 2008-09.
Provision of Rs. 612 crores has been sought under Capital
Outlay Budget for 2009-10 for acquisition/construction
of more properties.

152

Coordination

C

oordination Division consists of three wings viz.
Parliament Section, Coordination Section and
Education Section.

Parliament Section
Coordination Division functions as the nodal point of the
Ministry of External Affairs for all work relating to
Parliament including questions-answers, assurances,
debates on foreign relations and laying of reports on the
Table of both Houses of Parliament. The Division also
has the responsibility to organize the meetings of the
Consultative Committee on External Affairs, and
coordinates the work relating to the Parliamentary
Standing Committee on External Affairs and other
Parliamentary Committees.

Coordination Section
Coordination Section processes all proposals for grant of
no objection from the political angle for the foreign visits
of Governors, Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Deputy
Chairman of Rajya Sabha, Union Ministers, Ministers in
the State Governments, Members of Parliament, Members
of State Legislative Assemblies, Members of the Judiciary,
Government officials, etc. Political clearance is accorded
by the Ministry of External Affairs after taking into
consideration the guidelines laid down by the government
for the purpose, the political and functional justification
for the visit, meetings arranged and the recommendation
of the Indian Mission/Post concerned. During April to
November, 2008, Coordination Division had issued 2539
political clearances for such visits as against 2106 during
the corresponding period in 2007, thus registering an
increase of about 21%. The Section also handled work
relating to grant of diplomatic clearances for foreign nonscheduled flights and visits by naval ships. During April –
November 2008, Coordination Division issued 971
clearances for foreign non-scheduled flights as against 859
during the same period in 2007, thus registering an
increase of 13%.
The Division has initiated the process of revision of
guidelines on Channel of Communications between
Government of India and the State Governments on the
one hand and foreign Governments or their Missions in
India, Heads of Diplomatic Missions/Posts abroad and

17

international organizations on the other, in consultation
with various Ministries/Departments.
Coordination Section had also processed a large number
of approvals for participation of Indian sports teams and
sportsmen in international events abroad and visits of
foreign sports persons/teams to India. The Section also
examines requests for grant of no objection for holding
international conferences, seminars, workshops, grant of
Amateur W/T Licence under the Indian Telegraph Act
1885, grant in aid to Indo-foreign cultural friendship and
cultural societies located in foreign countries.
Coordination Section coordinates the work relating to
grant of Padma Awards to foreign nationals. The
nominations are obtained by the Coordination Division
from Indian Missions/Posts abroad and the
recommendations of the Ministry are conveyed to the
Ministry of Home Affairs.
Observance of Quami Ekta Week/Diwas (19-25
November) in the Ministry and Missions/Posts abroad was
also undertaken by the Coordination Division; pledges
were administered to the officials, both at Headquarters
and in Missions/Posts abroad.
Coordination Section assisted the Ministry of Defence in
interaction with the Ministry and the Indian Missions/
Posts abroad during DEFEXPO India – 2008 organized
by the Ministry of Defence in February, 2008. The Division
is also assisting MOD in interaction with the Ministry of
External Affairs/Missions & Posts abroad for the
forthcoming Aero India- 2009 scheduled to be held in
February, 2009 at Bangalore.
Coordination Section represented and gave Ministry’s
input at various inter-ministerial meetings on divergent
issues. Similarly, the Coordination Section collated inputs
from various Divisions of the Ministry in preparation of
documents, notes and briefs on important subjects. As
Ex-officio Director, Joint Secretary (Coord) also attended
Board Meetings of the Educational Consultants India
Limited, a public sector organization and provided advice
on their current activities and future programmes.

Education Section
Education Section deals with the selection, nomination
and admission of foreign students from 63 friendly,

153

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

neighbouring and developing countries for MBBS/BDS//
BE/B.Pharmacy and diploma courses in various
institutions in India under the Self Financing Foreign
Students Scheme against seats allocated to this Ministry
by the Ministries of Health & Family Welfare and Human
Resource Development respectively. Political clearances
of foreign students seeking admission to Graduate and
Post-Graduate courses in Engineering, Medicine,
Management, other technical and professional courses

including elective training/internship in various medical
institutions and research courses were also processed by
the Education Section.
For the academic year 2008-09, Education Section
received and processed 52 and 93 applications for
admission to the MBBS/BDS and B.E./B.Pharmacy courses
respectively. In addition, during the period from April to
November 2008, 433 applicants were granted no objection
from the political angle to pursue various courses in India.

154

External Publicity

E

xternal Publicity (XP) Division of the Ministry of
External Affairs (MEA) continued to articulate the
views / positions of the Government of India on various
national and international issues through interaction with
Indian and international media. This was done through
regular and special press briefings, statements,
backgrounders and postings on MEA’s website.
The main activities of the Division were focussed on
dissemination of information on India’s relations with its
immediate neighbours as also with major countries of the
world. The signing of Agreement for Cooperation on
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy with USA, also known
as the 123 Agreement and the hosting of various
international summits and seminars, were some of the
events, which were accorded due emphasis by the
Division.
The Division launched the first phase of the Media
Monitoring Project for all users at Headquarters. This is
aimed at streamlining the monitoring of media sources
for the Ministry. The Project monitors Print, Web and
Internet based media in a systematic manner and provides
five daily products to users on a real time basis.

Press Coverage of Incoming VVIP Visits
India’s robust engagement with international community
was marked by a number of visits by foreign dignitaries to
India. Notable among them were the visit of the President
of Iran, Mr. Ahamadnejad; President of Syria, Dr. Bashar
Al-Assad; President of Egypt, Mr. Hosny Mubarak; Prime
Minister of Nepal, Mr. Pushpa Kamal Dahal “Prachanda”;
Prime Minister of Bhutan, Mr. Lyonchen Jigmi Y. Thinley
and the President of the Russian Federation, Mr. Anatoly
Medvedev. The Division used the opportunities provided
by these visits to articulate India’s position on important
bilateral, regional and international issues. The Division
also arranged joint press interaction with the visiting
dignitaries during these visits. Special briefings by the
official spokesperson and other senior officials of the
Ministry were also held regularly to keep the media
updated on important international issues of concern to
India.

18

Press Coverage of Indian Dignitaries’
Visits Abroad
All logistical arrangements, including setting up and
operation of Media Centres fully equipped with facilities
for filing of stories by journalists, media briefings and other
arrangements enabling Indian delegations accompanying
the President, Vice President, Prime Minister and the
External Affairs Minister on their visits abroad formed an
important part of work of the Division to ensure timely
media coverage of events. During the year, accompanying
media delegations on President’s visit to Brazil, Medico,
Chile, Vietnam and Indonesia; Prime Minister’s visits to
Bhutan, Japan (G-8 Summit), Sri Lanka (15th SAARC
Summit), USA and France (UNGA and Civil Nuclear
Cooperation Agreement), China, Oman and Qatar
(bilateral); the Vice President’s visits to Kazakhstan and
Turkmenistan and the External Affairs Minister’s visits
to Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, Russia, Australia, Egypt and
USA were facilitated.

Liaison with National and International
Media
The official spokesperson’s office liaised with the Indian
and foreign media throughout the year by conducting
regular briefings on major developments having a bearing
on India’s foreign policy, incoming and outgoing high level
visits and important day-to-day developments. During the
year (up to November 2008) 177 press releases, 91 press
briefings and 25 joint press statements and 66 media
advisories were issued by the Division on various issues of
concern. Interviews with the Prime Minister, External
Affairs Minister and other dignitaries were arranged with
Indian and international newspapers and TV
organizations. These were simultaneously placed on the
Ministry’s website.

Official Spokesperson’s Office
The Official Spokesperson’s Office functioned as the hub
for information dissemination on day-to -day
developments related to the conduct of India’s foreign
policy. The Office conducted regular media briefings by
the Spokesperson, which were duly supplemented by press

155

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

releases, briefing points and statements. During AprilNovember 2008, about 91 press briefings were organized
by Official Spokesperson’s office. In addition, more than
200 press releases and statements were issued during this
period. These were circulated to the media through emails
and simultaneously placed on the Ministry’s website. The
Division continued to make use of SMS alerts for
informing the media about briefings and updates to the
website. During the year, External Affairs Minister, Foreign
Secretary and other senior officials of the Ministry
addressed special media briefings on important issues of
concern. Additionally, constant efforts were made to
communicate the position and perspective of the
Government on various significant issues by providing
background briefings to media persons. Interviews with
the Prime Minister, External Affairs Minister, Ministers
of State for External Affairs and other dignitaries were
arranged with Indian and international newspapers and
TV organizations.

Maintenance and Regular Updating of
MEA Website
Ministry of External Affairs’ website continued to serve
as a useful instrument in the dissemination efforts of the
Division. The press section of the website was regularly
updated with the speeches / interviews / statements on
foreign policy by the Prime Minister, Minister(s), press
releases, briefings by the Official Spokesperson and other
Senior Officers. The website is widely accessed both inside
and outside India and is hyperlinked to the websites of
Indian Missions / Posts abroad and various Ministries.
The Division continued to use the Ministry of External
Affair’s Notice Board to provide the Missions/Posts abroad
with professionally written features on various aspects
of India for publicity purposes in local media. News
clippings of interest from national newspapers were also
uploaded on daily basis on the Board for use by our
Missions/Posts.
Hindi version of the website, launched in 2006, was greatly
appreciated particularly by the Hindi language media. The
Division constantly updated the website.

Logistical Support to Foreign Media
Based in India
Over 300-odd foreign media representatives based in India
were provided necessary facilitation to enable them to
function smoothly through provision of relevant
information on various issues of interest as well as

assistance in matters of credential documents, visas and
residence permits. Visa extensions and / or accreditation
facilities were extended to foreign journalists.

Familiarization Visits by Foreign
Journalists
Familiarization visits by foreign journalists to India
constitute a key element of the Division’s efforts to bring
about a more accurate and contemporary depiction of
India in the foreign media as the journalists obtain a
unique, first-hand impression of developments in India’s
politics, foreign policy, economy, culture and science and
technology. Based on the recommendations of Indian
Missions/Posts abroad, the Division organized the
familiarization visits of 72 foreign journalists to India
during the period April-November 2008. During these
visits, all logistical arrangements to enable the journalists
to visit important institutions and centers of excellence
in India were made by the Division. The Division also
organized meetings for visiting foreign journalists with
Ministers, Senior Officials, Academicians, Intellectuals
and Business Representatives.

Documentaries and Films
An important area of work of the Division pertains to the
clearance of documentaries by foreign audio-visual
agencies. An exercise to streamline the procedure for
granting approval for making documentary films in India
by foreign producers was undertaken by the Division. As
a result of inter-ministerial consultations, the process has
largely been streamlined. During the year, 370 proposals
for making documentaries by foreign producers from USA,
UK, Japan, Australia, France, Sweden, Italy, South Africa,
Malaysia and China were cleared by the Division.

Training, Workshops, Conferences and
Special Events
The Division, on recommendations of the concerned
Territorial Divisions, undertook specialized programmes
and media assistance measures in countries like Bhutan
and Maldives. The Division also organized the IBSA
(India, Brazil and South Africa) editors’ meet where
editors of leading media houses from India, Brazil and
South Africa participated. The Division also helped
organize the media facilitation for the BIMSTEC Summit
meeting. In the aftermath of dastardly terrorist attacks
on Mumbai, the Division facilitated issue of as many as
272 special visas in the first week following the attacks
and facilitated the foreign media to cover the tragic event.

156

Public Diplomacy Division

E

ver since its creation in April 2006, the Public
Diplomacy Division of MEA has been in contact with
researchers, think tanks, academia, civil society and
industry, both within India and abroad, to highlight the
contours of Indian foreign policy, as well as initiate debate
and discussion within the wider public about the key
foreign policy issues confronting India. The Division’s
mandate includes, inter-alia, outreach activities inside and
outside India, and audio visual and print publicity. The
aim is to effectively project India’s Foreign Policy to the
wider public to enable a more informed understanding
and appreciation of India and its external relations. Such
an understanding requires that issues of International
politics are enriched by the inputs from the civil society
and general public. The Division, therefore oversees the
matter of public involvement/public interest in the shaping
of the Indian foreign policy.
The Division continues to draws upon the resources of
the Ministry of External Affairs, as well as, independent
experts and researchers through seminars, workshops and
interactions on various foreign policy related issues.
Foreign policy events continue to be organized outside
Delhi to increase people’s participation in the policy
formulation.

Outreach Activities
The Division organized a number of outreach activities,
including conferences and seminars on various foreign
policy related issues as well as orientation programmes
on India for visiting MPs from other countries.
The Division organized a programme on important
domestic and foreign policy issues from 11-16 February in
Chennai, Hyderabad and New Delhi for a seven-member
delegation of Parliamentarians from Labour Friends of
India (LFIN), UK.
The Division in association with the Government of Bihar,
organized a seminar on “Emerging Trends in India-Nepal
Relations” at Patna from 26-27 April, 2008. Chief
Minister of Bihar and Minister for Physical Planning and
Works of Nepal participated in the inaugural session of
the seminar. Minister of State for Commerce and Industry

19

delivered the valedictory address. A 45 member Nepalese
delegation participated in the seminar which also saw the
participation of a large number of academicians, think
tanks, representatives of Industry, intelligentsia, journalists
and civil society from India. The objective behind the
seminar was to discuss key aspects of our bilateral relations
and the seminar covered the broad canvas of political and
cultural relations, trade and economic cooperation, border
security and its management, cooperation in the
hydroelectric sector, sharing of common river waters and
problems of floods.
The Patna Seminar was followed up by an interactive
discussion on “India and Nepal : Partners for Democracy
and Development” at Varanasi from 26-27 September,
2008, which was organized in association with the
Government of Uttar Pradesh. Minister of External
Affairs, Shri Pranab Mukherjee inaugurated the session.
H. E. Shri Dev Gurung, Minister of Law, Justice and
Constituent Assembly of Nepal led a 30 member Nepalese
delegation. Consolidation of Peace Process in Nepal,
Processes of Rehabilitation in Post Conflict Situation,
Federal Structure and Inclusiveness, Making of a New
Constitution, Open Border were some of the key issues
discussed.
The Division and the Center for Strategic Studies of the
Foreign Ministry of Afghanistan has jointly organized a
meeting on “India-Afghan relations: A framework for
Future Cooperation” from 31 May to 1 June, 2008. The
meeting was inaugurated by the Foreign Minister of
Afghanistan and was attended by around fifty persons.
The objectives behind the meeting was to brainstorm in
free and frank manner on the critical issues that are of
immediate concern to Afghanistan and to discuss the role
India could further play in assisting the people and the
government. This was the first meeting which brought
together a wide cross-section of stake holders. It was
agreed that such meetings should become a regular
component of the dialogue process.
The Division in association with the Book Review Literary
Trust organized an international colloquium “ Superpower
Rivalry in the 20th Century: Lessons for the 21st Century” in

157

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

New Delhi. A large number of Indian and foreign
academicians and think-tanks from China, Sri Lanka,
South Korea, Pakistan, Egypt, Australia participated in
the colloquium which discussed the regional fallout of
the Cold War, prospects for multi polarity in the 21st
century and the emerging world order.
The Division in association with Centre for Research in
Rural and Industrial Development, Chandigarh organized
a workshop ‘Total Agriculture – Workshop cum field visits
– Connecting India and Pakistan through knowledge
sharing on Agriculture’ earlier in the year. A 16 member
delegation from Pakistan exchanged production,
marketing and research experiences with Indian experts.
The dialogue was aimed at generating awareness and
enhancing confidence in areas having direct socioeconomic relevance to the people of the two Punjabs.
The Division supported a day long seminar on 29 April,
2009 in Addis Ababa to mark the 60th Anniversary of the
establishment of diplomatic relations between India and
Ethiopia. The seminar discussed the present state of IndiaEthiopia relations and how the two countries could further
their economic and social partnership.
Public Diplomacy Division participated and partly funded
a conference on “Sixty Years of North East: Revising the
Experience” organized in Shillong from 15-17 May, 2008
by Divya Jeevan Foundation Society. A total of about 200
people from all over North East participated in this
conference. As a part of this Conference MEA organized
presentations by a number of senior GoI officials and
experts from business and industry on issues related to
foreign policy and issues specific to development of the
North East. Participants from MEA, MOC, DIPP, DONER
and CII made presentations. While appreciated the
presentations, the participants said that there was urgent
need to prioritize and realize them in a time bound manner.
A ten-member Taiwanese delegation comprising MPs and
academicians dealing with strategic and political issues,
members of think tanks and business persons visited New
Delhi, Chennai and Cochin from 27 July to 3 August,
2008. The idea behind the visit was to expose the
delegation to modern India and the various concerns and
interest that India has on social, economic and
international issues as well as investment opportunities
in India.
Deputy Speaker of the Mauritius Parliament led a
delegation of 25 Mauritius MPs at the invitation of Public
Diplomacy Division from 12-16 October, 2008. Besides
Delhi the delegation also visited Mumbai. The idea behind
organizing this visit was to provide the visiting delegates

a comprehensive exposure to India and detailed briefings
on various subjects and issues of concern to us through
site visits and briefing meetings with industry, academia,
think-tanks, officials and political leadership. The
delegation called on PM, EAM, Governor of Maharashtra
and also met the Chairman and Members of Parliamentary
Standing Committee on External Affairs. The delegation
received detailed briefing on India’s position on Climate
Change and also on ongoing impasse in the Doha Round
talks of the WTO. They were also given detailed briefing
on Indian economy and had an interaction with CII
members and also interacted with the Senior Officers of
Western Naval Command.
Two delegations of ‘Liberal Democrat Friends of India’
and ‘Conservative Friends of India’ MPs from the UK
Parliament visited India for an orientation programme in
September and November 2008 respectively. The
delegations called on political leadership and also had
briefings on Indian economy, WTO and multilateral
economic issues, climate change, energy security, terrorism
and regional security, Indian peace keeping forces and also
visited some business enterprises and social institutions.
A ten- member delegation of Indian Origin South African
MPs from all the major political parties visited India for an
orientation programme from 7-12 December, 2008. Besides
Delhi the delegation visited Agra and Kolkata. The
delegation met EAM, MoS (AS), Minister of Overseas
Indian Affairs, Governor and Chief Minister of West Bengal.
Briefing were organized on centre-state relations, local self
governance, future outlook for Indian economy, Indian
defence forces, public health programmes to combat AIDS
besides interaction with businessmen and, with faculty and
students of Jadavpur University to enable the delegation
to get an accurate picture of the modern India.
In view of increasing focus on Climate Change related
issues, the Division organized a series of outreach activities
on this issue. In association with CII a Conference on
Climate Change was organized in Mumbai on 21 April,
2008 where Shri Shyam Saran, Social Envoy of Prime
Minister delivered the keynote address on India’s
negotiating position on Climate Change to create greater
awareness among the corporate sector. This was followed
by another talk by Shri Shyam Saran on Climate Change,
on 30 May, 2008 at Indian School of Business (ISB),
Hyderabad where Shri Saran discussed the current debate
in multilateral fora on tackling climate change and also
spoke on the elements that constitute India’s National
Action Plan on Climate Change. The ISB was attended
by about 150 students and faculty members as well as by
the press and corporate executive.

158

Public Diplomacy Division

To encourage scholarship and writing on Foreign Policy
and diplomatic matters, the Division organized the release
of the book “The Ultimate Prize: Oil and Saddam’s
Iraq”. EAM Shri Pranab Mukherjee released the book in
front of a large number of dignitaries including Cabinet
Ministers, Foreign Ambassadors, diplomats, think-tanks
and journalists. Another book titled “A life across three
continents: Recollections of a Diplomat’s wife” was
released in front of a large gathering by Ms. Gursharan
Kaur, wife of Prime Minister, Manmohan Singh.

The following documentaries were also telecast / screened
by foreign TV channels and in film festivals:
Beating Retreat was telecast by TV Asia, a local
channel in New York on 15 August, 2008.
Botswana Television aired five documentary films
viz., Bismillah and Benaras, Footsteps of Nikitin, The
oneness of creation, Renewing India and India
Infrastructure-An opportunity on 17 August, 2008.
Pather Panchali and Footprints of Nikitin were
nominated / screened at the International Festival
for Documentary and Short Feature Films in
Ashgabat. Pather Panchali was awarded a Special
Prize in the festival.

Audio-Visual Publicity
The Division commissions/acquires documentaries aimed
at positive projection of India’s image abroad and sends
these to Indian Missions abroad for screening and telecast
on foreign TV channels. The procurement and supply of
feature films for participation in film festivals and Indian
film weeks abroad, organizing cultural publicity and
exhibitions, are other audio-visual publicity activities
undertaken by the Division.
Several documentaries were completed during the year.
They are: ‘Song of the Sanctuary’; ‘Cosmopolitan Culture of
India’; India Innovates”; ‘Pather Panchali’; ‘A short history of
Indian Spices’; ‘The Sky is not the limit’; ‘On the life of Khan
Abdul Gaffar Khan’; ‘Back to Gondwanaland’; ‘Beating
Retreat’; ‘Shillong Chamber Choir’; ‘Kazi Nazrul Islam’;
‘Cradle by the Stream’; ‘Path Breakers’; ‘Path Breakers II’;
‘Dismantling the Digital Divide’; ‘Does Gandhi Matter’; ‘India
and the UN’; ‘Commonwealth Games-2010-New Delhi
welcomes’; ‘Jammu & Kashmir – Quest for Lasting Peace’;
‘Rocking the Hills’; ‘Story of Tagore’s Gitanjali’ and a three
part documentary series titled ‘Jammu and Kashmir – From
Peace to Prosperity’ ((a) Women’s Empowerment (b)
Kashmiriat & Shrines and (c) Youth and Development.
The Missions/Posts were supplied audio-visual material
in the form of Betacam cassettes, CD-ROMs, audio and
video CDs, DVDs and Cassettes for library and
presentation purposes. The following CDs Bollywood: 60
years of Romance, Music as Therapy and The De-Stress series
were purchased and sent to Missions.
During the year 18 documentary films, viz., Can You Hear
Me, Commonwealth Games-2010 New Delhi Welcomes,
Healing the World, Maadhyam, India and the UN, Urdu and
Modern India, Through a Lens Clearly: Raghu Rai’s India,
The City of Music, Beyond Traditions, Mast Qalandar, Indian
Elections – A Mammoth Democratic Exercise, Watering the
Grass Roots, Religious Linkages between Bhutan and Ladhakh
have been approved for commissioning.

Shillong Chamber Choir received a special mention
in the Lisbon Film Festival.
Pather Panchali was short listed by the Short Film
Center Goa in November 2008.

Print Publicity
India Perspectives is the flagship magazine of the Ministry.
The magazine covers a range of subjects varying from
India’s rich cultural heritage, art, literature, wildlife, film/
book industry, the country’s achievements in the fields of
information technology, space, nuclear energy, healthcare
and science & technology. The magazine is a medium to
disseminate widely information on various facets of India’s
progress and development across the world. It also seeks
to articulate India’s concerns in a subtle manner. With
the addition of the Italian edition this year, the magazine
is now published in 16 languages and distributed both
within India and abroad. Issues of India Perspectives are
available in the electronic format in Hindi and English
on Ministry’s website. The magazine in its new format
and content, commencing with the January-March 2008
issue, has been very well received. The SeptemberOctober 2008 Special Issue on book publishing in India
was released this year at the Frankfurt Book Fair. The
magazine has also been appreciated for its content in the
Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung dated 29 October, 2008.
The 20th Anniversary edition of the magazine will be
released by Foreign Secretary on 7 January, 2009.
Projecting India through books and publications is an
integral part of the Division’s publicity strategy abroad.
Two Books Purchase Committee meetings in 2008 selected
books on Indian economy, foreign policy, art & culture,
history and science & technology, etc. which have been
supplied to Missions abroad for presentation and use in
their libraries. Books were also provided for presentation

159

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

by/to outbound/inbound dignitaries/delegations and
participants for MEA’s international seminars/
conferences.
100 sets of primary level text books (25 nos. in each set)
were sent for presentation to Indian Associations in
Greece. 90 titles on Indology were sent for presentation
to Lanzhou University, Gansu in China .Similarly 36 titles
on Indology were sent for presentation to Pula University,
Zagreb and 27 titles on Indology were sent to our Embassy
in Madrid for presentation to Casa de la India Cultural
Centre. Books on Indology were also sent for presentation
to Centre for Oriental Studies, Vilnius University,
Lithuania.
Around 300 books on Indian literature and culture,
including books in Tamil language, were sent to HCI,
Colombo for a book exhibition from SAARC countries.
PD Division also dispatched about 2000 books to our
Embassy in Oman for gifting to colleges, universities and
Indian schools in Oman, where “India Corner” in the
libraries of two Omani Universities have been established.
Public Diplomacy Division funded a proposal from E/I,
Bogota for printing 1000 copies of Gandhiji’s
autobiography “My Experiments with Truth” in Spanish
language by a local publisher at a cost of US$ 5100. PD
Division extended financial support to International

Academy of Bulgarian Studies, Innovation & Culture and
the UNESCO Club of Varna for publishing 1000 copies
of a book on Mahatma Gandhi entitled “Bible of
Humanism” in Bulgarian language. Another proposal from
E/I, Sofia regarding publishing a special volume of Tagore’s
poems in Bulgarian language has also been approved.
On the occasion of the 15th anniversary of establishment
of diplomatic relations between India and Israel, PD
Division funded a proposal from the Indian Mission in
Tel Aviv for procurement of 750 copies of the book
“Karmic Passages : Israeli scholarship on India” authored
by well known Israeli scholars Prof. David Shulman and
Shalva Weil. A proposal from E/I, The Hague regarding
publishing a special volume on India-Dutch Relations for
the Amsterdam-India Festival was approved.
Public Diplomacy Division funded a proposal from CGI,
Durban regarding preparation of a Teachers’ Manual in
Telugu language for local Indian community. Among the
publications, the Division published a book entitled
“Strategic Shape of the World” which was a record of the
proceedings of the MEA-IISS Foreign Policy Dialogue held
at New Delhi in December 2007. Other major publications
during 2008-09 include “Millennium Development Goals:
India Country Report 2007” and “Prime Minister’s speech
at the SAARC Summit 2008".

160

20

Foreign Service Institute

Training for Indian Foreign Service (IFS)
Probationers

O

ne of the primary activities of the Institute is the
training of IFS probationers. The objectives of the
training programme for IFS probationers is to prepare
them to handle the wide range of tasks that they would
be required to perform during their professional careers,
both in Missions and Posts abroad as well as in India.

The 45 th Professional Course for Foreign Diplomats
commenced on 15 January, 2008. 22 participants from 21
countries participated in the Course.
Dr. Raghuram Rajan, Professor, University of Chicago,
Former Chief Economist, IMF, spoke at FSI on 16 January
2008 on “The future of the IMF and the World Bank”
and Dr. Vishaka Desai, President, Asia Society, New York,
spoke on 28 January on “Soft Power of India and China”
IFS probationers of the 2007 Batch were put through a
comprehensive and elaborate training programme
spanning the whole year of 2008. The training programme
included modules on a large number of subjects, such as
international relations and foreign policy, international
law, defence and security, cultural diplomacy, economic
diplomacy, right to information and official language policy
etc. The programme also included modules on practical
skills such as administration, establishment, accounts,
protocol, communications skills, representational skills
and relations with media.
The training programme was implemented through
lectures, interactive sessions as well as attachment to
various leading institutions. Accordingly, attachment to
India-Africa Partnership Forum Summit, Air Force and
Army, Boundary Cell of the Ministry, National Human
Rights Commission, and Ministry of Commerce etc. also
formed part of the training programme. The Probationers
also attended a three-month training course on economic
diplomacy, management and leadership at IIM Bangalore,
specially conducted for them.
In order to familiarize the Probationers with India’s
geography, history and cultural diversity, the Probationers
visited nine States as part of their Bharat Darshan tour.

With the objective of enabling the probationers to
enhance their knowledge of India’s immediate
neighbourhood and to familiarize them with the work of
the Indian Missions abroad, the training programme also
included a Mission Orientation Visit to Dhaka,
Bangladesh for one week in the month of April, 2008.
Library facilities for the probationers were upgraded by
computerizing the library catalogue and installing the
requisite library system software.
IFS probationers of 2008 batch joined the Institute in
December 2008.

Training of Officials of the Ministry
In addition to the training of IFS Probationers, the Foreign
Service Institute continued to conduct several training
courses for the Ministry officials. These included five Basic
Professional Courses (BPCs) for Assistants/UDCs/LDCs
and two Refresher Courses for Section Officers. In 2008,
FSI started a detailed training module in Integrated
Mission Accounting Software (IMAS) for the benefit of
Section Officers and staff members proceeding on transfer
abroad, with the assistance of the National Informatics
Centre (NIC) and the Office of the Chief Controller of
Accounts. Around 200 Ministry personnel attended these
training modules.

Promotion of links with Other Ministries
and Training Institutes
The Institute maintained regular contacts with other
training institutions such as the Lal Bahadur Shastri
National Academy of Administration, the National
Academy of Direct Taxes, and the Institute of Secretarial
Training etc. with a view to further develop the relationship
between the Indian Foreign Service and other Services.
With this objective in mind FSI conducted training modules
for 32 Senior and 12 Junior Officers of the Cabinet
Secretariat. FSI also organized the Third Vertical
Interaction Course for the Indian Police Service and Indian
Foreign Trade Service in February, 2008. The course
covered a wide range of topics including consular work,
foreign policy, economic diplomacy, bilateral relations, etc.

161

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

Special Programmes for Diplomatic
Correspondents
The Sixth Programme for Diplomatic correspondents was
organized in April/May, 2008 by FSI in association with
the External Publicity Division of the Ministry. 17
diplomatic correspondents, including eight from India and
nine from abroad, participated in the course.

Programmes for Foreign Diplomats
Foreign Service Institute continued to conduct various
training programmes for the Foreign Diplomats in its
efforts at building bridges of friendship with countries
around the world.
The 45 th and 46 th Professional Courses for Foreign
Diplomats (PCFD) were successfully organized by FSI from
15 January-20 February and 5 November-15 December,
2008 respectively. 24 diplomats from various countries
attended each of the two courses.
The Institute also organized two special courses, one for
15 diplomats from Southern Sudan and another for 24
ASEAN Diplomats. During the Special Courses and
PCFD the foreign diplomats were taken to various places
of historical, cultural, and industrial importance in and
around Delhi. They also visited Kolkata, Goa, Mumbai,
Hyderabad, Kerala and Bangalore etc.
The Foreign Defence Officers attending 48th Course at
National Defence College visited FSI on 31 July, 2008 and
a special lecture was arranged for them.

Linkages with Counterpart Institutes
Abroad
A Memorandum of Understanding providing an

institutional framework of cooperation between FSI and
its counterpart institute in Ukraine was signed in March
2008.
Delegation of Bangladeshi diplomats led by Vice Principal
of Bangladesh Foreign Service Academy called on Dean
(FSI) in March 2008.
The Director General of Romanian Diplomatic Institute,
visited FSI and had a meeting with Dean (FSI) in April,
2008 to further deepen and strengthen cooperation
between the two Institutes under the ambit of the MoU
signed in October 2006.
The Second Meeting of Deans of Diplomatic Institutes
of IBSA (India-Brazil-South Africa) countries was held
at FSI from 15 September-16 September, 2008. A Seminar
on the Subject of “India-Brazil-South Africa Cooperation:
Challenges and Opportunities” was also held on this
occasion.
A delegation of Ministry of Foreign Affairs of China called
on Dean (FSI) in November 2008.
World Hindi Day was celebrated by the Ministry of
External Affairs at FSI on 10 January, 2009. The Chief
Guest on this occasion was MoS (AS).
FSI organized a Special Course for Diplomats from Norway
from 19-21 January, 2009.
The 47 th Professional Course for Foreign Diplomats
(PCFD) will be organized by FSI from 11 February-23
March, 2009.
FSI conducted a Refresher Course (BPC) for assistants/
clerks in January 2009. Another Refresher Course for SOs
was conducted in February 2009.

162

Indian Council for Cultural Relations

T

he Indian Council for Cultural Relations was formally
set up in 1950, with the primary objective of
establishing, reviving and strengthening cultural relations
and mutual understanding between India and other
countries. Its aims, as enunciated in the Memorandum of
Association, are:
To participate in the formulation and
implementation of policies and programmes relating
to India’s external cultural relations
To promote cultural exchanges with other countries
and Peoples
To promote and strengthen cultural relations and
mutual understanding between India and other
countries
To establish and develop relations with national and
international organizations in the field of culture

The Council has worked steadily to attain these objectives.
The major activities of the Council are:
Administration of scholarship schemes for overseas students
on behalf of the Government of India and other agencies,
welfare of international students; grant of scholarships to
foreign students to learn Indian dance and music; exchange
of exhibitions; organization of and participation in
international seminars and symposia; participation in major
cultural festivals abroad; organization of “Festival of India”
in countries abroad; exchange of groups of performing
artistes; organization of lecture-demonstration by
performing artistes abroad; Distinguished Visitors
Programme under which eminent personalities from abroad
are invited to visit India, and the outgoing visitor’s
programme in which experts are sent abroad for delivering
lectures, presentation of books, audio-visual material, art
objects and musical instruments to institutions abroad;
providing the secretariat for the Jawaharlal Nehru Award
for International Understanding; organization of the annual
Maulana Azad Memorial Lecture, conducting Maulana
Azad Essay Competition; publication of books and journals
for distribution in India and abroad; maintaining Indian
Cultural Centres abroad; maintaining a well stocked library
and the manuscripts of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad;
digitization of rare manuscripts.

21

The Council has 11 Regional Offices which continue to
function in Bangalore, Chandigarh, Chennai, Hyderabad,
Kolkata, Lucknow, Mumbai, Thiruvananthapuram, Jaipur,
Pune and Varanasi. Efforts are being made to open new
Regional Offices in Shillong, Cuttack and Guwahati in
line with recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on External Affairs. The activities of the
Regional Offices include coordination with local bodies/
organizations and providing assistance to foreign students
studying under the Council’s scholarships schemes. The
Regional Offices also extend logistic facilities to incoming
and outgoing cultural delegations and the Council’s
distinguished visitors.
The Council’s flagship project, the Rabindranath Tagore
Centre (RTC) was inaugurated on 1 June, 2008 by Shri
Pranab Mukherjee, Minister for External Affairs in the
presence of Dr. Karan Singh, President, ICCR and Shri.
Buddhadev Bhattacharya, Chief Minister of West Bengal.
The building has state-of-the-art facilities such as multiple
art galleries, auditorium, conference hall, library, guest
rooms, café, souvenir shop, etc. The Centre would not
only be ICCR’s outreach in the Eastern region, but also
be a bridge with neighbouring countries of Bangladesh,
Nepal, Myanmar and Bhutan in the region.
The primary objective of the Council is to establish, revive
and strengthen cultural relations and mutual
understanding between India and other countries. In order
to promote awareness and appreciation of India’s
composite cultural heritage abroad, the Council is
maintaining 20 Cultural Centres. These are located in
Cairo (Egypt), Berlin (Germany), Port Louis (Mauritius),
Paramaribo (Suriname), Georgetown (Guyana), Jakarta
(Indonesia), Moscow (Russian Federation), London
(U.K.), Almaty, (Kazakhstan), Tashkent, (Uzbekistan),
Durban and Johannesburg (South Africa), Port of Spain
(Trinidad & Tobago), Colombo (Sri Lanka), Dushanbe
(Tajikistan), Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia), Suva (Fiji), Tokyo
(Japan), Kathmandu (Nepal) and Kabul (Afghanistan).
There are also two sub-Centres at Bali (Indonesia) and
Lautoka (Fiji). The Council is also funding the Music &
Dance Academy at Dhaka (Bangladesh) and a proposal
to open a new centre is being pursued. The Council

163

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

maintains Chairs of Indian Studies in various Universities
and institutions abroad. Indian Professors are deputed to
these Chairs on Short-term and long-term basis. Presently
the Council is maintaining 20 Chairs of Indian Studies
abroad to teach Indian languages and other subjects under
the Bilateral Cultural Exchange programmes, Scheme of
Propagation of Hindi abroad and Council’s own
programme. The Chairs are in the field of Hindi, Sanskrit,
Tamil, Modern Indian History, Indian Civilization in
Paramaribo (Suriname) Budapest, (Hungary), Moscow
(Russia), Seoul, (South Korea), Warsaw, (Poland), Port
of Spain (Trinidad & Tobago), Sofia (Bulgaria), Bucharest
(Romania), Beijing (China), Madrid (Spain), Ankara,
(Turkey) Bangkok (Thailand), Paris (France), Osh
(Kyrghystan),Tashkent (Uzbekistan), Brussels (Belgium),
Durban (South Africa) and Jalalabad (Afghanistan).
The Council is also maintaining eight Rotating short term
Chairs in the field of Sanskrit and Buddhist Studies in
Ulaanbaatar (Mongolia) Indian Literature in Pennsylvania
(USA), Indian Studies in three Universities in Germany,
Indian Economy at Sciences Po, Paris, (France), Indian
Studies at Witswatersrand University, Johannesburg,
(South Africa) and Humanities at Shenzhen University,
Guanghou (China).

Scholarship and Welfare of International
Students
One of the important activities of the ICCR is the
implementation of scholarship schemes for overseas
students for doctoral, postgraduate, undergraduate courses
as well as professional courses such as engineering,
pharmacy, business administration and accountancy.
Around 2200 foreign students are currently studying in
India under the various scholarship schemes administered
by the ICCR. During April-November, 2008, the Council
offered 1868 new scholarships, including 500 scholarships
for Afghan students.
The Council regularly organizes camps and study tours
for the international students.
The section also organized a One Day Conference on 30
April, 2008 at ICCR, Azad Bhavan to discuss various
issues concerning the Afghanistan scholarship scheme.
The Afghan Minister of Higher Education accompanied
by three officials of his Ministry, attended the Conference.
The delegates also visited Bangalore and Pune universities
and interacted with Afghan scholars studying there to
get first hand information.

Meeting of Regional Directors/Regional
Officers
A meeting of the Regional Offices Head was convened
by the Deputy Director General on 10 April, 2008 at Azad
Bhavan, IP Estate, New Delhi to discuss various issues
concerning the welfare of the foreign students and to
review the activities undertaken by the Regional Offices
for the foreign students. All Sectional Heads at
Headquarters also attended the meeting.

Meeting of International Students
Advisors
An International Students Advisors Meeting was
organized under the Chairmanship of Dr. Karan Singh,
President, ICCR on 11 April, 2008 at Azad Bhavan, IP
Estate, New Delhi to discuss issues concerning foreign
students sponsored by the ICCR who are studying in
various Indian Universities. International Student
Advisers from 15 Universities, representatives of the
Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Human Resources
Development, Ministry of External Affairs, Association
of Indian Universities and all Regional Directors, Officers,
ICCR attended the meeting.

Orientation Programme
An Orientation programme for the IFS probationers –
2007 batch was organized by the Council from 28 April2 May, 2008. Lectures / lecture-cum-demonstrations/
sightseeing to Museums, Galleries and Historical places
were arranged for them. The lectures were delivered by
eminent personalities on Indian traditional & modern art,
culture and contemporary Indian arts.

Meeting with Heads of African Missions
A meeting of the Heads of African Missions in India was
held under the Chairmanship of Shri Pavan K. Varma,
Director General, ICCR on 21 August, 2008 at Azad
Bhavan, IP Estate, New Delhi as a follow-up to the IndiaAfrica Summit, in which Prime Minister of India had
announced the doubling of the existing scholarships for
nationals of African countries.

Setting-up of Inter-Ministerial Committee
Pursuant to the meeting taken by Principal Secretary to
Prime Minister of India on 15 April, 2008 on the issue of
the welfare of foreign students in India, an InterMinisterial Committee was constituted under the
Chairmanship of the DG, ICCR. The Committee held
four meetings in Delhi. It also made field trips to Pune,

164

Indian Council for Cultural Relations

Bangalore, Chennai and Hyderabad to interact with
representatives of Universities/Educational Institutions,
FRO/FRRO, concerned State Government Departments
and foreign students. Feedbacks from Indian Missions
abroad and major Universities/ Educational Institutions
in the above five cities were also sought. The Committee
submitted its report to the Principal Secretary to Prime
Minister of India on 13 October, 2008.
The Council would also be organizing the XVI
International Students Cultural Festival on 18 December,
2008 at Sirifort Auditorium, New Delhi.

University, Bangkok from 7-9 July, 2008; 18 scholars from
India and Thailand participated in the Seminar, b) IndoIsrael Colloquium at India International Centre, New
Delhi and Kolkata from 8-15 September, 2008; eminent
scholars, film makers, journalists, authors from India and
Israel participated. The Council organized a Colombian
Cultural Week in Delhi, Kolkata and Mumbai in
association with Embassy of Colombia in New Delhi from
21-26 October 2008. The Council also assisted various
organizations/Institutes in organizing 14 International
Conferences in India.

Busts and Exhibitions

Incoming Cultural Delegation
ICCR organizes the visits of foreign performing artistes to
India for performances in various cities of India. These
groups are hosted under the ambit of Bilateral Cultural
Exchange Programmes as well as in response to
recommendations of Indian Missions abroad and requests
received from Foreign Diplomatic Missions and Cultural
Centres in India. During the period April - November
2008, the Council hosted the visits of 39 foreign cultural
groups from Pakistan, Algeria, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana,
Kenya, Libya, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania,
Uganda, Zambia, Spain, Russia, Iran, Israel, Bangladesh,
Uzbekistan, Syria, Botswana, South Korea, Brazil,
Tajikistan, Hungary, Colombia, Italy, China, Japan,
Morocco, Palestine, Qatar, and Yemen. The Council also
organized 25 special events, such as the Festival of Indian
Classical Dance by foreign artists residing in India, Malhar
Festival and Sufi Music Festival at Srinagar.

Publications
The Council has an ambitious publication programme,
which has grown over the years. The Council published
six journals in five different languages namely, “Indian
Horizons” and “Africa Quarterly” (both English
Quarterlies), “Gagananchal” (Hindi Quarterly), “Papeles
de la India” (Spanish, bi-annual), Rencontre Avec L’ Inde”
(French bi-annual) and “Thaqafat-ul-Hind” (Arabic
Quarterly).

Conferences and Seminars
During the period under review, the Council collaborated
in the holding of various Conferences and Seminars with
a view to facilitating interactions between intellectuals,
opinion makers and academicians representing various
countries. These included a) the Fourth International
Seminar on Indo-Thai Historical and Cultural Linkages
titled “ Reflections on Indo -Thai Historical and
Contemporary Cultural Relations” at Thammasat

ICCR sent one bust of Mahatma Gandhi for installation
at Cape Town, (South Africa). Five major exhibitions were
sent overseas. These included the Exhibition Entitled
“Celebrating Women-Amrita Shergil Revisited” to Prague,
Astana, Edinburgh & London, Exhibition of “Women by
Women” to Algeria, “SAARC Paintings Exhibition” to
Nepal, “The Murals of India” to Egypt, and the Exhibition
“Dolls & Dresses” to Prague.
The Council sponsored various other exhibitions abroad,
such as Solo Exhibition of Late Shri S L Parashar curated
by Ms. Bela Sathi to Tagore Centre, Berlin, Germany;
Exhibition “Return to Roots” by seven Indian Bengali
artists to Dhaka, Bangladesh; Solo Exhibition by Ms.
Bharati Kapadia to Vienna, Austria; Painting Exhibition
by Ms. Ranjeeta Kant to Nehru Centre, London; Paintings
and Photographs exhibition by Ms. G S Bhavani in Hanoi,
Vietnam; Photo Exhibition by Smt. Shobha Deepak Singh
to London; Exhibition and lecture-demonstration sessions
on “Chittara Art” by Mrs. Geetha Bhat, Ms. Mousumi &
Mrs. Gowri Chandrashekar, Photographic Exhibition by
Ms. Gauri Gill “The Americans” in United States;
Exhibition “Abstract Paintings” by Ms. Neelam Dhar in
Muscat; Exhibition “Satyagraha”, for the Literature
Festival of Shared Histories – in South Africa and
“Abstract Paintings” by Ms. Prabha Shah & Ms. Vandana
Shourie in Muscat.
The ICCR organized Incoming Exhibitions of Photos, folk
Dresses, Handicrafts and Books to mark the Days of
Iranian Culture in India, organizing by the Council and
Embassy of the Islamic Republic of Iran in collaboration
with the National Museum, New Delhi & Mumbai;
Painting Exhibition by Women Artists from Afghanistan;
Exhibition “KALPANA – Masterpieces of Figurative
Indian Contemporary Paintings” curated by Ms. Anjolie
Ela Menon in New Delhi; Exhibition, “History in the
Making – Visual Archives” of Kulwant Roy curated by
Aditya Arya and Sabeena in New Delhi; Photo Exhibition,

165

Annual Report 2008-2009

“Gabo the Writer” on Gabriel Garcia Marquez, Nobel
Laureate from Colombia to celebrate Colombian Cultural
Week in New Delhi; Photo exhibition “ Days of Tajik
Culture in New Delhi; and Exhibition “Lost City” curated
by Ms. Sadia Sayed a Visual Artist, in New Delhi.

Outgoing Cultural Delegations
During the period, the Council sponsored 70 cultural
delegations till 3 November, 2008 and seven groups are
in the pipeline to be sponsored in November 2008 to 72
countries, covering all continents of the world.
The Council sponsored many outstanding artistes,
including Ms. Prerana Shimali (Kathak), Ms. Padmini Roy
(Popular Music), Ms. Pratibha Prahlad (Bharatanatyam),
Shri Prateek Chaudhary (Sitar), Ms. Uma Sharma
(Kathak), Ms. Saroja Vaidyanathan (Bharatanatyam), Ms.
Ranjana Gauhar (Odissi), Ms. Anita Singhvi (Ghazal).
The Council provided 34 travel grants to Composite
Dance group of Outstanding artistes (Odissi Dance group
of Ms. Madhavi Mudgal, Manipuri Dance group of Ms.
Charu Mathur, Bharatanatyam Dance group of Ms. Geeta
Chandran, Kathakali Dance group of International Centre
for Kathakali and Kathak Dance group of Kathak Kendra)
to present Glimpses of Classical Dances of India at the
Bangkok International Dance and Music Festival. Apart
from this, the Council also provided travel grants to many
outstanding artistes such as Dr. Shanno Khurana (Vocal),
Shri Rudra Prasad Sen Gupta (Theatre), Prof. C. V.
Chandershekhar, Guru Vempati Chinna Satyam
(Kuchipudi), Ms. Rama Vaidyanathan (Bharatanatyam).
The Council also provided 38 travel grants to a theatre
group for Pakistan.
The main Festivals for which the Council provided
collateral support are, the Izmir Festival in Turkey, Arab
Cultural Festival in Syria, First International Folk Festival
“Dukat” in Bosnia and Herzegovina, National Arts
Festival Grahamstone in South Africa, Bali Arts Festival
in Indonesia, Seventh Choir Competition in Germany,
Theatre Festival “Contacting the World” in U.K., Karmiel
Festival in Israel, SAARC Cultural Festival in Sri Lanka,
25th Year Jubilee Convention of Fokana in USA, Gyongyos
Festival in Hungary, India Summer Festival in Switzerland,
Fifth AKKA World Kannada Conference 2008 in USA,
International Trade Fair in Belgium, Barcelona Festival
in Spain, Cervantino Festival in Mexico, Music Beyond
Borders in Hongkong, DIG Chain Tour in Germany,
Namaste India Festival in Japan, Thyagaraja Festival in
France, Annual Music Festival in Canada, Carnival of
FICCI in Myanmar, Abuja Carnival in Nigeria, Indian

Arrival Day in Guyana, Jamaica, Trinidad & Tobago and
Suriname, World Performing Arts Festival in Pakistan, and
APPAN Festival in Canada. The Council sponsored
groups for India’s Independence Day Celebrations,
Janmashtami celebration, and Navaratri Festival
Celebrations in Sri Lanka, Diwali Festival in Australia and
New Zealand and Zimbabwe, and Commemoration of 300
years of the Guru Granth Sahib.

Festival of India
As part of its effort to foster and strengthen cultural
relations and mutual understanding between India and
other countries, the Council organized the following
Festivals:
Festival of India in Syria
Following groups were sponsored for participation in the
festival.
1)

Seven-member Rajasthani Group led by Samandar
Khan Langa from 10-18 October, 2008. The group
also visited Beirut as part of chain tour.

2)

Five-member Shehnai Group of Shri Dayashankar
from 10 -17 October, 2008. The group also visited
Beirut for performances.

3)

12-member Bhangra Group led by Shri Major Singh
from 7-18 October, 2008.

Days of Indian Culture in Egypt
Following groups were sponsored for participation in the
festival.
1)

12-member Group of Goan dance from 27 October13 November, 2008. The Group also visited
Ethiopia, Sudan for performances, which were
organized by the respective Embassy of India.

2)

Six-member Talvadya Kacheri group of Dr. Anil
Chaudhary from 8-13 November, 2008.

3)

11-member Rajasthani Group led by Ms. Rakhi
Poonam Sapera from 12 November 2008-8
December, 2008. The group also visited Argentina,
Chile as part for performances which were organized
by the respective Embassies of India.

4)

Six-member Kathak Dance Group led by Ms.
Madhumita Roy and Shri Shouvik Chakraborty from
10 November-8 December, 2008. The Group also
visited Italy, Argentina and Chile for performances
which were organized by our respective Missions.

Amsterdam-India Festival in Netherlands
The Council, in coordination with the Concertgebouw
organized the longest ever Festival of India in Netherlands.

166

Indian Council of World Affairs

Dr. Karan Singh, President, ICCR visited Netherlands for
the inaugural ceremony. The following performing art
groups participated in the Festival.
1)

Seven-Member Bhajan Group of Shri Anup Jalota
from 19-24 November, 2008

2)

14-Member Kathak Group of Pt. Birju Maharaj from
7-25 November, 2008. The Group also visited
Germany, Hungary and Poland for performances,
which were organized by the respective Embassy of
India.

3)

Five-Member Carnatic Vocal Group of Shri Sanjay
Subramanyam from 18-24 November, 2008. The
Group also visited Italy and Spain for performances
which were organized our respective Missions.

4)

Four-Member Hindustani Vocal Group of Ms.
Ashwini Bhide from 10-15 November, 2008. The
Group also visited Italy, where performances were
organized by the Embassy of India in Rome.

5)

Ten-Member Odissi Group of Nrityagram from 1628 November, 2008. The Group also visited Italy,
where performances, which were organized by the
Embassy of India in Rome.

6)

14-Member Kathakali Group from 11-18 November,
2008. The Group also visited Spain, where
performances were organized by the Embassy of India
in Madrid.

Festival of India in Hungary
The Council sponsored a ten-member Rajasthani Group
of Shri Allah Bhaya to Hungary for participation in the
Festival from 28 November 2008-6 December, 2008.

Coronation Ceremony in Bhutan, a 38-Member
Contemporary Dance Group led by Astad Deboo was sent
to Bhutan from 3-9 November, 2008, for performing at
the King’s Coronation Ceremony.

Outgoing Visitors Programme
The Council sponsors the visit of Indian intellectuals;
scholars, academicians and artistes to facilitate their
participation in seminars, symposia, study tours and
conferences abroad.
During the period April 2008 to November 2008, the
Council sponsored the visits of 82 eminent scholars to
various parts of the world.

Distinguished Visitors Programme
As part of its effort to foster and strengthen cultural
relations and mutual understanding between India and
other countries, the Council facilitates the visits to India
of eminent figures in public life as well as those of scholars,
intellectuals, academicians and artistes from other
countries under its Distinguished Visitors Programme.
During the period, the Council hosted ten distinguished
visitors from different countries such as China, Germany,
South Africa, France, Bahrain, Tajikistan, Russia and nine
European countries.

Awards
President of India, Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil presented
the Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International
Understanding for the year 1995 to President of the Arab
Republic of Egypt, Mr. Mohamed Hosny Mubarak, at a
special function on 18 November, 2008.

167

22

Indian Council of World Affairs

D

uring the period April 2008-November 2008, the
Indian Council of World Affairs organized the
following events successfully:
i)

Lectures

7

ii)

Seminars/Conferences

9

iii)

Bilateral dialogues

6

iv)

Background briefings,
Book Release/Panel Discussions
and other events

14

Total

36

Process of Political Modernization: Experience of Central
Asian States and India”.
ICWA Research Fellows regularly participated in seminars
and contributed papers/lectures in various reputed
journals.
ICWA’s journal ‘India Quarterly’ was brought out
regularly during the period of this Report. Three issues of
‘India Quarterly’ namely: January-March 2008; April-June
2008 and July-September 2008 were brought out during
the period. October-December, 2008 issue will be
published by the end of January 2009.

The events were very well attended. A list of all the events
mentioned above may be seen in the Appendix.

Following CSCAP-related events were organized from
April-November, 2008

During the period, the ICWA signed three MoUs for
bilateral cooperation with:

1.

CSCAP SGM on Facilitating of Maritime Security
Cooperation in the Asia Pacific held in Seoul from
2-3 April, 2008

2.

CSCAP SGM on Countering the Proliferation of
Weapons and Mass Destruction in the Asia Pacific
held in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam from 26-27 May,
2008

3.

29th SCM held in Kuala Lumpur from 2 June, 2008

4.

22nd Asia Pacific Round Table Meeting held in Kuala
Lumpur from 2-5 May, 2008

5.

4th Meeting of Energy Security held in Brunei from
8-9 July, 2008

6.

CSCAP SGM on Export Control Experts Group
held in Manila, Philippines from 24-26 August, 2008

7.

3 rd ARF Experts and Eminent Persons (EEPs)
Meeting held in Beijing, China from 13-15
November, 2008

1.

Centre for Strategic Studies (CSS) of Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan.

2.

New Zealand Institute of International Affairs
(NIIA), Wellington.

3.

Australian Institute of International Affairs (AIIA)
Melbourne

The Council hosted the following foreign dignitaries
during the year:
(1)

H.E. Mr. Christoffel Braendli, President of the Upper
House of the Swiss Parliament - 13 August, 2008

(2)

H.E. Mr. Yang Jiechi, Minister of Foreign Affairs,
The People’s Republic of China - 9 September, 2008

(3)

Mr. Stephen Smith, Australian Minister for Foreign
Affairs - 11 September, 2008

(4)

Mr. Fritz Schramma, Lord Mayor of Cologne -17
November, 2008

ICWA sponsored a Joint Study between India-Central
Asia Foundation (ICAF), ICWA and Deptt. of
International Relations, Al-Farabi Kazakh National
University, Almaty, Kazakhstan on “Contemporary

Library environment has been improved and its
membership is on the increase. The membership has
grown to 477 from last year’s 289. The ambience, look
and feel of the library has been greatly enhanced attracting
more members. Reference queries are being received on
a day to day basis from American Centre, British Council,
India International Centre, Teen Murti Secretariat and

168

Indian Council of World Affairs

various other renowned libraries. Chief correspondents
of prestigious newspapers have been visiting library for
information. 200 books on key issues in International
affairs and foreign policies pertaining to Africa, South
Asia, Central, East and West Asia have been added so
far. About 90 research scholars from reputed Indian
Institutions and Universities subscribed to the library and
referred to the books, periodicals and press clippings

available in the library. Key Government Officials have
utilized and applauded the library services. Various systems
are being streamlined. Additional measures for
modernising the library are being processed.
ICWA continued to develop as a think tank and an
important platform for foreign affairs discussions in India
in the above period.

169

23

Research and Information System for
Developing Countries

Overview

R

IS, as an autonomous policy think-tank, conducted
policy research on international economic issues and
provided analytical support in preparations for major
Summit meetings and other important negotiations such
as East Asia Summit, IBSA Summit, SAARC and
BIMSTEC Summits, WTO negotiations, Track-II Study
Group of CEPEA, joint study groups for comprehensive
economic partnerships with different countries, among
others. It continued to hold policy dialogue on the
relevance and the way forward for an Asian Economic
Community in collaboration with leading policy thinktanks in Asia, and has networked with policy think-tanks
in other countries to bring policy coherence and capacity
building on international economic issues and
development cooperation.
Research and Information System for
Developing Countries (RIS)
RIS is a New Delhi based think-tank specialized in
international economic relations and development
cooperation. RIS is an autonomous institution under the
Ministry of External Affairs. Its mandate is to function as
an advisory body to the Government of India on matters
pertaining to multilateral economic and social issues,
including regional and sub -regional cooperation
arrangements, as may be referred to it from time to time.
RIS is envisioned as a forum for fostering effective policy
dialogue among developing country think-tanks on
international economic issues.
Highlights of the RIS’ work during the year 2008/09 are
presented below:
Research and Policy Inputs Provided to the
Government
RIS conducted research studies to assist the policy
formulation and preparations for major Summit meetings
and other negotiations besides track-II initiatives held in
the year. Some of these inputs include the following:
SAARC Summit: RIS brought out the South Asia
Development and Cooperation Report 2008 which was
launched on the eve of the Colombo Summit of the
170

SAARC by the External Affairs Minister and was
provided to the country delegations.
BIMSTEC Summit: RIS prepared a policy brief
Deepening Regional Cooperation in the Bay of Bengal:
Agenda of the BIMSTEC Summit which was launched
and presented at the BIMSTEC Business Summit
2008 organized by apex chambers in conjunction
with the Second BIMSTEC Summit in November
2008. RIS also provided inputs to the MEA on
BIMSTEC Economic Cooperation.
East Asia Summit and India-ASEAN Summit: RIS
has been deeply involved in the two track-II
processes emanating from the East Asia Summit,
namely the Economic Research Institute for
ASEAN and East Asia (ERIA) and the Track II
Study Group on Comprehensive Economic
Partnership of East Asia (CEPEA). RIS represents
the country on the ERIA Expert Group and the
Regional Research Network. It has contributed to
its various research programmes and coordinated the
regional study on infrastructure development in East
Asia. It also organizes a capacity-building programme
in collaboration with ERIA. RIS is also represented
on the Track-II Study Group on CEPEA. It hosted
a meeting of the CEPEA study group in New Delhi
in February 2008 besides contributing to the draft
report. The first phase report was concluded and
was presented to the Economic Ministers of EAS in
Singapore in August 2008 which asked the Group
to continue its work and produce a more detailed
report. RIS has also provided a number of inputs in
preparation of the fourth session of EAS to be held
in Thailand in early 2009 such as those on Chiang
Mai Initiative and Financial Cooperation in Asia,
inputs for statement on financial crisis. Inputs were
also provided for the 13th ASEAN-India Working
Group, the Tenth ASEAN-India JCC, and Tenth
ASEAN-India Senior Officials Meeting. Some
inputs on emerging regional architecture in Asia
were also provided to the Department of Commerce
and to the Special Envoy to PM.

Research and Information System for Developing Countries

Mekong-Ganga Cooperation: A note on ‘India’s
Air Connectivity Potentials with Mekong Subregion:
An Appraisal’ was provided to the MEA. RIS also
provided a more detailed note on India-MGC
partnership for the MEA.
Third IBSA Summit: RIS coordinated the IBSA
Academic Forum at the Third IBSA Summit with
participation of senior academics from the three
IBSA countries. The Academic Forum focused on
the financial crisis, food and energy security, and
the potential of IBSA partnership besides a
discussion on the future activities of the IBSA
Academic Forum. The report of the Forum was
presented by DG-RIS to the IBSA leaders at their
Summit. RIS has published the report of the Forum.
RIS also provided to the government inputs on
Energy and Food Security in preparations of the
IBSA Summit.
India-Africa Forum Summit: RIS jointly with
ICWA, organized a conference on India-Africa
Economic Partnership on the eve of the preparatory
process of the India-Africa Forum Summit hosted
by the Government of India. A number of studies
prepared by RIS on the subject were presented at
the conference besides those prepared by African
experts and other Indian experts.
WTO Doha Round: RIS brought out a discussion
paper and a policy brief on the ongoing Doha Round
of trade negotiations. RIS also hosted a discussion
meeting on the outcome of the July 2008 miniministerial conference.
Asian Cooperation Dialogue: RIS is represented
on the high-level expert group on the future
directions of the ACD. It participated in its meetings
and prepared a concept paper on Prospects and
Modalities of Track II Participation.
IOR-ARC Academic Group (IOR-AG): RIS
coordinates the activities of IOR-AG and
represented India at the meeting of the group held
at the Ministerial Meeting in Tehran in 2008.
Joint Study Groups for Comprehensive Economic
Cooperation Arrangements with Indonesia, New
Zealand and Australia: RIS is represented on the
three joint study groups set by the government with
counterparts from the respective countries. RIS
regularly participates in their meetings and
contributes to the draft reports as per the division
of labour worked out between the members.
Other Policy Papers and Inputs: RIS provided to

the Government of India a number of policy inputs
and briefings during the year including a Notes on
‘Lessons Learnt from European Economic
Integration and Consequent Implications for Asia’,
inputs for the high level meetings of the UNECOSOC on Brettonwoods institutions, WTO and
UNCTAD to the Department of Economic Affairs
(Ministry of Finance); a note on National Security
Exceptions for FDI Policy to the Dy. National
Security Advisor; inputs on regional mechanism for
infrastructure investment to the Cabinet Secretary,
among others.

Policy Dialogue, Conferences and
Symposia
During 2008/09 RIS organized a number of policy
dialogues, conferences and symposia to fulfil its mandate
of fostering intellectual dialogue among developing
countries. The select major events organized in the period
include the following:
High-level International Conference on Financial
Crisis, Global Economic Governance and
Development: Responses of Asia and the Global South,
6-7 February, 2009: To launch the Silver Jubilee
celebrations of RIS, a High-level International Conference
on Financial Crisis, Global Economic Governance and
Development: Responses of Asia and the Global South
was organised from 6-7 February, 2009 in New Delhi. This
Conference combined the major themes of RIS work. The
Conference was organized in collaboration with the
Institute of Southeast Asian Studies (ISEAS), Singapore;
Economic Research Institute for ASEAN and East Asia
(ERIA), Indonesia; Global Development and
Environment (GDAE) Institute at Tufts University,
Medford, USA; Centro De Investigaciones Para La
Transformacion, (CENIT), Buenos Aires, Argentina;
Commonwealth Secretariat, UK; Asian Development
Bank, Manila; Sasakawa Peace Foundation, Japan and
Ford Foundation, USA. The High-Level Conference
brought together heads or senior experts from policy thinktanks across the world and international development
agencies with whom RIS has developed institutional
networking links. It had a representation of more than 35
institutions from outside India and numerous institutions
within the country.
Mr. Pranab Mukherjee, External Affairs and Finance
Minister delivered the Inaugural Address, H.E. Mr.
Haruhiko Kuroda, President, Asian Development Bank
delivered a Keynote address in the Inaugural Session
chaired by Dr. Arjun Sengupta, M.P. and Chairman, RIS.

171

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

The Commonwealth Secretary-General H.E. Mr. Kamlesh
Sharma delivered a dinner address on 6 February, the
SAARC Secretary-General H.E. Dr. Sheel Kant Sharma
delivered a Keynote Address on 7 February and
Ambassador H. S. Puri, Secretary (ER), Ministry of
External Affairs, delivered the Valedictory Address at the
Session chaired by Ambassador Leela Ponappa, ViceChairperson, RIS.
The Report of the Conference has been issued as RIS
Policy Brief#41. The documentation of the Conference
is available at www.ris.org.in.
Third IBSA Summit Academic Forum - IBSA
Partnership for Shared Prosperity and Inclusive
Globalization: As a part of the IBSA Summit, RIS
coordinated a high-level Academic Forum from 13-14
October, 2008 to raise and discuss the contemporary issues
of development and policy challenges facing the
developing world. The Academic forum brought together
senior academics and experts from leading think-tanks
and other members of civil society from three countries
for a discussion on themes of mutual interest and common
concerns of development. Shri Pranab Mukherjee,
Minister for External Affairs delivered the inaugural
session. The report of the Forum was presented at the
Third IBSA Summit.
Regional Conference on Deepening South Asia
Economic Integration: RIS organized a Regional
Conference on Deepening South Asian Economic
Integration in collaboration with Federation of Indian
Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) and the
SAARC Chamber of Commerce and Industry (SCCI) on
24 July, 2008 in New Delhi to set the stage for the Colombo
Summit. Mr. Pranab Mukherjee, Minister for External
Affairs inaugurated the Conference and launched the RIS
publication South Asia Development and Cooperation Report
2008. Shri Jairam Ramesh, Minister of State for Commerce
and Industry delivered the valedictory address. Some key
participants from other SAARC countries included Dr.
Sheel Kant Sharma, SAARC Secretary-General; Dr.
Kamal Hossain, former Minister of Foreign Affairs,
Bangladesh; Mr. Nihal Rodrigo, Advisor to President of
Sri Lanka; Dr. Saman Kelegama, Executive Director,
Institute of Policy Studies, Sri Lanka; Dr. Bekh Bahadur
Thapa, former Minister of Foreign Affairs, Nepal; Mr. Tariq
Sayeed, President, SCCI, Mr. Sultan Chawla, Chairman
(R&D Committee), Federation of Pakistan Chambers of
Commerce and Industry.
International Conference on Africa-India Partnership
in the 21st Century: RIS, jointly with Indian Council of
World Affairs (ICWA) and in collaboration with African

Studies Association of India (ASA), organized the
International Conference on Africa-India Partnership in
the 21st Century in New Delhi from 2-3 April, 2008 as a
precursor to the India-Africa Forum Summit. It was
addressed by senior experts from Indian and African
academic and think-tanks. Mr. Nalin Surie, Secretary
(West), Ministry of External Affairs delivered the
inaugural address. Shri Anand Sharma, Minister of State
for External Affairs delivered the Valedictory Address.
H.E. Mr. Carlos Agostinho Do Rosario, Ambassador of
Mozambique and Dean of African Diplomatic Corps in
New Delhi also addressed the conference.
Session at WTO Public Form on Trade and
Development Policy for the 21st Century – Towards a
Southern Consensus: RIS, jointly with Global
Development and Environment Institute (GDAE) at the
Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA; and Research
Centre for Economic Change (CENIT), Argentina,
organized a special session on Trade and Development
Policy for the 21st Century: Towards a Southern
Consensus at the WTO Public Forum on Trading into
Future in Geneva on 25 September, 2008. The
distinguished panelists included Mr. Faizel Ismail, Head
of the South African Delegation to the WTO, Geneva;
Dr. Kevin Gallagher of GDAE; Dr. Mehdi Shafaeddin,
IRENE, Universite de Neuchatel, Switzerland, and Dr
Nagesh Kumar, DG-RIS.
Conference on Emerging Asian Regionalism: ASEAN
India FTA and Beyond: RIS, jointly with the Asian
Development Bank (ABD), Manila, organized the
conference on Emerging Asian Regionalism: ASEANIndia FTA and Beyond in New Delhi on 29 September,
2008. Dr. Jairam Ramesh, Minister of State, delivered the
inaugural address. Key speakers included Dr. M. Kawai,
Dean, ADB Institute, Tokyo.
Conference on ‘India-ASEAN Economic Partnership:
Trade and Investment Opportunities’, 24 November
2008: RIS, jointly with India Trade Promotion
Organisation (ITPO), New Delhi organized a Conference
on India-ASEAN Economic Partnership: Trade and
Investment Opportunities on Monday, 24 November,
2008 in New Delhi. A number of presentations on
different aspects of the recently concluded Indian-ASEAN
FTA were made by different experts from Indian and
ASEAN side.
Silver Jubilee Eminent Persons Lecture, 24 March,
2009: In commemoration of Silver Jubilee of its
establishment, RIS has launched an Eminent Persons
Lecture Series. The First Silver Jubilee Eminent Persons

172

Research and Information System for Developing Countries

Lecture was delivered by Professor Jan Pronk formerly
Minister for Development Cooperation, the Netherlands
and a leading development thinker, on Globalization,
Sustainable Development and Conflict on 24 March, 2009
in New Delhi. Professor Muchkund Dubey, President,
CSD and Chairman, RIS Research Advisory Council
chaired. Dr. Arjun Sengupta, Chairman, RIS made the
opening remarks. Dr. Nagesh Kumar, Director-General,
RIS extended the vote of thanks.
RIS/NARC/UNESCO: Fourth Asian Conference on
Biotechnology and Development 12-13 February, 2009:
The Fourth Asian Conference on Biotechnology and
Development was organized by RIS in collaboration with
Nepal Agriculture Research Council (NARC) in
Kathmandu from 12-13 February, 2009. The Conference
was supported by UNESCO.
Mr. Tek Bhadur Thapa, Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture
and Cooperatives chaired the inaugural session. Dr. Sachin
Chaturvedi, Senior Fellow, RIS made the welcome
remarks. H.E. Mr. Jayaprakash P. Gupta, Minister for
Agriculture and Cooperatives, Government of Nepal
delivered the inaugural address. Prof Govindan Parayil,
Vice-Rector, United Nations University and Director,
Institute of Advanced Studies (UNU-IAS), Japan
delivered the keynote address. Prof. Parashuram Lal Karna,
Executive Director, Nepal Agricultural Research Council
(NARC), Kathmandu proposed the vote of thanks. About
90 participants from 19 countries and seven international
organizations participated in the Conference. From India
Dr. S. R. Rao, Advisor, Department of Biotechnology; and
Dr. K. Ravi Srinivas, Associate Fellow, RIS, among others,
participated.
The Conference was an effort to collectively explore how
best Asia and other developing countries may strategize
optimum returns on their technological and R&D
investments. It was part of the RIS initiative launched in
collaboration with UNESCO and with the support from
many other national agencies. The report of the
Conference is available at RIS website.
First South Asia Economic Summit on Economic
Integration in South Asia: The First South Asia
Economic Summit on Economic Integration in South
Asia: SAFTA and Beyond was held in Colombo from 2830 August, 2008. This Summit was organized by the
Institute of Policy Studies of Sri Lanka (IPS) and
Federation of Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Sri
Lanka (FCCISL) in collaboration with RIS, India among
other organizations. The RIS’ South Asia Development &
Cooperation Report 2008 was launched at the summit by
Mr. Alok Prasad, High Commissioner of India in Sri Lanka.

Workshop on National Biosafety Legislations and
Cartagena Biosafety Protocol: RIS and International
Centre for Trade and Sustainable Development (ICTSD)
organized a workshop on National Biosafety Legislations
and Cartagena Biosafety Protocol: How far we are from
Convergence?’ in Bonn, Germany on 14 May, 2008.
Among the speakers were Mr. John Komen, from PBS,
The Netherlands, Dr. Adrian Ely, SPRU Research Fellow,
Sussex University, UK; Dr. Sachin Chaturvedi, Fellow,
RIS; and Dr Maria Julia Oliva, Senior Programme Officer,
ICTSD, Geneva.
Seminar on the Doha Round on Trade Negotiations:
Challenges and Prospects: RIS organized a Seminar on
13 August 2008 to discuss the key negotiating positions
of developed and developing countries, the emerging areas
of convergence and challenges remaining to be addressed
in the Round and the future prospects. Mr. Gopal K. Pillai,
Commerce Secretary, Government of India, and Dr.
Anwarul Hoda, Member, Planning Commission addressed
the participants.

Outreach, Global
Networking

Presence

and

RIS has taken steps to strengthen the institutional
networking and international visibility of its work by
organizing seminars at the global events. In the past year
a number of policy dialogues were organized jointly with
partner institutions e.g. ICTSD, Geneva; ADB, Manila;
Institute for Policy Studies, Sri Lanka; IDE/Jetro and
ERIA, Japan; GDAE at Tufts University, USA; CENIT,
Argentina; ADB Institute, Tokyo; FICCI, CII, ITPO,
Institute of Chinese Studies, Indian Council of World
Affairs, among others. RIS has entered into MoUs
providing a framework for joint activities with a number
of similar institutions in different countries such as with
Development Research Centre (DRC) of the State
Council of China, Korea Institute for International
Economic Policy (KIEP), Institute of Policy Studies of Sri
Lanka, Institute of Southeast Asian Studies in Singapore,
Institute of Developing Economies (IDE/JETRO) in
Tokyo, International Institute of Trade and Development
in Bangkok, NAM Centre for South-South Technical
Cooperation in Jakarta, Centre for Strategic and
International Studies (CSIS), Jakarta among others.

Capacity Building
Programmes

and

Training

A four-week capacity-building programme on International
Economic Issues and Development Policy (IEIDP) is
conducted during February-March every year under the

173

Annual Report 2008 - 2009

auspices of ITEC/SCAAP Programme of the MEA. In
2008, ten participants from nine different countries
participated in the programme. In February-March 2009,
another group of 16 participants from 14 countries
participated.
Another capacity-building programme on Global and
Regional Economic Issues (GRECI) was launched in
February-March 2008 for participants from EAS countries
with the support of ERIA. In 2008, eight participants from
East Asian countries participated in it. In February-March
2009, another batch of 12 participants from 11 East Asian
countries participated.
Training Programme on Global Economic Regime and
India’s Regional Economic Engagements: RIS, on behalf
of the Foreign Service Institute, Ministry of External
Affairs, organized a training programme for IFS
Probationers in New Delhi from 3-4 June, 2008.
Training Programme on India’s Economic Security in
the Globalized World: A training module was organized
by the RIS for senior officers of the Cabinet Secretariat,
Government of India from 24-25 June, 2008.
Training Module on ‘Global Economic Issues:
Implications for Developing Countries’: RIS organized

a Training Module in conjunction with 46th Professional
Course for Foreign Diplomats conducted by Foreign
Service Institute, Ministry of External affairs in New Delhi
on 10 November, 2008.
Training Module on ‘Understanding Regional
Economic Cooperation in Asia’ 5 November, 2008: RIS
organized a Training Module on Understanding Regional
Economic Cooperation in Asia for College and University
Teachers conducted by Academic Staff College,
Department of Economics, Jamia Millia Islamia University.

RIS Publications
During 2008/09 RIS published five books/reports, issued
five Policy Briefs and fifteen Discussion Papers. Two issues
of the South Asia Economic Journal, three issues of the
Biotechnology and Development Review and three issues of
New Asia Monitor, and one issue of RIS Mekong-Ganga
Policy Brief were brought out. In addition four issues of
RIS Diary were also published. RIS publications can be
downloaded from its website http://www.ris.org.in.

Budget
RIS received a budgetary support of Rupees Rs 260 lakhs
during 2008-09 from the MEA.

174

Library

T

he Ministry’s Library has over 100,000
books, rich resource materials and a large collection
of maps, microfilms and official documents. It is also
equipped with modern facilities to support policy planning
and research. The library subscribes/ receives and
maintains about 480 Periodicals / Journals (including online journals and databases) and Newspaper titles.
The Library has an in-house computer system consisting
of a Server, and 12 PCs. The system supports data entry
and retrieval in Hindi as well. The Library has CD-ROM
databases on foreign affairs and current affairs. The Library
PCs are also equipped with CD-writers and laser printers.
It also has a colour scanner (with OCR capability as well
as facility for storage and retrieval of Image), a microfilm
/ fiche reader printer, plain paper photocopiers and a HP
Office-jet pro laser printer with Desk Top Publishing
(DTP) software.
A Library Committee manages library activities including
purchase of books and subscription of journals /
periodicals. In April 2008, Foreign Secretary has
reconstituted the Library Committee. The current Library
Committee consists of Joint Secretary (PP & R) as
Chairman, Three Directors from territorial divisions as
Members and Director (Lib & Info) as Member Secretary.

24

affairs. Using this database and CD-ROM Databases, the
Library provides Current Awareness Service and
Bibliographical and Reference Service. In addition, the
Library regularly issues:
Foreign Affairs Documentation Bulletin (FADB): a list
of Selected articles on International Relations and related
subject.
Recent Additions: an annotated list of Books /
Publications added to the Library.
The Library regularly send Article Alert Service, which
consists of abstracts of important articles from Journals /
periodicals subscribed by MEA library through group eMails IDs to all Foreign Service officers in the Ministry
and Missions abroad.
In addition to this, MEA Library has become a virtual
Library in reality as have started subscribing “EIU online
databases / services”, “J-GATE: Social Science and
Management Science: a full text multi-user database”
and “JSTOR Data base” for the users at Head Quarters
in New Delhi and all Indian Missions Abroad. In addition
to this library have also subscribing 91 online periodicals
/ journals along with print copies. These online databases
and journals / periodicals can be accessed on Internet via
username and passwords. A list of such titles has also been
circulated at Head Quarters as well as Missions abroad
and also available on MEA Library’s Website: http://
mealib.nic.in.

All Documentation / Bibliographic Services as well as
other library operation and services have been
computerized, using an integrated library software package
LIBSYS covering all the features of library. LIBSYS follows
MARC as well as non-MARC format. It supports wordbased free text searching using Boolean operators. It also
provides online validation of input data prior to updating
the database. Information on all books, maps, documents
and selected articles from periodicals received in the
Library since 1986 [and also pre-1986 publications in
active use] are available online through intranet in all
PCs of Ministry of External Affairs Library at Patiala
House. Library’s information can also be accessed through
Internet on MEA Library’s website: http://mealib.nic.in.

The Library in cooperation with NIC has brought out a
full text CD-ROM version of Annual Report of Ministry
of External Affairs [from 1948 to 1998-99] and Foreign
Affairs Record [1955 to 1999 (August)]. The Information
on the CD can be retrieved via combination of searches
including search on any given word or combination of
words. This CD-ROM version was prepared based on
material available as on 1 January 2000. This CD can be
consulted in the Library at Patiala House, New Delhi.

All new documents received in the Library i.e. books,
maps, microfilms, selected articles from periodicals are
being fed on a regular basis in the database on foreign

Weeding out of old and obsolete books and journals had
commenced few years back is still continuing and a
substantial progress has been made in this regard.

175

Annual Report 2008-2009

Retro-conversion and bar-coding of MEA Library records
project has been approved. The work has been awarded
and will be completed in this financial year.
Library also provides practical training to the student of
Library Science studying in various Institutions of Delhi
from time to time.
The library renovation work has also started after a gap
of almost ten years. The work has been awarded to CPWD
and will be completed in this financial year.
Director (Lib & Info) and other professionals attended /
participated International and National Conferences /
Seminars of various Library Associations / IFLA from time
to time.

The Library has also processed case for Category V Library
as per orders of Ministry of Finance after a gap of 17 years.
MEA Library website (http://mealib.nic.in) has been
redesigned and updated. A circular in this regard has been
sent to all officers in the Ministry including Indian
Missions abroad as per instructions of Foreign Secretary.
Library users including research scholars are welcome to
access the Library and its database, including CD-ROM
Database, and the Foreign Affairs Information Retrieval
system (FAIRS). Photocopy and Computer Print-out
facilities are also available to all Library users including
research scholars.

176

Appendices

Appendix I
Cadre strength at Headquarters and Missions abroad during 2008-09 (including Posts
budgeted by Ministry of Commerce and those ex-cadred etc.)
S. No

Cadre/Post

Posts at
Headquaters

Posts at
Mission

Total

1

Grade I

5

26

31

2

Grade II

9

34

43

3

Grade III

38

140

178

4

Grade IV

36

110

146

5

Junior Admn. Grade/Senior scale

44

147

191

6

(i) Junior Scale

10

39

49

(ii) Probationers Reserve

62

-

62

(iii) Leave Reserve

15

-

15

(iv) Deputation Reserve

19

-

19

(V) Training Reserve

7

-

7

245

496

741

(i) Grade I

84

212

296

(ii) Deputation Reserve

6

-

6

(i) Integrated Grades II&III

147

236

383

(ii) Leave Reserve

30

-

30

(iii) Deputation Reserve

16

-

16

(iv) Training Reserve

25

-

25

(i) Grade IV

189

416

605

(ii) Leave Reserve

60

-

60

(iii) Deputation Reserve

55

-

55

(i) Grade V/VI

168

101

269

(ii) Leave Reserve

60

-

60

(iii) Deputation Reserve

14

-

14

(i) Grade II of Cypher Cadre

41

147

188

(ii) Leave Reserve

24

-

24

(i) Stenographer’s cadre

174

488

662

(ii) Leave Reserve

47

-

47

(iii) Training Reserve(Hindi)

10

-

10

(iv) Deputation Reserve

12

-

12

13

Interpreter’s Cadre

7

26

33

14

L&T cadre

14

1

15

Sub Total

1183

1627

2810

Grand Total

1427

2123

3551

Sub Total
IFS(B)
7

8

9

10

11

12

179

Appendix II
Data on recruitment through direct recruitment, departmental promotion and Ltd
Departmental Examination made in the Ministry along with the reserved vacancies for
April 2008 to November 2008
Groups

Total No. of Vacancies

Number of Vacancies
Reserved
SC

ST

OBC

Unreserved

Group A

19

4

1

4

10

Group A
(Ex-Cadre)

-

-

-

-

-

Group B

34

6

2

6

20

Group C

8

-

-

2

6

Grou D

-

Total

61

10

3

12

36

180

Appendix III
Number of IFS Officers with Proficiency in various languages
Language
Arabic

Number of Officers

Language

91

Bahasa Malaysia

2

Bhasa Indonesia

12

Burmese

2

Chinese

60

Dutch

1

French

Number of Officers

Korean

3

Nepalese

3

Persian

20

Portuguese

21

Russian

77

Serbo-Croatian

3

68

Sinhalese

1

German

31

Spanish

Hebrew

4

Thai

2

Italian

3

Turkish

7

Ukranian

1

Vietnamese

2

Japanese

24

Kazakh

1

Kiswahili

5

181

58

Appendix IV
Statement showing the number of passport applications received and passports issued
including under Tatkaal Scheme, miscellaneous applications received and services rendered
as well as Revenue (including revenue under Tatkaal Scheme) and Expenditure figures of
the Passport Offices from 1 January - 31 December 2008.
Name of
RPO/PO

Ahmedabad
Amritsar#
Bangalore
Bareilly
Bhopal
Bhubaneswar
Chandigarh
Chennai
Cochin
Coimbatore##
Dehradun###
Delhi
Ghaziabad
Guwahati
Hyderabad
Jaipur
Jalandhar
Jammu
Kolkata
Kozhikode
Lucknow
Madurai####
Malappuram
Mumbai
Nagpur
Panaji
Patna
Pune
Raipur#####
Ranchi
Shimla
Srinagar
Surat
Thane
Trichy
Trivandrum
Vishakapatnam
*
**
***
****
*****
******

No. of
Applications
received
272609
53306
321287
70852
69394
46620
295120
292756
249626
20926
20668
272075
93610
35036
373172
195568
198787
15937
232897
193747
332521
149670
155941
298569
56768
30381
206974
119895
22101
42286
27292
15247
87901
149925
143907
164699
83234
5411304

expenditure
expenditure
expenditure
expenditure
expenditure
expenditure

incurred
incurred
incurred
incurred
incurred
incurred

No. of
No. of
Passports miscellanissued
eous
applications
received
280415
34190
310436
65950
70187
49938
307760
307433
249513
11409
14314
280168
92645
31872
372001
174081
191409
16938
200007
195112
334233
131602
152176
293427
59701
30755
164020
120786
16115
38409
26257
14812
89479
151497
177306
163077
90737
5310167

12626
7439
28664
3556
2761
2934
36517
24377
52937
1757
1238
25649
7238
4029
18209
11767
34806
1099
17521
31318
19667
9286
23372
20707
1834
4553
7403
7913
975
4083
1481
1197
7737
5842
8998
35231
12453
499174

Miscellaneous
services
rendered
12286
6868
27976
3551
2750
2565
34895
23689
52360
1514
1127
24481
7046
3842
13556
8828
33369
995
17248
30642
18204
8564
23358
20289
1771
4445
7872
7888
966
3760
1450
1167
7644
5752
8983
34148
11777
477626

by RPO Jalandhar
by PO Bareilly
by RPO Bhopal
by RPO Chandigarh
by RPO Ahmedabad
by RPO Mumbai

Passports
issued
under
Tatkaal

Revenue
under
Tatkaal
Scheme

Total
Revenue

20203 27542450
3559
7194400
36527 64993400
3309
536250
8302 12373000
17262 19330600
22066 49553422
85414 131617500
47778 72509000
5139 13955700
928
3594700
58338 13560000
7146 14858300
8643 20988100
44440 101139980
20087 39335300
3916
6259600
111
166500
14204 34178000
34514 55600000
12827 34000000
28993 75579500
19903 30400000
22361 30226000
5568
7040200
1602
2532000
2869
4532000
14589 19345500
2857
7142500
6218
9421000
1611
4505600
260
386000
1946
2745600
8731 15441500
16575 26139000
28795 44056000
9700 14901500
627291 1017680102

303428770
62590600
342337850
78505430
81537072
67363240
337646760
446284553
340196000
28107900
23500700
35840000
80555965
44978500
480497925
221283240
228692862
17534010
243976200
259700000
364800000
203241683
207800000
333569177
63768414
35227143
209222121
141775510
25853800
42636000
29337828
16388230
91465100
166470450
190112030
226450679
99629759
6172305501

#
##
###
###
#####

182

Total
expenditure

47001756
*
34177234
15780475
11169915
5333674
35104863
41226878
39582000
2992559
**
5370000
11730373
6431960
46163557
26054479
40407428
3690765
24468070
27900000
39300000
17943800
20800000
88261531
6093239
5595033
16365075
11271480
***
5475609
****
7819874
*****
******
26689783
20660807
9636910
700499127

Amritsar opened on 28 June 2008
Coimbatore opened on 13 September 2008
Dehradun opened on 17 June 2008
Madurai opened on 17 December 2007
Raipur opened on 17 December 2007

Appendix V
Finances of the Ministry of
External Affairs in 2008-2009
The Budget Allocation of the Ministry of
External Affairs in the Budget Estimates
(BE) 2008-2009 is Rs. 5062.00 crores,
which is Rs. 628.40 crores i.e. 14.17 %
more than the BE 2007-08 of Rs. 4433.60
crores. There is an increase in the Revised
Estimates for 2008-09 by Rs. 1806.42
crores i.e. by 35.68 % over BE 2008-09
allocation.

MEA Expenditure and Budget (2002-2003 to 2008-2009)
(Revenue & Capital)
Years

Actuals (in Rs. Crores)

Percentage
variation from
previous year

2002-2003

3253.79

23.98

2003-2004

3344.53

2.79

2004-2005

3756.15

12.31

2005-2006

4089.67

8.88

2006-2007

3949.68

-3.43

2007-2008

4572.39

15.77

2008-2009 (BE)

5062.00

14.17

2008-2009(RE)

6868.42

54.92

183

Appendix VI
The Major Sectoral Allocations in the 2008-2009 Budget (Revised Estimate)
(Revenue & Capital)
Sectors

Allocation (in Rs. Crores)

MEA Secretariat

186.21

Embassies & Missions

1230.96

Passport & Emigration

247.76

Special Diplomatic Expenditure

1041.39

Technical & Economic Cooperation

1730.09

Contributions to International Organizations

1015.56

Grant to Indian Council for Cultural Relations

86.75

Loans and Advances to Foreign Governments

914.60

Others

415.10

Total

6868.42

184

Appendix VII
Principal Destinations of India’s Aid & Loan Programmes
The principal beneficiaries of our Aid and Loan Programmes in the Current Financial Year (2008-09) are as under:
(Revised Estimates)
Aid & Loan to Countries

(In Rupees Crores)

% of India’s total aid and loan budget

1205.92

45.60

Maldives

504.70

19.08

Afghanistan

418.50

15.82

Other Developing Countries

215.75

8.16

Nepal

113.00

4.27

African Countries

95.00

3.59

Myanmar

35.00

1.32

Sri Lanka

30.00

1.13

Central Asia

18.82

0.71

Bangladesh

6.00

0.23

Latin American Countries

2.00

0.08

2644.69

100.00

Bhutan

Total

1.

The Government of India has extended loans to the
Government of Bhutan to assist in the
implementation of developmental projects. During
2008-2009, the loan extended to the Government
of Bhutan amounts to Rs.114.60 crores. This year a
standby credit facility of Rs. 300 crores has also been
extended to Bhutan.

2.

The Budget of the Ministry of External Affairs is
essentially a Non-Plan Budget. However, from 199697, a Plan Head has been established with the
approval of the Cabinet. This primarily caters to
certain large developmental projects undertaken in
Bhutan, as part of project assistance requested by
Government of Bhutan in the Government of India’s
“Aid to Bhutan” Programme. The Tala-Hydroelectric
Project has been commissioned. The other projects
in Bhutan being funded from the Plan head are the
Punatsangchu Hydroelectric Project and the
Dungsum Cement Plant Project. The Kabul-Pul-eKhumri double circuit transmission line in
Afghanistan and the Kaladan Multimodal Transport
project in Myanmar are also being funded from Plan
allocations. The Plan segment also caters to the loans
extended to the Government of Bhutan, which is
Rs. 114.60 crores for the current financial year(20082009).

3.

The estimated expenditure on the Headquarters of
the Ministry of External Affairs during the current
financial year is Rs. 186.21 crores, which is 3.56 %
of the total estimated revenue budget of Rs. 5227.57
crores . Estimated expenditure on Indian Missions
and Posts abroad is expected to be Rs. 1230.96 crores
which is about 23.55 % of the total revenue
expenditure of the Ministry.

4.

The Ministry of External Affairs’ revenue from
Passport and Visa fees and other receipts for 200809 are likely to be of the order of Rs. 2000.36 crores.
It is estimated that Passport fees would account for
Rs. 950 crores, Visa fees for Rs. 1000 crores and other
receipts for Rs. 50.36 crores .

185

Appendix VIII
Extracts from C&AG's Report on Ministry of External Affairs
Ministry’s approval for unwieldy large Haj goodwill delegations to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for long duration of
18 – 20 days, which is inconsistent with the role of the delegations, renders it extravagant. No criteria have been
established for nomination of the members for the delegation. Ministry arranges hotel accommodation for the
accompanying spouse/family members of the delegates at Government cost which is irregular.
(Report No. CA 1 OF 2008)

186

Appendix IX
Treaties/Conventions/Agreements Concluded or Renewed by India with other countries in
the year 2008
S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement

Date of
Signature

Date of Date of Entry
Deposit
into force
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

A. MULTILATERAL
1

Seventh Additional Protocol to the Constitution of the
Universal Postal Union

5.10.2004

7.3.2008

2

International coffee agreement 2007

28.8.2008

18.9.2008

22.9.2008

3

Amendment of Annex B to the Kyoto Protocol adopted
by the Conference of Parties to the Kyoto Protocol.

17.11.2006

30.9.2008

18.11.20008
25.7.2008

4

International Tropical Timber Agreement, 2006.

23.4.2008

19.6.2008

5

Charter of the SAARC Development fund(SDF)

3.8.2008

27.10.2008

6

Protocol of Accession of Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
to agreement on South Asian Free Trade Area(SAFTA)

3.8.2008

27.10.2008

7

SAARC Convention on Mutual Assistance in
Criminal Matters

3.8.2008

29.8.2008

8

Agreement on the Establishment of South Asian
Regional Standards Organization (SARSO)

3.8.2008

27.10.2008

Convention 174 Prevention of Major
Industrial Accidents Convention, 1993.

3.4.2008

6.6.2008

9
10

Headquarters Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the South Asian University(SAU).

6..6.2009

30.11.2008

30.11.2008

IBSA
Memorandum of Understanding between the
Government of the Republic of India, the Government
of the Federative Republic of Brazil and the Government
of the Republic of South Africa on cooperation in the
field human settlements development.

15.10.08

15.10.08

Memorandum of Understanding between the Government
of the Republic of India, the Government of the Federative
Republic of Brazil and the Government of the Republic of
South Africa on cooperation in the area of environment
under IBSA forum

15.10.08

15.10.08

Tripartite agreement among the Government of the
Republic of India, the Government of the Federative
Republic of Brazil and the Government of the Republic
of South Africa for cooperation in the field of
tourism under IBSA.

15.10.08

Memorandum of Understanding on trade facilitation for
standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment
among the Government of the Republic of India, the
Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil
and the Government of the Republic of South Africa.

15.10.08

B. TRILATERAL
1

2

3

4

187

Appendix IX

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement

5

6

7

Date of
Signature

Memorandum of Understanding among the
Governments of the Republic of India,
the Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil and
the Government of the Republic of South Africa on
cooperation in the field of women’s development and
gender equality programmes.

15.10.08

Agreement on Wind Resources between the
Government of the Republic of India, the Government
of the Federative Republic of Brazil and the
Government of the Republic of South Africa.

17.10.07

Agreement on Public Administration & Governance
between the Government of the Republic of India, the
Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil and
the Government of the Republic of South Africa.

17.10.07

Date of Date of Entry
Deposit
into force
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

C. BILATERAL
1

Australia
Extradition Treaty between The Republic of
India and Australia.

23.6.2008

11.8.2008

Treaty between the Republic of India and Australia on
Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters.

23.6.2008

14.8.2008

3

Belgium
Agreement on Social Security between the Kingdom of
Belgium and The Republic of India

3.11.2006

3.6.2008

4

Bhutan
Memorandum of Understanding on telemedicine
project in Bhutan between Government of India
and the Government of Bhutan.

28.3.2008

5

Brazil
Treaty on Extradition between the Republic of India
and the Federative Republic of Brazil.

16.4.2008

14.8.2008

6

Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the Federative Republic
of Brazil on audio visual co production.

4.6.2007

22.8.2008

7

Bosnia & Herzegovina
Agreement between India and Bosnia & Herzegovina for
Bilateral Investment Promotion and Protection.

12.9.2006

27.11.2007

8

British High Commission
Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of
Human Resource Development, Government of India
and British High Commission regarding her
Majesty’s Government.

21.1.2008

9

Belarus
Treaty on Extradition between the Republic of
India and the Republic of Belarus

16.4.2007

2

188

17.4.2008

14.2.2008

Appendix IX

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement

10

Date of
Signature

Date of Date of Entry
Deposit
into force
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Bulgaria
Protocol between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the Republic of Bulgaria
amending the Agreement between the Government of
the Republic of India and the Government of the
Republic of Bulgaria for the Promotion and Protection
of Investment signed in New Delhi on the twenty sixth
day of October in the year nineteen thousand
and ninety eight

12.9.2007

8.11.2007

12.5.2008

Treaty on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters
between the Republic of Bulgaria.

12.9.2007

24.9.2008

9.10.2008

Treaty on the Transfer of sentenced persons between the
Republic of India and the Republic of Bulgaria.

12.9.2007

28.2.2008

9.10.2008

Agreement on Economic Cooperation between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Republic of Bulgaria

12.9.2007

20.3.2008

14

Brunie Darusssalam
Bilateral Investment Promotion and
Protection Agreement(BIPA)

22.5.2008

14.7.2008

15

Cambodia
Agreement between the government of the Republic of
India and the Royal Government of Cambodia of the
Transfer of Sentenced Persons.

8.12.2007

5.6.2008

China
Memorandum of Understanding between National Bank
for Agriculture and Rural Development and Agricultural
Development Bank of China on Mutual Cooperation.

14.1.2008

14.1.2008

Memorandum of Understanding between Ministry of
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation of the Republic
of India and Ministry of Construction of the
People’s Republic of China.

14.1.2008

14.1.2008

A Shared Vision for the 21 Century of the Republic of
India and the People’s Republic of China.

14.1.2008

-

Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation
between the Ministry of Railways of the Republic of
India and Ministry of Railways of the
People’s Republic of China.

14.1.2008

14.1.2008

Protocol of Phytosanitary Requirements for the Export
of Tobacco Leaves from India to China between the
Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of India and the
General Administration of Quality Supervision,
Inspection and Quarantine of the
People’s Republic of China.

14.1.2008

14.1.2008

11
12
13

16

17

18
19

20

st

189

Appendix IX

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement

Date of
Signature

Date of Date of Entry
Deposit
into force
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

21

Memorandum of Understanding on Scientific
Cooperation between Geological Survey of India and
China Geological Survey in Geosciences.

14.1.2008

14.1.2008

22

Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of
Rural Development of the Republic of India and the
Ministry of Land and Resources of the People’s Republic
of China for Cooperation in Land Resource
Management, Land Administration and
Resettlement & Rehabilitation.

14.1.2008

14.1.2008

23

Memorandum of Understanding between Department of
Ayush, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare of the
Republic of India and State Administration of Traditional
Chinese Medicine (SATCM), People’s Republic of
China concerning Cooperation in Traditional Medicine.

14.1.2008

14.1.2008

Memorandum of Understanding between the Indian
Council for Cultural Relations and the Chinese People’s
Association for Friendship with Foreign Countries on
Cooperation in Culture.

14.1.2008

14.1.2008

Memorandum of Understanding between Indian Council
for Cultural Relations and Chinese People’s Association
for Friendship with Foreign Countries on India-China
Joint Medical Mission.

14.1.2008

14.1.2008

Memorandum of Understanding for Cooperation
between the Planning Commission of the Republic of
India and The National Development and Reform
Commission of the People’s Republic of China.

14.1.008

14.1.2008

Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry
of Water Resources, the Republic of India and the
Ministry of Water Resources, the People’s Republic of
China upon Provision of Hydrological Information of the
Yaluzangbu/Brahmaputra River in Flood Season by
China to India.

5.6.2008

5.6.2008

28

Cyprus
Agreement between Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the Republic of Cyprus
on Combating International Terrorism Organized Crime
and Illicit Drug Trafficking

25.5.2007

29

Canada
Agreement between the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy, Government of India and The University of
Saskatchewan, Canada on Indo-Canadian Renewable
Energy Cooperation.

28.3.2008

24

25

26

27

30

Agreement for scientific and technological cooperation
between the Government of the Republic of India and
the Government of the Canada.

190

17.11.2005

25.1.2008

28.3.2008

10.9.2008

Appendix IX

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement

31

32

33

34

35

36
37

38

39

40

41

Date of
Signature

Date of Date of Entry
Deposit
into force
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Denmark
Arrangement between the Government of the Republic
of India and The Government of the Kingdom of
Denmark on Gainful Employment for Family Members
of a Diplomatic Mission or Consular Post.

6.2.2008

6.2.2008

Djibouti
Agreement between the Government of theRepublic of
India and the Government of the Republic of Djibouti
for the Promotion and Protection of Investments.

19.5.2003

16.10.2008

Ethiopia
Agreement between the Government of Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Government of
the Republic of India for the Reciprocal Promotion and
Protection of Investments.

5.6.2007

3.9.2007

Egypt
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the Arab Republic of
Egypt on the Transfer of Sentenced Persons.

8.1.2008

5.6.2008

Agreement on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal
Matters between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt

8.1.2008

24.1.2008

Extradition Treaty Between Government of India and
the Government of Arab Republic of Egypt

18.11.2008

8.12.2008

Memorandum of Understanding in the fields of Health and
Medicine between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the Republic of Egypt.

18.11.2008

18.11.2008

France
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and The Government of the French Republic
concerning to the Protection of Classified information
and Material in the Field of Defence.

25.1.2008

19.12.2008

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the Republic of France
on the Transfer of Sentenced Persons.

25.1.2008

16.7.2008

Bilateral Agreement for the Jules Horowitz Reactor
Construction and Operation between Commissariat
A L’energie Atomique a French State and Department
of Atomic Energy, Government of India.

25.1.2008

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the French Republic on
India-French Development Cooperation Through AFD.

25.1.2008

191

13.8.2008

Appendix IX

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement

Date of
Signature

Date of Date of Entry
Deposit
into force
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

42

Agreement concerning cooperation to set up an
International Associated Laboratory “Project” between
National Brain (NBRC) Government of India and The
National Institute for Health and Medical Research.

25.1.2008

43

Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry
of Railways of the Republic of India and The French
National Railways(SNCF).

14.5.2008

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the French Republic on
the Development of Peaceful uses of Nuclear Energy.

30.9.2008

Germany
Agreement between the Federal Ministry of Defence of
the Federal Republic of Germany and the Ministry of
Defence of the Republic of India on the Mutual
Protection of Classified Information.

30.10.2007

30.10.2008

44

45

14.5.2008

46

Hellenic Republic
Agreement between the Government of the Hellenic
Republic of Greece and the Government of the Republic
of India on scientific technological cooperation.

26.4.2007

18.7.2007

29.2.2008

47

Agreement between India and Hellenic Republic
of Greece for Bilateral Investment Promotion
and Protection.

26.4.2007

21.8.2007

12.4.2008

48

Hungary
Plan of Cooperation in the field of Health and Medicine
between the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare of
the Republic of India and the Ministry of Health of the
Republic of Hungary.

18.1.2008

18.1.2008

49

Agreement between the Ministry of Agriculture of the
Republic of India and the Ministry of Agriculture and
Rural Development of the Republic of Hungary on
Cooperation in the filed of Agriculture and Allied sectors.

18.1.2008

18.1.2008

50

Iran
Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on Mutual Legal Assistance in
Criminal Matters.

2.11.2008

51

Italy
Agreement on cultural cooperation between the
Government of the Republic of Italy and the
Government of Republic of India.

12.7.2004

6.10.2008

Memorandum of Understanding between the Government
of the Republic of India and Italian Ministry of Agriculture,
Food and Forestry Policies on cooperation in the fields
of Agriculture and Phytosanitary issues.

16.1.2008

16.1.2008

52

192

18.11.2008

Appendix IX

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement

Date of
Signature

Date of Date of Entry
Deposit
into force
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

53

Iceland
Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of the Republic
of Iceland for the Promotion and
Protection of Investments.

29.6.2007

19.10.2007

54

Ireland
Agreement on Scientific and Technological cooperation
between the Government of the Republic of India and
the Government of Ireland

19.1.2006

19.2.2008

Japan
Joint statement between the Planning Commission of
India and the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry
of Japan on the Occasion of the third Meeting of the
Japan-India Energy Dialogue.

17.9.2008

55

56
57
58

59

60

61

62

63

64

16.12.2008

Joint Statement on the advancement of the Strategic
and Global Partnership between India and Japan.

22.10.2008

Joint Declaration on Security Cooperation
between India and Japan.

22.10.2008

Joint Statement signed between Minister for Commerce
and Industry and the Japanese Minister for Economy,
Trade and Industry.

21.10.2008

Memorandum of Understanding between Japan Bank
for International Cooperation and India Infrastructure
Finance Company Limited and Delhi Mumbai Industrial
Corridor Development Corporation Limited.

21.10.2008

Memorandum of Understanding on Scientific and
Technological Cooperation between the Department of
Science and Technology, Government of India and the
High Energy Accelerator Research
Organization(KEZ), Japan.

22.10.2008

22.10.08

4.2.2008

4.2.2008

Kyrgyz Republic
Programme of Cooperation between the
Ministry of External Affairs of the Republic of India and
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Kyrgyz Republic.
Macedonia
Agreement between the Government of India and the
Government of the Republic of Macedonia for the
Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments.

17.3.2008

Madagascar
Memorandum of Understanding between the Government
of the Republic of India and the Government of the
Republic of Madagascar

18.9.2008

Mauritius
Extradition Treaty between India and Mauritius.

21.11.2003

193

30.4.2008

17.10.2008

21.8.2007

23.6.2008

Appendix IX

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

Date of
Signature

Myanmar
Memorandum of Understanding between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Union of Myanmar on
Intelligence Exchange Cooperation.

2.4.2008

Framework Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of the Union of
Myanmar for the Construction and Operation of a
Multi-Modal Transit Transport Facility of Kaladan River
connecting the Sittwe Port in Myanmar with the State
of Mizoram in India.

2.4.2008

Protocol on Facilitation of Kaladan Multi-Modal Transit
Transport between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the Union of Myanmar.

2.4.2008

Protocol on Maintenance and Administration of
Kaladan Multi-Modal Transit Transport Facility between
the Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Union of Myanmar.

2.4.2008

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the Union of Myanmar for
the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments.

24.6.2008

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the Union of Myanmar for
the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of
Fiscal Evasion with Respect to Taxes on Income.

2.4.2008

Date of Date of Entry
Deposit
into force
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

1.10.2008

Montenegro
Convention between Montenegro and the Government
of the Republic of India for the avoidance of double
taxation and prevention of fiscal evasion

8.2.2006.

Maldives
Memorandum of Understanding between the
Government of India and Maldives concerning
Manpower requirements of Indira Gandhi
Memorial Hospital(IGMH), Male.

19.9.2008

19.9.2008

Memorandum of Understanding between the Government
of the Republic of India and the Government of the
Republic of Maldives for the Establishment of the
India-Maldives Foundation.

19.9.2008

19.9.2008

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the Republic of Maldives
on cooperation in the fields of Science and Technology.

11.2.2008

11.2.2008

Mexico
Agreement between India and Mexico for Bilateral
Investment Promotion and Protection.

21.5.2007

194

12.9.2008

2.7.2007

23.9.2008

23.2.2008

Appendix IX

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement

76

77

78

79

80

81
82

83

84

Date of
Signature

Date of Date of Entry
Deposit
into force
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Netherlands
Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry
of Science and Technology of the Republic of India and
the Ministry of Economic Affairs of the Netherlands on
Cooperation in the Fields of Science, Technology
and Innovation.

28.3.2008

Norway
Memorandum of Understanding Between the Ministry
of Human Resource Development, Republic of India and
the Ministry of Education and Research, Kingdom of
Norway on Cooperation in the Field of Education.

18.6.2008

Pakistan
Agreement on Consular Access between India
and Pakistan.

21.5.2008

21.5.2008

Memorandum of Understanding between Securities and
Exchange Board of India and Securities and Exchange
Commission of Pakistan.

28.1.2008

28.1.2008

Memorandum of Understanding between Institute of
Defence Studies and Analysis, New Delhi, India and
Institute for Strategic Studies, Islamabad, Pakistan.

4.2.2008

Memorandum of Understanding between India and
Pakistan on Air Services.

15.2.2008

Palestine
Memorandum of understanding between the
Government of the Republic of India and the Palestine
Liberation Organization for the benefit of the Palestine
Authority regarding.

7.10.2008

Qatar
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the State of Qatar
concerning cooperation on Defence.

9.11.2008

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the State of Qatar on
Cooperation in Security and Law enforcement matters.

9.11.2008

19.12.2008

15.2.2008

9.11.2008

85

Romania
Agreement on Economic Cooperation between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Republic of Romania

23.10.2006

20.3.2008

86

Russian Federation
Agreement between the Government of Republic of
India and the Government of the Russian Federation
on cooperation to combat illicit trafficking in Narcotics
Psychotropic substances and their Precursors.

12.11.2007

1.10.2008

195

Appendix IX

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement

87

Date of
Signature

Memorandum on Cooperation in the Field of Archives
between National Archives of India and the Federal
Archival Agency (Russian Federation)

12.2.2008

88

Protocol for consultations between the Ministry of
External Affairs of the Republic of India and the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation
for 2009-2010.

20.10.2008

89

Memorandum on the Development of Cooperation in
Law Enforcement Matters between the Central Board of
Excise and Customs, Department of Revenue, Ministry
of Finance, Republic of India and the
Federal Customs Service (Russian Federation).

12.2.2008

90

Joint Declaration between the Republic of India and the
Russian Federation

5.12.2008

91

Protocol on the Fourteenth Session of the Indo-Russian
Inter-Governmental Commission on Trade, Economic,
Scientific, Technological and Cultural Cooperation.

5.12.2008

92

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the Russian Federation on
cooperation in the construction of additional nuclear
power plant units at Kudankulam site as well as in the
construction of Russian designed nuclear power plants
at new sites in the Republic of India.

5.12.2008

93

Memorandum of Understanding between Indian Space
Research Organization (ISRO) and Russian Federal
Space Agency on joint activities in the field of human
spaceflight Programme.

5.12.2008

94

Joint Action Programme for the period 2009-10 for the
implementation of the agreement between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Russian Federation on cooperation
in the field of Tourism.

5.12.2008

95

Memorandum on cooperation between the National
Academy of Customs, Excise and Narcotics of India and
the Russian Customs Academy.

5.12.2008

96

Memorandum of Understanding between the Securities
& Exchange Board of India and Federal Financial
Markets Service of Russian Federation in relation to
Mutual Cooperation and information sharing.

5.12.2008

97

Contracts for supply of 80MI-175V-5 Helicopters.

5.12.2008

98

Agreement between the Financial Intelligence Unit of
India and Federal Financial Monitoring Service of the
Russian Federation on Cooperation in the Sphere of
Counteracting Legalization (laundering) of
proceeds from Crime.

5.12.2008

Memorandum of Understanding between Co-chairs of
India-Russia CEO’s Council.

5.12.2008

99

196

Date of Date of Entry
Deposit
into force
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Appendix IX

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement

100 Protocol for Consultations between the Ministry of
External Affairs of the Republic of India and the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation
from 2009-2010

Date of
Signature

Date of Date of Entry
Deposit
into force
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

20.10.2008

20.10.2008

101 Senegal
Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of the Republic of
Senegal for the Promotion and Protection of Investments.

3.7.2008

25.8.2008

102 Serbia
Convention between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the Republic of Serbia for
the Avoidance of Double Taxation with respect to taxes
on Income and on Capital.

8.2.2006

10.1.2008

103 Syrian Arab Republic
Work Plan under Memorandum of Understanding
between the Government of the Republic of India and
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic for
Cooperation in the Field of Agriculture and Allied
Sectors for 2008-2009.

18.6.2008

104 Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government the Syrian Arab Republic on
the Mutual Promotion and Protection of Investments.

18.6.2008

12.9.2008

105 Saudi Arabia
Memorandum of Understanding on combating crime
between India and Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

25.1.2006

22.2.2006

106 Agreement between India and Saudi Arabia for Bilateral
Investment Promotion and Protection.

25.1.2006

107 Sri lanka
Memorandum of Understanding on Telemedicine Project
in Sri Lanka between Government of India and the
Government of Sri lanka.

12.6.2008

108 Memorandum of Understanding on Tele education
Project in Sri Lanka between Government of India and
Government of Sri lanka

28.6.2008

109 Memorandum of Understanding between Government
of Sri Lanka and Government of India relating to
Grant Assistance from Government of India for Artificial
recharge to Groundwater in Export Processing Zone at
Katunayeke, Sri lanka.

4.9.2008

110 Memorandum of Understanding on Strengthening of
SAARC Terrorist Offences Monitoring Desk (STOMD)
and the SAARC Drug Offences Monitoring Desk
(SDOMD) based in Sri Lanka between Government of
India and the Government of Sri lanka

4.10.2008

111 Memorandum of Understanding between Government of
Sri Lanka and Government of India regarding the Rural
Solar Energy Electrification Project in Sri Lanka. Not available on records

197

18.6.2008

14.8.2008
20.6.2008

21.11.2007

Appendix X
Instruments of Full Powers Issued during the period 1 January 2008 to December 2008
Sl. No. Convention/Treaty

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Date of
Full Powers

In favour of Shri M. Lal Dingliana, Ambassador of India to Macedonia for signing the
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government of
the Republic of Macedonia for the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments.

18.1.2008

In favour of Shri Debashish Chakravarti, Ambassador of India to Romania for signing
the Protocol between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government of
Romania amending the Agreement between the Government of Romania and the
Government of the Republic of India on the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of
Investments signed in New Delhi on the seventeenth day of November in the year
nineteen hundred and ninety seven

31.1.2008

In favour of Shri Anand Sharma, Minister of State for External Affairs, for signing the
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government of
the Republic of Uruguay for the Promotion and Protection of Investments.

6.2.2008

In favour of Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Science & Technology and Earth Sciences
for signing the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Republic of Finland on Cooperation in the Fields of Science and
Technology.

24.3.2008

In favour of Shri R.K. Goyal, Additional Member Planning, Railway Board, for signing
the Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Railways of the Republic of
India and the French National Railways (SNCF).

3.4.2008

In favour of Shri Vayalar Ravi, Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs, for signing the
Memorandum of Understanding on the Employment of Workers between the
Government of India and the Government of Malaysia.

4.4.2008

In favour of Shri P. Chidambaram, Finance Minister for signing the Agreement between
the Government of the Republic of India and the Government of His Majesty The Sultan
and Yang Di-Pertuan of Brunei Darussalam on the Reciprocal Promotion and
Protection of Investments.

19.5.2008

In favour of Shri M. Madhavan Nambiar, Special Secretary, DIT for signing the
Agreement between the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology of
India and the Ministry of Transport and Communications of Finland for Co-operation in
the Field of Information Security.

22.5.2008

In favour of Shri R. S. Mathoda, Chairman, Central Board of Direct Taxes, for signing
the Agreement and the Protocol between the Government of the Republic of India and
the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income and on Capital.

22.5.2008

In favour of Shri E. Ahamed, Minister of State for External Affairs for signing the
Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of Republic of India and the
Palestine Liberation Organization for the benefit of the Palestinian Authority regarding
construction and equipping of Jawaharlal Nehru High School at Abu Dees.

4.6.2008

In favour of Shri Jairam Ramesh, Minister of State for Commerce & Power for signing
the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government
of the Union of Myanmar for the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments.

23.6.2008

In favour of Shri Shiv Shankar Mukherjee, High Commissioner of India to United
Kingdom for signing the International Coffee Agreement, 2007.

198

7.8.2008

Appendix X

Sl. No. Convention/Treaty

13

14

15.

16

17

Date of
Full Powers

In favour of Shri K. Mohandas, Secretary, Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs
Agreement between the Republic of India and the Federal Republic of Germany on
Social Insurance.

7.10.2008

In favour of Shri Anil Kumar Upadhyay, Additional Secretary, Department of
Agricultural Research and Education (DARE) & Secretary, Indian Council of
Agricultural Research (ICAR), for signing the Memorandum of Understanding between
the Government of the Republic of India and the Government of Republic of Ecuador
for Cooperation in the Field of Agricultural Research and Education.

14.11.2008

In favour of Shri N.B. Singh, Chairman, Central Board of Direct Taxes, for signing
the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government
of the Republic of Tajikistan for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention
of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income.

17.11.2008

In favour of Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister, Science and Technology and Earth Sciences,
for signing the Agreement between the Republic of India and the Government of the
Republic of Singapore on Science and Technology Cooperation.

17.11.2008

In favour of Shri. Vayalar Ravi, Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs, for signing the
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on Labour and Manpower Development
between the Government of India and the Kingdom of Bahrain.

21.11.2008

199

Appendix XI
Instruments of Ratification/Accession issued during the period 1 January 2008 to December
2008
Sl. No. Instruments of Ratification/Accession
1

2
3

4
5
6

7
8

Date of Issue of Ratification

Convention between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government
of the Republic of Serbia for the Avoidance of Double Taxation with respect to
Taxes on Income and on Capital

10.1.2008

Agreement on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters between the Government
of the Republic of India and the Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt.

24.1.2008

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government
of the Republic of Cyprus on Combating International Terrorism, Organized Crime
and Illicit Drug Trafficking

25.1.2008

Agreement on Scientific and Technological Cooperation between the Government
of the Republic of India and the Government of Ireland

19.2.2008

Treaty on the Transfer of Sentenced Persons between the Republic of India and the
Republic of Bulgaria

28.2.2008

Seventh Additional Protocol to the Constitution of the Universal Postal Union was
adopted by the XXIII Congress of the Union held at Bucharest on the fifth day of
October in the year two thousand and four

7.3.2008

Agreement on Economic Cooperation between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of Romania

20.3.2008

Agreement on Economic Cooperation between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the Republic of Bulgaria

20.3.2008

9

Convention 174 Prevention of Major Industrial Accidents Convention, 1993

10

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government
of the Republic of Macedonia for the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments

30.4.2008

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government
of the Republic of Uruguay for the Promotion and Protection of Investments.

30.4.2008

11
12

3.4.2008

Agreement on Social Security between the Kingdom of Belgium and the
Republic of India

3.6.2008

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government
of the Arab Republic of Egypt on the Transfer of Sentenced Persons

5.6.2008

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the Royal
Government of Cambodia on the Transfer of Sentenced Persons

5.6.2008

15

International Tropical Timber Agreement, 2006

9.6.2008

16

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government
of the Republic of France on the Transfer of Sentenced Persons

16.7.2008

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government
of His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan of Brunei Darussalam on the
Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments

14.7.2008

18

Extradition Treaty between the Republic of India and Australia.

11.8.2008

19

Film Co-Production Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

11.8.2008

13
14

17

20

Treaty on Extradition between the Republic of India and the Federative Republic of

200

Appendix XI

Sl. No. Instruments of Ratification/Accession

Date of Issue of Ratification

Brazil

14.8.2008

Treaty between the Republic of India and Australia on Mutual Legal Assistance in
Criminal Matters.

14.8.2008

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government
of the Federative Republic of Brazil on audio visual co production.

22.8.2008

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government
of the Senegal for the promotion and protection of investments.

25.8.2008

Agreement for scientific and technological cooperation between the Government of
the Republic of India and the Government of the Canada.

10.9.2008

Convention between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government
of the Republic of Montenegro for the avoidance of double taxation with respect to
taxes on income and capital.

12.9.2008

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic on the mutual promotion and protection of investments.

12.9.2008

27

International coffee agreement.

18.9.2008

28

Extradition Treaty between Government of India and Government of
Arab republic of Egypt.

8.12.2008

21
22
23
24
25

26

29
30

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government
of the State of Qatar on Cooperation in Security and Law Enforcement Matters.

19.12.2008

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government
of the French Republic concerning protection of classified information and material
in the field of Defence.

19.12.2008

201

Appendix XII
Conference/ Seminars/ Study projects organized/ undertaken by Institutions/ NGOs, which
were funded, partially or wholly, by Policy Planning & Research Division till January 2008
Sl. No.

Event

Institution / Beneficiary

1.

Seminar on “India-China Border Trade-a Strategy for
Frontier Development” on 5-6 March 2007 at Gangtok.

Indian Council of Social Science
Research (ICSSR) North Eastern
Regional Centre, Shillong (Meghalaya)

2.

International Seminar on “Envisioning A New South Asia”
from 29-31 March 20007 at Visakhapatnam.

Centre for SAARC Studies, Andhra
University, Visakhapatnam (A.P.)

3.

Study on “Newer Dynamics of India’s Nepal Policy:
Challenges, Options and Way Forward” by Prof.
Mahendra P. Lama.

Centre for Public Affairs (CPA),
Noida (UP)

4.

Research Projects on
i. Indo-Myanmar Geo-political and security relations:
Measures for improving trade & economic tie-ups.
ii. Impediments in India’s “Look East” policy: suggested
remedies.
iii. Indo-Russian strategic relations in the new world order:
Opportunities/Challenges.
iv. New realities in the Indian Ocean Region: How can
India benefit from them?

Asia Centre, Bangalore

5.

Study on “The National Interest Project”.

Indian Council for Research on
International Economic Relations
(ICRIER), New Delhi.

6.

Study by the Task Force on Disarmament and Non-Proliferation
set up by Ministry of External Affairs consisting of Dr. K.
Subrahmanyan, Arundhati Ghose, Shyam Saran and others.

Ministry of External Affairs

7.

Financial assistance to the Centre for the Advanced Study
of India (CASI).

University of Pennsylvania (USA)

8.

7th India-Korea Dialogue in October 2007 at Seoul (Korea).

Indian Council for Research on
International Economic Relations
(ICRIER), New Delhi.

9.

3rd International Congress of the Asian Political and
International Studies Association (APISA) at New Delhi
from 23-25 November 2007.

Developing Countries Research
Centre(DCRC), University of Delhi.

10.

Seminar on “India and the Gulf”

Association of Indian Diplomats
(AID), New Delhi

11.

Publication of “Foreign Affairs Journal”

Association of Indian Diplomats
(AID), New Delhi

12.

Research Project on “Contemporary Myanmar: From Isolation
to Active Engagement - By Dr. K. Yhome

Observer Research Foundation (ORF),
New Delhi

13.

7th International Conference on Regional Economic
Cooperation - Bangladesh, China, India and Myanmar
(BCIM) at Dhaka

Institute of Chinese Studies (ICS),
New Delhi

14.

5th Conference on “International Dimension of Environmental
Law” on 8-9 December 2007

Indian Society of International Law
(ISIL)

202

Appendix XII

Sl. No.

Event

Institution / Beneficiary

15.

International Seminar on “Democracy, Nation Building and
Peace in South Asia: Challenges and Prospects” from
10-12 December 2007

Rajiv Gandhi Chair in Contemporary
Studies, Allahabad University
University of Allahabad.

16.

2nd Sustainability Summit: Asia 2007 held on
11-12 December 2007

Confederation of Indian Industry
(CII), New Delhi

17.

Research Study on “Foundational Crisis in South and South
East Asia - A study of Bangladesh, Indonesia & Malaysia” - By
Dr. Abu Nasar Saied Ahmed

Omeo Kumar Das Institute of Social
Change and Development
(OKDISCD), Guwahati

18.

Research Project on “Central Asia-China Relations, 1991-2006”
by Prof. K. Warikoo, JNU, New Delhi

The Centre for South, Central &
South East Asian Studies (CSCSEAS),
JNU, New Delhi

19.

International Seminar on “India and South-Asia : Strategic
Convergence in the 21st Century” from 3-5 January 2008

Centre for SAARC Studies (CSS)
Andhra University, Vishakapatnam
(AP)

20.

Conference on “The Landscape of Regional Integration”
on 11-12 January 2008

Association of Asia Scholars (AAS),
New Delhi.

21.

International Conference on “Afghanistan” February 2008.

Centre for South, Central Southeast
Asia and Southwest Pacific Studies,
School of International Studies, JNU,
New Delhi.

22.

Seminar on “State and Society in Pakistan” and “India-Pakistan
Relations”

23.

28th Round Talks of Track-II Dialogue with Pakistan at Islamabad. India-Pakistan Neemrana Initiative
(IPNI), New Delhi

24.

Seminar on “Cooperation Development and Peace in Central
Asia: An Indian Perspective”

The Centre for Research in Rural and
Industrial Development (CRRID),
Chandigarh

25.

Study Project on “Analysis of Alternative Course for India:
Post Kyoto Negotiations”

Integrated Research and Action for
Development (IRAD), New Delhi

203

India-Pakistan Friendship Society
(IPFS), New Delhi

Appendix XIII
List of ITEC/SCAAP partner countries
S. No

Countries

S. No

Countries

1

Afghanistan

41

Democratic Republic of Congo

2

Albania

42

Djibouti

3

Algeria

43

Dominican Republic

4

Angola

44

East Timor

5

Anguilla

45

Ecuador

6

Antigua and Barbuda

46

Egypt

7

Argentina

47

El-Salvador

8

Armenia

48

Equatorial Guinea

9

Azerbaijan

49

Eritrea

10

Bahamas

50

Estonia

11

Bahrain

51

Ethiopia

12

Bangladesh

52

Fiji

13

Barbados

53

Gabon

14

Belarus

54

Gambia

15

Belize

55

Georgia

16

Benin

56

Ghana

17

Bhutan

57

Grenada

18

Bolivia

58

Guatemala

19

Bosnia – Herzegovina

59

Guinea

20

Botswana

60

Guinea Bissau

21

Brazil

61

Guyana

22

Brunei Darussalam

62

Haiti

23

Bulgaria

63

Honduras

24

Burkina Faso

64

Hungary

25

Burundi

65

Indonesia

26

Cambodia

66

Iran

27

Cameroon

67

Iraq

28

Cape Verde Island

68

Ivory Coast

29

Cayman Island

69

Jamaica

30

Central African Republic

70

Jordan

31

Chad

71

Kazakhstan

32

Chile

72

Kenya

33

Colombia

73

Kiribati

34

Commonwealth of Dominica

74

Korea (DPRK)

35

Comoros

75

Kyrgyzstan

36

Congo

76

Laos

37

Costa Rica

77

Latvia

38

Croatia

78

Lebanon

39

Cuba

79

Lesotho

40

Czech Republic

80

Liberia

204

Appendix XIII

S. No

Countries

S. No

81

Libya

120

Samoa

82

Lithuania

121

Senegal

83

Macedonia

122

Seychelles

84

Madagascar

123

Singapore

85

Malaysia

124

Sierra Leone

86

Malawi

125

Slovak Republic

87

Maldives

126

Solomon Island

88

Mali

127

South Africa

89

Marshall Islands

128

Sri Lanka

90

Mauritius

129

St. Kitts & Nevis

91

Mauritania

130

St. Lucia

92

Mexico

131

St. Vincent & Grenadines

93

Micronesia

132

Sudan

94

Moldova

133

Suriname

95

Mongolia

134

Syria

96

Montserrat

135

Swaziland

97

Morocco

136

Tanzania

98

Mozambique

137

Tajikistan

99

Myanmar

138

Thailand

100

Namibia

139

Togo

101

Nauru

140

Tonga

102

Nepal

141

Trinidad & Tobago

103

Nicaragua

142

Tunisia

104

Niger

143

Turkey

105

Nigeria

144

Turkmenistan

106

Oman

145

Turks & Caicos Island

107

Palau

146

Tuvalu

108

Palestine

147

Uganda

109

Panama

148

Ukraine

110

Papua New Guinea

149

Uruguay

111

Paraguay

150

Uzbekistan

112

Peru

151

Vanuatu

113

Philippines

152

Venezuela

114

Poland

153

Vietnam

115

Qatar

154

Yemen

116

Republic of Sao Tome

155

Zambia

117

Romania

156

Zimbabwe

118

Russia

157

Serbia

119

Rwanda

158

Montenegro

205

Countries

Appendix XIV

List of ITEC Training Institutes in India (2008-09)
S.No.

Name of Institute

City

1

Administrative Staff College of India

Hyderabad

2

Aptech Limited

New Delhi

3

Bureau of Indian Standards

New Delhi

4

Bureau of Parliamentary Studies and Training

New Delhi

5

Central Fertilizer Quality Control & Training Institute

Faridabad, Haryana

6

English and Foreign Languages University

Hyderabad

7

Central Institute of Tool Design

Hyderabad

8

Central Institute for Rural Electrification

Hyderabad

9

Central Scientific Instruments Organisation

New Delhi

10

Centre For Development of Advanced Computing

Mohali(Chandigarh)

11

Centre For Development of Advanced Computing

Noida, UP

12

CMC Ltd.

New Delhi

13

Entrepreneurship Development Institute of India

Bhat, Gujarat

14

Fluid Control Research Institute

Kerala

15

Human Settlement Management Institute

New Delhi

16

Indian Institute of Mass Communication

New Delhi

17

International Centre for Information and System Audit (CAG)

Noida, UP

18

Indian Institute of Production Management

Orissa

19

Indian Institute of Remote Sensing

Dehradun

20

Indian Institute of Technology

Roorkee

21

Institute of Applied Manpower Research

New Delhi

22

Institute of Government Accounts Finance

New Delhi

23

International Management Institute

New Delhi

24

International Statistical Education Centre

Kolkata

25

National Crime Records Bureau

New Delhi

26

National Institute of Bank Management

Pune

27

National University of Educational Planning & Administration

New Delhi

28

National Institute of Entrepreneurship and Small Business Development

Noida, UP

29

National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education & Research

Punjab

30

National Institute of Rural Development

Hyderabad

31

National Institute of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (formerly NISIET)

Hyderabad

32

National Institute of Technical Teachers Training and Research

Chennai

33

NIIT Limited

New Delhi

34

Research & Information System for the Non-aligned and
Other Developing Countries

New Delhi

35

Shri Ram Institute of Business and Information Technology

New Delhi

36

South India Textile Research Association

Coimbatore

37

Centre for Excellence in Telecom Technology and Management

Mumbai

38

The Energy Research Institute (TERI)

New Delhi

39

V.V. Giri National Labour Institute

Noida, UP

40

UTL Technologies Ltd.

Bangalore

41

Indian Institute of Management

Ahmedabad

206

Appendix XV
Lectures/Seminars/Conferences/Bilateral Dialogues/Book Releases organised by ICWA
No.Date

Event

Lectures
1. 9.9.2008

2. 11.9.08
3. 17.11.08

4. 19.1.09
5. 5.2.09

6. 26.2.09
7. 27.3.09

Speech on “China-India Strategic Partnership” by H.E. Mr. Yang Jiechi, Minister of Foreign
Affairs, The People’s Republic of China (in collaboration with the Institute of Chinese
Studies and Embassy of the People’s Republic of China at Hyatt Hotel)
Lecture by Hon’ble Stephen Smith, Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs on ‘Australia and
India in the Asia Pacific Century’
Presentation on Cologne Region & India: New Partnership & Opportunities by Mr. Fritz
Schramma, Lord Mayor of CologneChief Guest: Shri M.M. Pallam Raju, Hon’ble Minister of
State for DefenceChair: Ambassador V. K. Grover, Former Secretary to the Government of India
Lecture on “Imperatives of Nation Building in Africa: Security, Peace & Reconciliation” by
H.E. Mr. Paul Kagame, President of the Republic of Rwanda
(ICWA Auditorium) ‘Annual Lecture 2009’ of the Association of Indian Diplomats by H.E. Mr.
Kamlesh Sharma, Secretary General of the Commonwealth on “Managing Change and Diversity in
a Compacting World” [in cooperation with the Association of Indian Diplomats]
Lecture by Mr. Bolat Nurgaliev, Secretary General of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (in
collaboration with the ICAF)
Lecture by H.E. Miguel Angel Ramirez Ramos, Ambassador of Cuba in India on “Caribbean
Region from the eyes of Havana”

Seminars
8. 2-3 April, 08

9. 9-10 June, 08
10.

11.27-28 Nov 08
12. 2-3 Dec 08

13. 12-14 Jan 09
14. 24-26 Mar 09
15. 30 Mar 09
16. 31 Mar 09

International Conference on “Africa-India Partnership in the 21st Century”[Seminar of
Intellectuals from Africa and India - in collaboration with the Research and Information System
for Developing Countries (RIS) & African Studies Association of India (ASA)]
International Conference on “Towards a World Free of Nuclear Weapons”[in collaboration
with the Centre for Strategic & International Studies (CSIS), Gurgaon] (The ITC Maurya)
13 Aug 08 Seminar on ‘Indo-Swiss Relations: Blossoming Cooperation’ on the occasion of 60th
Anniversary of the Indo-Swiss Treaty of Friendship, 1948And Release of the book: “Friendship in
Diversity” Sixty Years of Indo-Swiss Relations Edited by Bernard Imhasly, in cooperation with
the Embassy of Switzerland
Seminar on “India-Russia Strategic Partnership: Challenges and Prospects” in collaboration
with the Moscow Institute for International Cooperation, MOSCOW
Roundtable on India-Arab Historical Linkages and Civilizational Dialogue Inaugural Address:
Shri E. Ahamed, Hon’ble MOS for External AffairsKeynote Address: Dr. Amre Moussa, Secretary
General of the League of Arab States in cooperation with the Federation of Indian Chambers of
Commerce and Industry (FICCI) – on the occasion of the India-Arab Forum: Partnership
Through Culture – jointly organized by FICCI, MEA, ICWA and League of Arab States on 2-7
December 2008.
International Seminar in association with Cross Cultural Conversation on Human Solidarity:
Visions and Projects
Seminar on Gulf and Emerging Asia: Defining Regional Architecturein collaboration with Gulf
Studies Programme, JNU
Seminar on India-Kazakhstan Relations : New Horizons
Seminar on India-Kazakhstan Strategic Partnership

Bilateral Dialogues
17. 8-11 Aug 08 Visit of Indian delegation to Kabul, Afghanistan for signing of MoU between ICWA and
Centre for Strategic Studies (CSS) of Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan
18. 18 Aug 2008 India-Nigeria Track II Dialogue on ‘International Affairs’ and Lecture on‘Dynamics of IndoNigerian Relations in the Age of Globalization’ by Prof. Osita C. Eze, Director General,

207

Appendix XV

No. Date

Event

Nigerian Institute of International Affairs (NIIA) on the occasion of the visit of a 5 member
delegation from the Nigerian Institute of International Affairs
19. 16-17 Oct 08 Fourth India-Spain Dialogue Forum
20. 6-8 Nov 08 Visit of ICWA delegation to New Zealand Institute of International Affairs(NIIA), Wellington
(to sign a MoU also)
21. 9-11 Nov 08 Visit of ICWA delegation to Australian Institute of International Affairs (AIIA) Melbourne
(to sign a MoU also)
22. 12-13 Nov 08 Visit of ICWA delegation to Lowy Institute, Sydney. First Australia-India Roundtable

Panel Discussions/Background Briefings
23. 5 Jun 08

24.6 Jun 08

25. 29 Aug 08
26. 12 Sep 08
27. 15 Sep 08
28. 18 Sep 08

29. 26 Sep 08
30. 25 Nov 08
31. 23 Feb 09

Press Conference on the occasion of the International Conference on Towards a World Free of
Nuclear Weapons on 9-10 June, 2008 in collaboration with the Centre for Strategic & I
International Studies (CSIS)Briefing by Ambassador Lalit Mansingh, Air Cmde. Jasjit Singh,
AVSM, Vrc, VM (Retd.), Director, Centre for Strategic and International Studies and Shri
Ashok Kumar, Acting Director General, ICWA
Background briefing by Shri Shyam Saran, Special Envoy of the Prime Minister, Air Cmde. Jasjit
Singh, AVSM, Vrc, VM (Retd.), Director, Centre for Strategic and International Studies and Shri
Ashok Kumar, Acting Director General, ICWA on the occasion of the International Conference
on Towards a World Free of Nuclear Weapons on 9-10 June, 2008 in collaboration with the
Centre for Strategic & International Studies (CSIS)
First Meeting regarding project on Towards a New Asian Security Architecture – An Indian
View in collaboration with the Institute of Peace and Conflict Studies
Second Meeting regarding project on Towards a New Asian Security Architecture – An Indian
View in collaboration with the Institute of Peace and Conflict Studies
Roundtable Discussion on Recent Developments in the Caucasus
Discussion on ‘New Nepal - Its Aspirations and Dreams ’Participants from Nepal:
1.)Dr. Devendra Raj Panday, Civil Society activist and Member, International Board of Directors,
Transparency International;2.) Shri Vijay Kumar Panday, TV Journalist, Nepal3.) Shri Suresh Ale
Magar, Advisor to the Central Committee, CPN(Maoist)4.) Shri Bimlendra Nidhi, General
Secretary, Nepali Congress5.) Shri Pradeep Kumar Gyawali, Member of Central Committee, CPN
(UML)6.) Shri Shyamananda Suman, Head of International Department, Madhesi Janadhikar
Forum and Advisor to the Foreign Minister of Nepal
Third Meeting regarding project on Towards a New Asian Security Architecture – An Indian
View in collaboration with the Institute of Peace and Conflict Studies
Function to commemorate the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian PeopleChief
Guest: Shri E. Ahamed, Hon’ble Minister of State for External Affairs
Panel Discussion on Indian and EU Approaches to Security in collaboration with the European
Union Institute for Security Studies (EUISS)

Book Publicity
32. 1 May 08
33. 16 Jun 08

34. 26 Nov 08

35. 13 Jan 09
36. 29 Jan 09

On the occasion of the 53rd Anniversary of inauguration of Sapru House Launch of the book:
India-Kyrgyz Relations: Perspectives & Prospects a joint project of the ICWA and ICAF
Release of the book: Ta Prohm: A Glorious Era in Angkor Civilisation written by Shri Pradeep
K. Kapur, OSD & Joint Secretary(FSI), MEA and Prof. Sachchidananad Sahai by Shri Pranab
Mukherjee, Hon’ble Minister of External Affairs
Panel Discussion on and Release of the book: Nuclear Synergy: India-US Strategic
Cooperation and Beyond Edited by Prof. N.K. Jha, Rajiv Gandhi Chair in Contemporary Studies,
University of Allahabad, by Ambassador Lalit Mansingh, Former Foreign Secretary of India
Panel discussion on the book: Bahudha and the Post 9/11 WorldAuthored by Shri B.P. Singh,
Governor of SikkimChief Guest: Dr. Karan Singh, M.P.
Panel Discussion on and Release of the Book: Post 9/11 Indian Foreign Policy: Challenges
and Opportunities Edited by Dr. Sudhir Kumar SinghChief Guest: Ambassador A.N. Ram

208

Appendix XVI
Seminars Organized by RIS
Seminar on Development Cooperation: Emerging
Trends, Patterns and Policies, New Delhi on 20
November 2008.

Policy Briefs

Seminar on the Global Financial Crisis and India,
New Delhi on 24 December 2008.

#34 Towards a Global Compact for Managing Climate
Change, November 2007

A Seminar on Regional Infrastructure for Asia’s
Economic Integration, New Delhi on 22 December
2008.

#35 Building a Development- Friendly World Trading
System, March 2008

Seminar on Globalization, Productivity and
Employment, New Delhi, on 16 December 2008.
Seminar on India-East Asia Economic
Cooperation: The Case of Logistics Network, New
Delhi, jointly with the Institute of Chinese Studies
(ICS).
Seminar on Pricing to Market in Indian Exports:
The Role of Market Heterogeneity and Product
Differentiation, New Delhi on 17 July 2008.
Launch of the Special Issue of Asian Biotechnology
and Development Review (ABDR), Bonn on 20 May
2008
Seminar on Sovereign Wealth Funds: Issues and
Challenges for India, New Delhi on 5 May 2008.
Seminar on Global Economic Crisis: Responses
from the South, New Delhi, 12 November 2008
(jointly with Institute of Chinese Studies and
Council for Social Development).

RIS Publications
Books and Reports
South Asia Development and Cooperation Report
2008 Published by Oxford University Press, 2008.
Industrial Agglomeration, Production Networks
and FDI Promotion-the Experience of Auto
Component Industry in Two Clusters in India. RIS,
2008. Economic Research Institute for ASEAN
and East Asia (ERIA), Tokyo: IDE-JETRO.
The Study on Infrastructure Development in India
and RIS Infrastructure Index. 2008. Economic
Research Institute for ASEAN and East Asia
(ERIA), Tokyo: IDE-JETRO
Asian Biotechnology, Innovation and
Development: Issues in Measurement and
Collection of Statistics
Regional Study on SAARC Trade in Services, RIS
and the SAARC Secretariat, 2008

209

Resurgent China: Implications for India, RIS,
2009.

#36 Back to the Drawing Board: No Basis for
Concluding the Doha Round of Negotiations,
April 2008
#37 Emerging Aid Architecture: Tightening the
Conditionalities? July 2008
#38 Deepening Regional Cooperation in the Bay of
Bengal: Agenda of the BIMSTEC Summit,
November 2008
#39 IBSA Partnership for Shared Prosperity and
Inclusive Globalization- Report of Third IBSA
Summit Academic Forum, December 2008
# 40 Reforming the Bretton-woods System for
Development and Democratic Global
Governance
Discussion Papers
#132 The WTO’s Doha Negotiations: An
Assessment by Bhagirath Lal Das
#133 Towards An Asian “Bretton Woods” for
Restructuring of the Regional Financial
Architecture by Ramgopal Agarwala
#134 India-Africa Economic Partnership: Trends
and Prospects by S. K. Mohanty & Sachin
Chaturvedi
#135 East Asian Infrastructure Development in a
Comparative Global Perspective: An Analysis
of RIS Infrastructure Index by Nagesh Kumar
& Prabir De
#136 Potential of Asian Economic Integration: A
Perspective from the Strategy of Japanese
Enterprises by Tetsuji Kawamura
#137 Emerging Countries as Sources of Investment
and Appropriate Technology: Case Study of
India by Sachin Chaturvedi
#138 Emerging Countries and the World Economy:
Implications of India’s Recent Expansion on
Developing Countries by S.K. Mohanty
#139 Emerging Patterns in Architecture for

Appendix XVI

Management of Economic Assistance and
Development Cooperation: Implications and
Challenges for India by Sachin Chaturvedi

2.

#140 Internationalization of Indian Enterprises:
Patterns, Strategies, Ownership Advantages and
Implications by Nagesh Kumar
#141 Rediscovering the Role of Developing Countries
in GATT before the Doha Round by Faizel
Ismail
#142 Transportation
Cost
and
Trade
Competitiveness: Empirical Evidence from India
by Prabir De and Bhisma Rout
#143 Changing Economic Power by Manmohan
Agarwal
#144 Exchange Rate Pass-through in India’s Exports
to Developed and Emerging Markets by
Sushanta Mallick and Helena Marques
#145 South-South and Triangular Cooperation in
Asia-Pacific: Towards a New Paradigm in
Development Cooperation by Nagesh Kumar
Periodicals
1.

South Asia Economic Journal (Vol. 9 No. 1)
January-June 2008.
South Asia Economic Journal (Vol. 9 No. 2) JulyDecember 2008.

210

Asian Biotechnology and Development Review,
Vol. 10 (1&2), November 2007 to February
2008.
Asian Biotechnology and Development Review,
Vol. 10(3), July 2008.
Asian Biotechnology and Development Review,
Vol. 11(1), November 2008.

3.

New Asia Monitor, Vol. 5 No. 1, January 2008.
New Asia Monitor, Vol. 5 No. 2 &3, April &
July 2008.
New Asia Monitor, Vol. 5 No. 4, October 2008.
Mekong-Ganga Policy Brief, No.3, May 2008.

Newsletter
RIS Diary,Vol. 6 No. 1, January 2008.
RIS Diary,Vol. 6 No. 2, April 2008.
RIS Diary,Vol. 6 No. 3, July 2008.
RIS Diary,Vol. 6 No. 4,October 2008.

Abbreviations

AALCO

Asian African Legal Consultative
Organisation

AMM

ASEAN Ministerial Meeting

ARF

EAS

East Asia Summit

ECOWAS

Economic Community Of West African
States

ASEAN Regional Forum

EIL

Engineers India Limited

ASEAN

Association of South East Asian Nations

EMM

East Asia Energy Ministers Meeting

ASEM

Asia Europe Meeting

EU

European Union

ASSOCHAM

Associated Chambers of Commerce
and Industry

EXIM

Export Import Bank of India

FICCI

AU

African Union

Federation of Indian Chambers of
Commerce and Industry

AYUSH

Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani,
Siddha and Homeopathy

FIPB

Foreign Investment Promotion Board

FOC

Foreign Office Consultations

BIMSTEC

Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral
Technical and Economic Cooperation

FTA

Free Trade Agreement

CCIT

Comprehensive Convention on
International Terrorism

GAIL

Gas Authority of India Limited

GCC

Gulf Cooperation Council

CECA

Comprehensive Economic Cooperation
Agreement

GST

Goods and Service Tax

CEP

Cultural Exchange Programme

HAL

Hindustan Aeronautics Limited

CHOGM

Commonwealth Heads of Government
Meet

HIV/AIDS

Human Immuno Virus / Acquired
Immuno Deficiency Syndrome

CIC

Central Information Commission

IAEA

International Atomic Energy Agency

CII

Confederation of Indian Industry

IBF

India Business Forum

CIS

Commonwealth of Independent States

ICCR

Indian Council for Cultural Relations

COMESA

Common Market for Eastern and
Southern Africa

ICRIER

Indian Council for Research on
International Economic Relations

CORPAT

Coordinated Patrol

ICT

Information and Communication
Technology

COSC

Chiefs of Staff Committee

ICWA

Indian Council of World Affairs

CPIO

Central Public Information Officer

IDSA

Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses

CPV

Consular Passport and Visa

IFS

Indian Foreign Service

CSCAP

Council for Security Cooperation in Asia
Pacific

IIBF

Indian Institute of Banking and Finance

CSD

Comprehensive Security Dialogue

IIT

Indian Institute of Technology

DIPP

Department of Industrial Policy and
Promotion

ILO

International Labour Organisation

INS

Indian Navy Ship

INSTC

International North-South Transport
Corridor

IOR-ARC

Indian Ocean Rim Association for
Regional Cooperation

DSSC

Defence Services Staff College

DTAC

Double Taxation Avoidance Convention

EAC

East African Community

211

Abbreviations

ISCS

Inter-State Council Secretariat

RBI

Reserve of Bank of India

ITEC

Indian Technical and Economic
Cooperation

RITES

Rail India Technical Economic Service

RTI

Right to Information

JWG

Joint Working Group

SAARC

LNG

Liquified Natural Gas

South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation

MERCOSUR

Market of Southern Cone Countries

SADC

Southern African Development
Community

MFN

Most Favoured Nation

SAFTA

South Asia Free Trade Agreement

MoU

Memorandum of Understanding

SBI

State Bank of India

NABARD

National Bank for Agriculture and
Rural Development

SCAAP

Special Commonwealth Assistance for
Africa Programme

NAFED

National Agricultural Cooperative
Marketing Federation of India Limited

SCO

Shanghai Cooperation Organisation

NAM

Non-Aligned Movement

SEBI

Securities and Exchange Board of India

SEWA

Self Employed Women’s Association

SEZ

Special Economic Zone

NASSCOM National Association of Software and
Service Companies
NATO

North Atlantic Treaty Organisation

SME

Small and Medium Enterprises

NELP

New Exploration Licensing Policy

STPI

Software Technology Parks of India

NEPAD

New Partnership for Africa’s
Development

TEAM-9

Techno-Economic Approach for Africa
India Movement

NIC

National Information Centre

UNCTAD

NPT

Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty

United Nations Conferences on Trade
and Development

NSC

National Security Council

UNESCO

NSG

Nuclear Suppliers Group

United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization

OCI

Overseas Citizenship of India

UNGA

United Nations General Assembly

OECD

Organisation for Economic Cooperation
and Development

UNSC

United Nations Security Council

UPA

United Progressive Alliance

ONGC

Oil and Natural Gas Corporation

VSNL

Videsh Sanchar Nigam Limited

PIO

Persons of Indian Origin

WTO

World Trade Organisation

212


