Ministry of External Affairs

This Annual Report can also be accessed at
MEA website www.meaindia.nic.in

Annual Report 2006-2007

Ministry of External Affairs
Government of India

Annual Report
2006-2007
Ministry of External Affairs
Government of India

Annual Report
2006 – 2007
ENTER

Ministry of External Affairs
Government of India

Published by:
Policy Planning and Research Division, Ministry of External Affairs, New Delhi
This Annual Report can also be accessed at website:
www.meaindia.nic.in
Front Cover:
Illustration of Central Secretariat buildings taken from original water colour painting
by Shri Kashi Nath Das
Designed and printed by:
Cyberart Informations Pvt. Ltd.
Kanu Chambers, 3rd Floor, C-2, Sanwal Nagar, New Delhi 110 049, INDIA
Telefax: 26256148/26250700
E mail: cyberart@vsnl.com; cyberart_infos@yahoo.com
Website: www.cyberart.co.in

HOME

Contents
Introduction and Synopsis
1

India’s Neighbours

2

South East Asia and the Pacific

3.

East Asia

4.

Eurasia

5.

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

6.

Africa (South of Sahara)

7.

Europe

8.

The Americas

9.

United Nations and International Organizations

10.

Multilateral Economic Relations

11.

Technical & Economic Cooperation and
Development Partnership

12.

Investment and Technology Promotion

13.

Policy Planning and Research

14.

Protocol

15.

Consular, Passport and Visa Services

16.

Administration and Establishment

17.

Coordination

18.

Right to Information

19.

External Publicity

20.

Foreign Service Institute

21.

Implementation of Official Language Policy and
Propagation of Hindi Abroad

22.

Cultural Relations

23.

Indian Council of World Affairs

24.

Research and Information System for Developing Countries

25.

Library

Annexures

Introduction and Synopsis

The foreign policy of India has been shaped by the desire

strengthened SAARC process, we hope to usher in a new
phase of effective regional cooperation, reconnecting the
subcontinent to itself and the world. It is our hope that
one of the key steps in this process, namely, the full
implementation of SAFTA, will be realized soon.

to create an external environment conducive to peace
and stability in the region, ensuring our accelerated
economic development and the safeguarding of our
national security. In pursuit of this enlightened national
interest, India has undertaken a comprehensive
engagement with the world – with all major powers, with
our extended neighbourhood and with our partners in
the developing world and the Non-aligned Movement.

India perceives the world today as increasingly
multivalent, marked by considerable political cooperation
among the major powers with ever more inter-twined
economies. The current global economy is increasingly
defined by freer and substantive movement of capital and
by the technology revolution, in particular information
technology. The freedom of movement of capital is yet to
be matched by the other factors of production or by ideas.
In this age of globalisation, the most pressing problems of
the day require global responses, such as the scourge of
international terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and related technologies, trafficking of
arms and drugs, the increasing levels of violence and
destruction perpetrated by non-state actors, pandemics
and natural disasters, climate change and environmental
degradation which require coordinated transnational
action.

In consonance with our desire to live in a neighbourhood
of peace and prosperity, India continues to accord the
highest priority to closer political, economic and cultural
ties with its neighbours. India is committed to developing
political relations with its South Asian neighbours on the
basis of sovereign equality and mutual respect. This is
exemplified most recently by the upgrading of the 1949
friendship treaty with Bhutan.
The countries of the subcontinent are bound together by
history, culture and ethnic ties, and share a common
destiny. India has a vision of South Asia as an integrated
entity in which there is free flow of goods, peoples and
ideas, unfettered by boundaries. There is a real opportunity
today for shared prosperity between India and her
neighbours. Amidst high growth rates in the region, we
are in a position to advance together through trade, open
borders, and regional economic integration. We strive to
build strong and enduring partnerships with all our
neighbours. Politically, this requires an enabling
environment of peace and security, containing threats
from extremism, terrorism and removing the sources of
political discord. Our endeavour is also to work together
with India’s neighbours to create a common space of
prosperity based on enhanced economic, trade and
investment linkages and sustainable social and economic
development. As host of the next SAARC summit in New
Delhi, India will take the initiative to accelerate regional
economic and political development. Through a

To meet the challenges posed by the emerging
international scenario, India has worked towards
strengthening relations with all the countries, particularly
the major powers of the world. India’s relations with USA
have been substantially transformed in the last couple of
years. The visit of President Bush to India in March 2006
following Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh’s landmark
visit in July 2005 further underscored our common
commitment to carry this partnership forward. The
understanding between India and USA on civilian nuclear
energy cooperation is significant from the larger
perspective of our energy security. India and Russia remain
committed to their multi-faceted bilateral relationship
founded on traditional strategic ties. This was reaffirmed
during the visit of President Putin to India in January 2007.
i

Back to Contents

Cooperation, IBSA, G-15, G-8, Indian Ocean Rim, and
the East Asia Summit. India has also played a significant
role in the WTO and other international economic
institutions so that the evolving multilateral framework
of economic cooperation can benefit India.

India has also entered into strategic partnerships with the
European Union, UK, France and Germany. PM’s visit to
Japan in December 2006 reflects our growing ties with
Japan, both in substance and strategic significance.
India has significantly expanded its network of
international relationships and the country’s political
engagement and economic and technical cooperation with
the world is greater today than ever before. Trilateral
meetings between India, Russia and China were held at
Summit level in July 2006 at St. Petersburg and at Foreign
Minister level in February 2007 at New Delhi to discuss
international issues and trilateral cooperation among the
three countries. Through the IBSA forum, India is
engaged with two leading emerging economies, Brazil and
South Africa. India has devoted considerable attention
to ASEAN and its “Look East” policy has been further
strengthened by regular participation in the East Asia
Summit. India has also developed closer relations with
countries in the Gulf region. India continues to intensify
its engagement with countries in West Asia, Africa and
Latin America. India’s participation in the NAM Summit
at Cuba reflects its commitment to promote South-South
cooperation.

Neighbours
Afghanistan: India continued its policy of building
bilateral relations with Afghanistan and assisting it in its
reconstruction. India reaffirmed its commitment to the
development of a sovereign, stable, democratic and
prosperous Afghanistan by increasing its cumulative
pledge of assistance by US$ 150 million during the year,
raising it to US$ 750 million. Of this, the expenditure
this year was about US$ 90 million. India’s assistance
projects are in a wide range of sectors, including hydro
electricity, road construction, agriculture, industry,
telecommunications, information and broadcasting,
education and health. India also supported Afghanistan’s
entry into SAARC and External Affairs Minister, Pranab
Mukherjee, visited Kabul in January 2007 to invite
President Karzai to the 14th SAARC Summit to be held
in New Delhi. President Karzai visited India in April and
in November 2006. India co-hosted with Afghanistan,
the 2nd Regional Economic Cooperation Conference
(RECC) on Afghanistan in New Delhi on 18-19
November 2006. The security situation in Afghanistan,
however, continued to remain a matter of concern. There
was a sharp escalation in violence, particularly in the east
and south of the country where insurgents, mainly the
Taliban, were able to get support and shelter from across
the border.

In the current debate on reforming the United Nations,
India has repeatedly underlined the urgency of
restructuring global institutions — both political and
economic — to reflect the new realities on the ground.
In particular, the developing world must find its due
representation among the permanent members of the UN
Security Council. India continues to work with likeminded nations for an equitable, multi-polar world order,
which takes into account the legitimate aspirations of
developing countries.

Bangladesh: Relations with Bangladesh were guided by
India’s commitment to engage the Government of
Bangladesh on the entire gamut of relations between our
two countries. Prime Minister Khaleda Zia visited India
in March 2006 during which a revised bilateral trade
agreement and an agreement on mutual cooperation for
preventing illicit trafficking in narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances were signed. The Ministers of
Water Resources of India and Bangladesh met in
September 2006. Official level meetings included Home
Secretary level talks in August 2006 and meetings of the
Joint Boundary Working Group in July 2006, the Joint
Group of Customs in May 2006, the Joint Working Group

India’s foreign policy gives considerable stress on economic
diplomacy so as to promote the country’s social and
economic development goals by providing increased
access to international markets, sources of energy and
advanced technologies as well as by harnessing higher
levels of foreign direct investment especially in critical
areas such as infrastructure. Recognizing that its own
economic growth is closely linked to the economic
progress of other countries, India has strengthened
institutional inter-linkages with economic groupings such
as SAARC, ASEAN, BIMSTEC, Mekong-Ganga
ii

Back to Contents

Introduction and Synopsis

continued their efforts to seek a peaceful resolution of
outstanding differences, including the boundary question.
Discussions between the Special Representatives on a
mutually-agreed framework for the settlement of the
boundary question continued. Bilateral trade crossed the
US$ 25 billion mark (according to Chinese statistics) and
the signing of the Agreement on Investment Protection
and Promotion during the year will facilitate two-way
investment flows. Border trade through Nathula was
resumed during the year. Defence exchanges and
functional cooperation in various areas continued to
expand. It was also decided to open new Consulates in
Kolkata and Guangzhou and establish a hotline between
the Foreign Ministers. The process of confidence building
measures in the border areas was strengthened with the
operationalisation of border personnel meetings at
Kibithu-Damai in the Eastern Sector.

on Trade in July 2006 and the Standing Committee on
Inland Water Transit and Trade in September 2006.
Presently, a caretaker government is in place in Dhaka
and general elections, originally scheduled to be held in
January 2007, have been postponed. As a friendly
neighbour, India is interested in Bangladesh remaining
stable, peaceful and democratic.
Bhutan: India-Bhutan relations, which are based on
shared historical and cultural linkages, were further
consolidated in all areas. India conveyed its full support
to Bhutan during its transition to a democratic
constitutional monarchy.
King Jigme Singye Wangchuck of Bhutan accompanied
by the Trongsa Penlop Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck,
the Crown Prince of Bhutan, visited India from 26-31
July 2006.

Maldives: Our bilateral relations with the Maldives
continued to be close and friendly. Both India and the
Maldives were engaged in developing mutual
understanding and closer cooperation through exchange
of high level visits and organizing training programmes.
President Gayoom visited India in January-February 2007
to attend the international conference held by the Indian
National Congress to commemorate the centenary of the
Satyagraha movement. External Affairs Minister Pranab
Mukherjee visited Maldives in January 2007. Ismail
Shafeen, the Defence Minister of Maldives visited India
in January 2007.

In a momentous development, Jigme Singye Wangchuck
announced the transfer of responsibilities of the Monarch
and Head of State to the Crown Prince Trongsa Penlop
Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck on 9 December 2006
who became the Fifth Druk Gyalpo of Bhutan.
Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck, the Fifth Druk
Gyalpo, paid his first visit abroad to India from 7-12
February 2007, during which India and Bhutan signed
the India-Bhutan Friendship Treaty, which updates the
Treaty of 1949. The signing of the Treaty marked a historic
moment in our relations with Bhutan, and reflects our
mutual desire to enhance our relationship with Bhutan
to an even higher level of cooperation and goodwill to
meet the aspirations of our two peoples for a better life.
The Treaty reinforces the close, warm and exemplary
relations of complete trust, respect and confidence that
have existed between the two countries for decades.

Myanmar: Further substance was added to India’s
relations with Myanmar which are cordial and trouble
free. There was a regular exchange of high level visits
during the period. President’s visit to Myanmar in March
2006 was the first-ever visit by an Indian President to
Myanmar and the first Head of State/Head of Government
visit from India in nearly a decade. During the visit an
MoU on Cooperation in the energy sector was signed.
General Thura Shwe Mann, Chief of Joint Staff and Major
General Maung Oo, Home Minister of Union of Myanmar
visited India in December 2006 for talks with their Indian
counterparts. External Affairs Minister Pranab Mukherjee
visited Myanmar in January 2007. Several official level
meetings took place through the period. Work continued
on cross border infrastructure projects, including the
resurfacing of the Tamu-Kalewa-Kalemyo Road and the

China: India-China relations continued to develop
steadily. The year 2006 was celebrated as the India-China
Friendship Year with a number of commemorative
activities. The process of high-level interactions, which
has contributed to mutual understanding and cooperation,
was sustained. The visit of President Hu Jintao of China
to India was a milestone in bilateral relations and resulted
in a number of significant understandings, which have
further substantiated the strategic and cooperative
partnership between the two countries. The two sides also
iii

Back to Contents

interaction has further been facilitated by the PoonchRawalakot bus service introduced across the LoC. India
extended tariff concessions under SAFTA to Pakistan,
but Pakistan has not done so to India.

Kaladan Multi-Modal Transit Transport Project, which
would benefit Myanmar and the North East region of
India, as well as improving bilateral trade.
Nepal: The year 2006 witnessed momentous changes in
Nepal and was a turning point in the nation’s history. After
the restoration of multi-party democracy in April 2006,
the people of Nepal made significant progress in finding a
peaceful political solution to the challenges facing the
country. A Comprehensive Peace Agreement was signed
by the Government of Nepal and CPN (Maoist) which
formally brought to an end the armed insurgency. The
Agreement laid down the road-map for further steps, as
per which the process of arms management was initiated,
the interim Constitution promulgated, and an interim
Legislature, with the inclusion of CPN (Maoist),
constituted in January 2007. These developments were
significant steps in Nepal’s journey towards a settled
constitutional order to enable the people of Nepal to
realize their aspirations for peace and prosperity. India
will extend its full support to the Government and people
of Nepal in their task of nation building at this juncture
of their history.

Cross-border terrorism continued to affect bilateral
relations. The Mumbai blasts of July 2006, which had
cross-border linkages, led to the postponement of Foreign
Secretary talks. When Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan
Singh met President Musharraf in Havana in September
2006, it was decided to institute a Joint anti-terror
mechanism and resume the Composite Dialogue. The
Joint anti-terror mechanism was set up during Foreign
Secretary talks in November 2006, and will test Pakistan’s
resolve and commitment to combat cross-border
terrorism. External Affairs Minister Pranab Mukherjee
visited Pakistan in January 2007 to convey invitation for
the SAARC Summit in New Delhi. The fourth round of
the Composite Dialogue will commence in March 2007.
Sri Lanka: India-Sri Lanka relations continued to develop
in 2006. India is concerned at the ongoing hostilities in
Sri Lanka which has taken its toll on civilian casualties
and resulted in an exodus of refugees. India is of the view
that the only way out is a negotiated, political settlement
which meets the legitimate aspirations of all communities
while respecting the unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Sri Lanka.

The Prime Minister of Nepal, G.P. Koirala, paid his first
visit abroad to India from 6-9 June 2006 during which
the close ties of friendship between our two countries were
reinforced. An economic assistance package of Rs. 1000
crore was offered to Nepal. The External Affairs Minister
Pranab Mukherjee visited Nepal in December 2006.

Sri Lankan President Mahinda Rajapakse visited India in
November 2006. Prime Minister Ratnasiri
Wickramanayake visited India in January 2007 to attend
the Satyagraha conference. Sri Lankan Foreign Minister
Rohitha Bogollagama visited India in end January 2007.
From India several ministerial and official level visits took
place. External Affairs Minister Pranab Mukherjee visited
Colombo in January 2007 to handover the SAARC
Summit invitation to the Sri Lankan President.

Pakistan: India-Pakistan relations remained well short of
their potential and are yet to be fully normalised. India
seeks a cooperative and constructive relationship with
Pakistan based on trust and confidence in an atmosphere
free of violence. India believes in settling all issues,
including Jammu and Kashmir through bilateral talks.
Towards this goal India has pursued a policy of
constructive engagement with Pakistan to establish
peaceful, friendly and cooperative relations. The dialogue
process hinges on the 6 January 2004 commitment of the
President of Pakistan not to permit any territory under
Pakistan’s control to be used to support terrorism. The
Composite Dialogue made some progress during the year.
An agreement on ‘Reducing the Risk from Accidents
relating to Nuclear Weapons’ was initialled and a Revised
Shipping Protocol was signed. People-to -people

Bilateral trade for the period April to October 2006
amounted to US$ 1 billion and annualized figures are
expected to touch US$ 2 billion. India became the second
largest investor in Sri Lanka. Bilateral tourism received a
boost as the weekly frequency of flights between the two
countries increased and Indians formed the largest group
of tourist arrivals in Sri Lanka. There was progress in the
negotiations between India and Sri Lanka on a
Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement
iv

Back to Contents

Introduction and Synopsis

(CEPA) which would build on the success of the Free
Trade Agreement (FTA).

Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement
marking the beginning of a new phase in economic
engagement with Japan.

South-East Asia and The Pacific
Republic of Korea (ROK): India-ROK relations have
developed and diversified in recent times, particularly
since the visit of President Roh Moo-hyun to India in
October 2004 and that of our President to ROK in
February 2006. During the year, the two sides continued
to work together to substantiate the “Long-Term
Cooperative Partnership for Peace and Prosperity”,
including diversification of trade and investment linkages,
enhanced momentum in defence relations and increased
people-to-people contacts. ROK continued to be an
important economic partner, with the trade volume
increasing by 35% to touch US$ 6,162 million in 200506. ROK companies expanded and consolidated their
business presence in India through increased investments.
Principal among these was the decision of POSCO to
invest $ 12 billion for an integrated steel plant in Orissa.
Regular meetings of India-ROK Joint Task Force were held
to develop a Comprehensive Economic Partnership
Agreement between the two countries.

India’s relations with countries in the South East Asia
and South Pacific, including Australia and New Zealand,
continued to improve. As a principal objective of our
“Look East” policy, actively pursued over the last decade
and a half, India has developed multi-faceted relationship
with the countries in the region. Prime Minister
participated in the India-ASEAN and East Asia Summits
held in Cebu, Philippines in January 2007. The External
Affairs Minister participated in the Ministerial meetings
preceding the Summits as well as in the MGC Foreign
Ministers’ meeting. It was agreed at the India-ASEAN
Summit that efforts would be made to finalise IndiaASEAN FTA by July 2007. India’s trade with most of the
countries in the region showed significant improvement
during the year. India continued to help Cambodia, Laos,
Vietnam and Pacific Island countries in their development
efforts. India extended humanitarian assistance to
Indonesia and the Philippines in the aftermath of natural
disasters in these two countries. Defence cooperation and
cultural exchanges between India and the countries in
the region also continued to show enhanced coverage.

Mongolia: India continued to enjoy excellent relations
with Mongolia during the year 2006. High level visits,
cooperation in education, human resource development
and cultural exchanges strengthened bilateral cooperation
and partnership.

East Asia
Japan: India continued to attach high priority to
strengthening relations with Japan. The dynamic growth
in bilateral relations was reflected in several high-level
visits, positive momentum in bilateral trade, increase in
Japanese investments into India and enhancement of
defence and security cooperation, including the visit of
Defence Minister to Japan. There has been a qualitative
shift in India-Japan relations following Prime Minister’s
visit to Japan in December 2006. During the visit, the
two sides agreed to establish a Strategic and Global
Partnership, which would involve closer political and
diplomatic coordination on bilateral, regional, multilateral
and global issues, comprehensive economic engagement,
stronger defence exchanges, enhanced technological
cooperation as well as working towards a quantum
increase in cultural ties, educational linkages and peopleto -people contacts. Discussions have begun on a

Eurasia
India continued its close, extensive and cooperative
interaction with all Eurasian countries. Intensified
interactions with Russia that have characterized our
bilateral relations, found reflection in the landmark visit
of President Vladimir Putin of the Russian Federation on
25-26 January 2007, when he participated as the Chief
Guest at the Republic Day celebrations. A series of
important agreements were signed/ adopted by the two
sides, including a Joint Statement signed by the two
leaders, a Joint Statement on nuclear energy cooperation,
a Cultural Exchange Programme and agreements on space
cooperation, constructing additional nuclear power plants
and custom exchanges. Trade and investment, energy,
defence, space, science and technology, political dialogue

v

Back to Contents

The External Affairs Minister Pranab Mukherjee visited
Iran on 6-7 February 2007. Views were exchanged on
bilateral and regional issues. The impetus provided by high
level discussions has contributed to cooperation in
multifarious areas including strategic and security spheres.
The burgeoning trade relations that have witnessed over
43% increase over the previous year have placed bilateral
relations on a new trajectory. India’s commitment to
strengthening its bonds of friendship with Iran for mutual
prosperity and peace and stability in the region has been
reiterated at the highest level. The desire and endeavour
to developing relations have been operationalised through
instituionalised linkages.

and culture are important focus areas for cooperation
between the two countries.
India exchanged high level official, parliamentary and
commercial delegations and cultural troupes with all its
other Eurasian partners to pursue its bilateral objectives
with respective countries. In this context, the President
of Tajikistan visited India in August, 2006 and the Prime
Minister visited Uzbekistan in April, 2006. Cultural
festivals, seminars, conferences and trade exhibitions were
organized regularly; bilateral agreements in various fields
were signed, training courses were offered and assistance
provided within the parameters of the ITEC Programme
as well as through other channels.

West Asia and North Africa (WANA): The crisis in
West Asia continued to engage our attention. India
condemned the use of force and expressed deep concern
at the developments in Lebanon clarifying that this could
have negative implications for the entire region. India
reiterated its call for all parties to renounce violence and
resolve their differences through peaceful means. India’s
view that lasting peace and security in the region can be
achieved only through a negotiated and comprehensive
solution that takes into account the legitimate interests
and grievances of all the parties concerned, was reiterated.
India’s support for the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people in the region based on UN Security Council
Resolutions, continued to form the bedrock of India’s
policy towards the Middle East situation.

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa
The Gulf: The year 2006-07 witnessed further
consolidation of India’s relations and bilateral interactions
with the countries of the Gulf. The Amir of Kuwait paid a
successful visit to India in June 2006. Trade and economic
relations witnessed significant expansion underscored by
the success of the Second Industrial Conference held
between India and GCC states in March 2006 in Muscat,
Oman. Joint Commission meetings were held with Oman,
Saudi Arabia and Kuwait coupled with exchange of visits
by several trade and commercial delegations with the
countries of the region. The first round of negotiations to
enter into a Free Trade Agreement between India and
GCC states in Riyadh in March 2006 was one of the many
steps to tap the immense potential that exists for trade
and economic cooperation. The finalization of a number
of bilateral agreements helped further strengthen the
institutional framework for cooperation. Efforts were made
to ensure the welfare of expatriate Indian communities
especially by entering into institutional arrangements with
the countries of the region. Overall, this year was marked
by a more proactive engagement with our Gulf neighbours
with whom we share a common interest in promoting
durable peace and stability in the region.

The King and Queen of Jordan visited India from 30
November – 2 December 2006. Other important visitors
from this region were the Moroccan Foreign Minister in
June 2006, the Egyptian Foreign Minister in December
2006 and the Israeli Minister of Trade, Industry and
Labour, also in December 2006. Minister for Agriculture,
Sharad Pawar, visited Israel in May 2006.
Bilateral trade with WANA countries has significantly
improved. Trade with Egypt stood at US$ 1065 million in
2005, up from US$ 628 million in 2004, crossing US$ 1
billion mark for the first time. Trade with Israel stood at
US$ 2.5 billion in 2005. India has also invested in a major
way in the hydrocarbon, fertilizers and power sectors in
WANA countries.

India’s relations with Iran are underlined by historical,
civilisational and multifaceted ties. The bilateral
cooperation has acquired a strategic dimension flourishing
in the fields of energy, trade and commerce, information
technology and transit. During 2006-07, relations with
Iran were further strengthened through regular exchanges.
vi

Back to Contents

Introduction and Synopsis

Africa

Credit (LoC) in the TEAM-9 countries. In 2006, an
agreement to extend a US$ 250 million LoC by the
Government of India to the ECOWAS Bank for
Investment and Development was signed. The impact of
these initiatives on our relationship with countries of West
Africa region was evident in the visit of President of Gabon
and Foreign Minister level visits that India received from
countries like Cote d’Ivoire, Nigeria, Benin, Senegal,
Ghana, Angola, Republic of Congo and DR Congo. At
regional and institutional level, we had visits from
Chairperson of the AU Commission and a Ministerial
delegation from ECOWAS.

In Sub-Saharan Africa, India has strengthened its
engagement at bilateral, regional and Pan African levels
for upgradation of relations. Special emphasis has been
given to capacity building, technical assistance and HRD,
grant assistance for development projects and credit lines.
India’s dialogue with the AU has led to the decision to
work for the establishment of an India-Africa Forum.
There was growing recognition in the region that India
can be an ideal partner in economic development and a
reliable source of affordable products, services and
technologies in sectors as diverse as agriculture and small
industries on one hand, and IT and space technology on
the other. Exchange of several VVIP and ministerial visits
were a testimony to the growing interest. Countries of
the region overwhelmingly supported India’s candidature
to various international fora, including Human Rights
Council.

Work for implementation of the Pan African e-network
Project continued. Dakar (Senegal) was chosen as the
site for establishment of the hub for the project.
Memoranda of Understanding for participation in the
project have already been signed with 20 countries in
Africa.

Europe

The Ministry provided direct assistance to a number of
countries in response to humanitarian emergencies or in
the context of longer-term development projects. Multimillion dollars worth of concessional lines of credit for
infrastructure development projects were extended.

India’s engagement with the European Union continued
to strengthen. Development of relations with the EU and
its member states is a principal focus of India’s foreign
policy. Europe, particularly a Europe that is uniting would
play the role of a key pole in the evolving multi-polar
international system. The Helsinki Summit of October
2006 took significant decisions to progress the India-EU
strategic partnership. One of the most important of these
is for the two sides to enter into a broad--based trade and
investment agreement.

Over 1000 officials from Africa received training in India
under the ITEC and SCAAP; over 10,000 African
students studied in India and several Indian experts went
on secondment.
India continued to be one of the largest contributors to
peacekeeping in Africa: 3000 troops in Sudan, 3500 in
DRC and over 1000 on Ethiopia-Eritrea border.

India’s engagement with Europe is not only important in
the bilateral and India-EU contexts but in trying to
develop common approaches to addressing various global
challenges. India shares a strategic partnership with the
European Union, and also individually with France,
Germany and the UK. During the year, India’s engagement
with the EU and individual countries in Europe intensified
and diversified further as indicated by twelve Summit level
interactions (UK, France, Germany, Spain, Belgium,
Portugal, Finland, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Romania and
Norway) and burgeoning interactions across the board.
These included a growing number of parliamentary and
ministerial level visits, indicative of growing interest on
the part of Europe in interacting with a rapidly growing

The Ministry led the Indian industry in the promotion of
private sector project partnerships through regional CII
Conclaves in Lusaka and Addis Ababa & Pan-African
Conclave in New Delhi.
Relations were upgraded with the Regional Economic
Communities of COMESA, SACU, SADC and EAC.
The TEAM-9 initiative along with India-Africa Project
Partnership Conclaves continue to provide an effective
impetus to deepen India’s relations with several important
countries of West Africa. Projects of a value of over US$
200 million are under implementation under Lines of

vii

Back to Contents

India as well as our steadily growing cooperation with this
part of the world. This co-operation encompassed a wide
range of areas from political to trade and investment,
culture, science and technology.

India-U.S. bilateral relationship.
President George W. Bush paid a state visit to India in
March 2006 during which he and Prime Minister Dr.
Manmohan Singh announced initiatives in agriculture,
science and technology, space and maritime cooperation.
President Bush also called on President Dr. A.P.J. Abdul
Kalam and received UPA Chairperson and the Leader of
Opposition.

The EU is India’s largest trading partner accounting for
1/5th of India’s total external trade. Bilateral trade has
steadily grown between 2001 and 2005 at over 10% on
average to reach Euro 40 billion in 2005. India and the EU
are also important investment partners. Total FDI inflows
from the EU to India are US$ 8 billion. Indian companies
have also begun to invest in the EU in recent years. UK,
Belgium, Germany, France, Italy and The Netherlands are
important trade & investment partners for India.

Several steps were taken by both sides to implement the
understanding on resumption of civil nuclear energy cooperation that was reached in July 2005. India finalized
its Separation Plan and the US Government amended its
domestic laws to legally enable it to resume full civil
nuclear cooperation with India. Both sides started
negotiation on a bilateral agreement for implementation
of the understandings of 18 July 2005 and March 2006
Separation Plan. India joined FutureGen and the
International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor
initiative.

India-EU relations are firmly based on the shared values
of democracy, pluralism and rule of law and have grown
exponentially from what used to be a purely trade and
economic driven relationship to one covering all areas of
interaction. In order to carry forward their strategic
partnership in these various areas, India and the EU
adopted a comprehensive Joint Action Plan in 2005, the
first time that India has adopted such an Action Plan with
any of its partners.

Total trade between India and the USA stood at $26.76
billion in 2005, an increase of 23.6% over 2004. The
Knowledge Initiative on Agriculture launched in July 2005
was further advanced with an announcement of a 3 year
Work Plan.

There was strong focus on India in Germany in 2006. India
was the Partner Country at the Hannover International
Trade Fair; Guest of Honour Country at the Frankfurt
Book Fair and the focus country at the Bonn Biennale
Art festival.

The India-US Defence Policy Group held its eighth
meeting in New Delhi and its sub-groups also held their
separate meetings. The Five Working Groups under the
India-US Energy Dialogue – Oil & Gas, Power &
Efficiency, New Technology and Renewable Energy, Coal
and Civil Nuclear Energy - carried out a series of
collaborative activities and initiatives.

A Defence Cooperation Agreement was signed with
Germany; a Social Security Agreement was signed with
Belgium; a Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty was signed
with Spain and Bulgaria; an Extradition Treaty was signed
with Portugal.

Relations with Canada continued to expand in various
areas. Both countries carried forward their cooperation
in science and technology, and agreed to discuss
resumption of defence contacts. Discussions on setting
up an Environment Forum and an Energy Dialogue are
ongoing.

The Festival of India (Oct 2006-Jan 2007) was organized
by ICCR in collaboration with Palais des Beaux-Arts in
Brussels.

The Americas
The last year was marked by a broadened India-US
dialogue on bilateral, regional and global issues of mutual
interest. This encompassed strategic and security issues,
defence, counter-terrorism, science and technology,
health, trade, space, energy, maritime cooperation, and
environment which reflect the transforming nature of the

Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC)
Relations with the countries of Latin America and the
Caribbean continue to evolve. The effort was, in particular,
to add substantive trade and economic content to our
traditionally warm and friendly relations with the

viii

Back to Contents

Introduction and Synopsis

countries of the region with which we are bound by
common values and principles that we share, including
the principles of democracy, pluralism, respect for multiculturalism and multi-ethnicity. The effort is to reduce
the physical distance between India and Latin America
and the Caribbean and work together to increase
connectivity and build on the growing complementarities
and opportunities for co-operation.

2006, besides attending a meeting of the Commonwealth
foreign ministers as well as the inaugural meeting of the
Foreign Ministers of BRIC (Brazil, Russia, India and
China).
India has been actively involved in the reform process at
the UN stressing the imperative for this to enhance the
UN’s ability to serve the interests of the majority of its
membership, which is from developing countries. The
decision making structures at the UN, especially the
Security Council, need to be reflective of contemporary
realities. This would also bring about greater legitimacy
and ownership of important decisions among the
membership of the UN. India also made effective
contributions to the ongoing discussions on other major
elements of UN reform including revitalization of UNGA,
strengthening of ECOSOC, the UN’s development
agenda and reform of its management structures and
procedures.

During 2006-07, relations with the region were
strengthened and diversified with exchange of high level
visits, Joint Commission meetings and Foreign Office
Consultations. The visit of the Prime Minister to Brazil
and Cuba was the first ever visit to the region after a gap
of 20 years. The relations with Brazil have been upgraded
to a strategic partnership. The visit of the Vice President
to Guyana and Trinidad and Tobago further intensified
our traditional linkages with the Caribbean region. The
bilateral trade with almost all the countries in the region
has continued to increase. A number of Indian companies
have started seriously pursuing investments and joint
ventures in the region. Academic, cultural and
educational exchanges have also increased. The cricket
stadium in Guyana built with India’s financial assistance
of US$ 25 million, including a grant component of US$ 6
million was inaugurated in November 2006.

With a view to maintaining momentum towards reform
and expansion of the UN Security Council in both
permanent and non-permanent categories, India
maintained constant contact and coordination with Brazil,
Germany and Japan in the format of the G-4 Group of
Countries which have been working together for this
purpose. Intensive contacts and deliberations were also
maintained with other members of the United Nations.
High level delegations from Headquarters attended the
AU Summits. Without diluting India’s commitment to
seeking a permanent seat at the UN Security Council,
India also announced its bid for the non-permanent seat
at the UN Security Council for the term 2011-2012.

United Nations and International
Organisations
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh led the Indian
delegation to the 14th NAM Summit in Havana in
September 2006. In his highly acclaimed statement, he
emphasized India’s strong commitment to NAM and
called for new NAM initiatives on energy security, Africa
and West Asia.

India was elected as a member of the Organizational
Committee of another new body of the UN, namely, the
Peace-building Commission under the category of top five
providers of military personnel and civilian police to the
UN peace-keeping operations. India contributed an
amount of US$ 2 million to the Peace-building Fund.

The External Affairs Minister led the Indian delegation
to the General Debate of 61st UNGA Session in
September 2006 in his capacity as the then Defence
Minister. His statement at the General Debate covered a
number of major issues including the need to address the
inequities in the global economic and financial order,
Millennium Development Goals and comprehensive
reform of the UN, and was widely acclaimed. He also led
the Indian participation at the 30th Annual Ministerial
Meeting of the G-77 held in New York on 22 September

India was also elected to the newly set up Human Rights
Council in May 2006 with the highest number of votes
among the contested seats and will be contesting for
membership of the Council again in 2007. India has been
an active participant in the discussions on human rights
issues at the UN and the recently formed Human Rights
ix

Back to Contents

to several UN and International organisations which
included Inter-governmental Cultural Heritage of
UNESCO, Executive Council of International
Telecommunication Union, UN Human Rights
Committee, INTERPOL, the International Law
Commission and the Radio Regulation Board of ITU.

Council, including on its mandates and work methods.
India also engaged in the deliberations that led to the
adoption of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities and are among the countries that signed the
International Convention on the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance on the day when it opened
for signature.

India made further commitments for enhancing
cooperation within the Commonwealth and played an
active role in its various fora and initiatives. It agreed to
host the International Partnership Summit of the
Commonwealth Connects Programme of which it is the
largest contributor.

The Ministry has been fully engaged in the global
discussions on sustainable development and climate
change including proactive participation in the
formulation of positions and negotiations at the meetings
of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change
and its Kyoto Protocol given the critical implication that
these can have for India’s growth and development. The
involvement in Climate Change issues has also included
interactions with key countries and in India’s participation
in partnerships for clean technologies.

Multilateral Economic Relations
SAARC has entered into its third decade. India will host
the 14th SAARC Summit in New Delhi on 3-4 April 2007.
There is renewed hope that the time has come to move
SAARC from consultation to an implementation phase.
India hopes to upgrade regional cooperation during its
Chairmanship of SAARC. Emphasizing on the need for
connectivity in the region, the Prime Minister, during the
13th Summit in Dhaka in November 2005 stated “if we
wish the next 20 years in SAARC to be different, we
should take the first decision to reconnect the countries
of the subcontinent…”. He offered on a reciprocal basis,
transit facilities to all countries of the region, including
greater air connectivity through a virtual open skies
arrangement. A SAARC Multimodal Transport Study has
been conducted and there is hope that the South Asian
region will be well connected through air, rail and road.
To highlight the need for connectivity, a SAARC Car Rally
is being organized. At the forthcoming SAARC Summit
in April 2007, Afghanistan will also become a member of
SAARC and, for the first time, five Observers – China,
Japan, European Union, Republic of Korea and USA –
would be invited to attend the Summit.

With growing capacity and willingness to assist in the area
of humanitarian assistance, India contributed US$ 2
million to the UN’s Central Emergency Response Fund
and has a member on its Advisory Board.
India has always been mindful of the vulnerabilities of
countries with special needs such as the Least Developed,
the Land Locked Developing Countries and the Small
Island Developing States. Our participation at the review
meeting in New York on the UN’s plan of action for these
groups was at Ministerial level. We have also undertaken
specific efforts to assist Small Island Developing States
and those from the islands in the Pacific Ocean.
International Migration issues have become another
important issue on the global agenda. India participated
at the Ministerial level at the High Level Dialogue on
International Migration and Development at the UN.
While welcoming the adoption of a Counter-Terrorism
Strategy by the UNGA in September 2006, India
continued to pursue the important issue of expeditious
finalization of a Comprehensive Convention on
International Terrorism for which it had presented a draft
as far back as in 1996. It accepted a visit by a delegation
of UN counter-terrorism experts in November 2006 which
was mutually beneficial.

India continued its policy of active engagement with
various economic groupings like ASEAN, EAS, MGC,
BIMSTEC, IOR-ARC, IBSA, G-15, G-8 etc so as to
further deepen its integration with the world economy
and to reap the benefits of natural synergies with various
regions. Taking forward its Look East policy, India
participated at the ASEAN-India and the East Asia
Summits as well as the MGC Foreign Ministers’ meeting

During the year 2006, India and its nominees were elected

x

Back to Contents

Introduction and Synopsis

Investment and Technology Promotion
(ITP)

held in Cebu, Philippines in January 2007. Efforts are being
made to finalize the ASEAN-India FTA at an early date.
The ASEAN leaders acknowledged that India is one of
their most active dialogue partners and emphasized the
cultural and civilizational links with India. India would
host the 2nd BIMSTEC Summit in 2007. Prime Minister
led the Indian delegation to the 1st IBSA Summit held in
Brasilia, Brazil in September 2006 where 5 trilateral
agreements in the areas of maritime transportation,
biofuels, agriculture, information technology and trade
facilitation were signed. Prime Minister participated in a
meeting of the outreach countries of the G-8 Summit held
in St. Petersburg, Russia in July 2006, signaling India’s
willingness to constructively contribute to the endeavours
to find global solutions to the challenges being faced by
the international community. India continued its efforts
with the developing countries to evolve common positions
on issues and causes of common interest and to further
the same in the integrated world economy.

The Ministry continued to accord high priority to
economic diplomacy to attain Government’s overall
foreign policy goals and to face the challenges and exploit
the opportunities thrown up by the fast integrating world.
Some of the major objectives of economic diplomacy that
the Ministry constantly sought to achieve were promotion
and enhancement of external trade through market and
region specific schemes, ensuring higher levels of energy
security by supporting Indian companies to acquire oil
and gas equity abroad and realization of our political and
strategic interests abroad through economic action using
Lines of Credit, Grants and technical assistance. These
helped in building partnerships with friendly countries and
in opening markets for Indian products and projects
abroad.

Policy Planning and Research (PPR)
The PPR Division maintained close interaction with
institutions as well as individuals specializing in policy
research and analyses on themes having a direct bearing
on India’s foreign policy and international relations and
provided financial assistance for holding a number of
seminars and undertaking research studies with a view to
deriving invaluable inputs for the Ministry’s foreign policy
planning, formulation and implementation process. A
database of experts and institutions specializing in policy
research and analyses has already been developed by the
PPR Division and is updated on regular basis.

Indian Technical and Economic
Cooperation (ITEC) Programme and
Development Partnership (DP)
As ever, technical cooperation constituted an important
element in the conduct of diplomatic relations with
developing countries. India’s bilateral assistance, extended
through the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation
(ITEC) Programme to 156 countries, saw 4000
participants attending training courses aimed at capacity
building and human resource development. Requests for
increased assistance in this area were conveyed at various
bilateral meetings including at the highest level from the
developing world. The programme also assumed new
dimensions with regional and multilateral organizations
actively associating themselves with the programme.

A Foreign Policy Coordinating Committee (FPCC) has
been constituted in the Ministry. The Committee
functions under the supervision of Minister of External
Affairs and PPR Division provides the Secretariat for
FPCC. The FPCC will work on themes such as India’s
relations with its neighbours, global issues, relations with
major regions and countries, economic issues and case
studies/historical research. The FPCC met twice during
2006 and deliberated on important foreign policy issues.

Further progress in developing in-house expertise in
project delivery with a view to maximizing costeffectiveness, expeditious delivery, and coordination,
buttressed the increasing emphasis on the delivery of
development projects as part of India’s development
cooperation programme.

The PPR Division prepared the Annual Report of the
Ministry and also the Monthly Summary for the Cabinet.
It also handled work related to examination of maps
depicting India’s external boundaries in coordination with
Survey of India.

India’s humanitarian programme of relief and solidarity
to disaster-struck parts of the world was continued as
before.

xi

Back to Contents

Protocol

to modernizing and upgrading the passport/visa issuance

As compared to 2004, when 63 incoming VVIP/VIP visits
took place, 114 incoming visits at the same level took
place in 2006. A similar trend has emerged in terms of
increase in the number of Foreign Resident Diplomatic
Missions in Delhi whose number has gone up from 116 in
2003 to 130 in 2006. Foreign Resident Missions in Delhi
are also growing in size and nearly 150 posts are being
added annually. This trend is expected to continue.

system, like centralized printing of passports, issuance of
e-passports and outsourcing of visa work.

Administration
The Indian diplomatic presence was expanded by opening
five new missions and posts during the year. Special efforts
were made to simplify rules and regulations with the
objective of decentralizing decision-making. A
comprehensive exercise on revision of pay scales of local
staff was carried out. Austerity measures were
implemented through abolition of posts and increase in
tenure of postings.

Consular, Passport and Visa Services
There are presently 31 Passport Offices and 16 Passport
Collection Centres in India. It is proposed to open new
Passport Offices at Amritsar, Dehradun, Raipur, Shimla,
Coimbatore and Madurai in 2007. A number of measures
have been taken to make the passport issuance system
simpler and speedier for the comfort and convenience of
the public like decentralization and online applications.

A severe shortage of posts necessitated special focus on
optimum utilization of human resources. A review of
deployments at various levels was conducted, indents were
placed for recruitment and promotions were effected well
in time. The Special Drive to fill up backlog vacancies in
reserved categories was carried forward.

Approval from the Ministry of Finance for creation of 293
additional posts in various categories was received in

The Ministry implements the provisions of the Persons
with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of
Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 and has included
recruitment to the Indian Foreign Service under its ambit.
Ministry is sensitive to gender equality and strives to
provide equal opportunities for women employees at all
levels.

September 2006. The process for filling up these posts in
various Passport Offices will be completed by March 2007.
Another proposal for creation of 287 posts in Indian
Missions/Posts abroad is presently under consideration of
the Ministry of Finance.
Indian Embassies in Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia and UAE in the Gulf region have introduced, with
effect from April 2006, provision of free legal aid for two
hours twice a week to Indian workers to resolve labor
related issues.

In line with Government’s policy of promotion and
propagation of Hindi, the Ministry has been making
special efforts in this regard. All important documents
like Bilateral Treaties, Agreements, Memoranda of
Understanding, Annual Report of the Ministry and
Parliament Questions are prepared bilingually. The Hindi
website of the Ministry was launched. Meetings of the
Hindi Advisory Committee and the Official Language
Implementation Committee were held. A Hindi Pakhwada
was organized in the Ministry with active participation of
the Ministry’s employees. Various Hindi training
programmes were organized by the Foreign Service
Institute.

Visa waiver agreements with Mongolia and Mexico came
into force in February 2006, thereby increasing the number
of such countries to 35. Efforts are being made to sign
such agreements with other countries.
The process of computerization of passport and visa
sections has been completed in London, New York,
Islamabad, Kuwait, Dubai, Abu Dhabi, Muscat, Dhaka,
Riyadh, Madrid, Paris, Singapore and Colombo. The
process of computerization in remaining missions and posts

Ministry has well-formulated schemes for propagation of
Hindi abroad through Indian Missions abroad, including
provision of Hindi teaching material, financial support,

will be completed by March 2007.
The Ministry has embarked on several projects with a view

xii

Back to Contents

Introduction and Synopsis

donation of audio-visual material, grant of scholarships
to foreign students to study Hindi in India, organizing
Hindi Diwas, etc. Regional Hindi conferences were
organized periodically in different countries. The World
Hindi Day was celebrated on 10 January 2007. Action is
underway for organizing the 8th World Hindi Conference
in New York in July 2007, as well as for establishment of
the World Hindi Secretariat in Mauritius.

Right to Information Act
As per the mandate of the RTI Act, a comprehensive list
of information has been put online under the title “Basic
Information Related to MEA”. Particulars of facilities
available to the citizens for information including names
and address of public information officers (as per article
4(1)(b)(xvi) of RTI Act 2005) as well as that of the Chief
Appellate Authority (under Sec 19(1) of RTI Act 2005)
for the Ministry, Indian Council for Cultural Relations,
Indian Council of World Affairs and Central Passport
Offices can be accessed on the website of the Ministry,
viz. www.mea.gov.in

Coordination
The Coordination Division of the Ministry serves as the
nodal point for all work relating to Parliament in MEA
and for examination of proposals for clearance of foreign
tours of Ministers, legislators and government officials. It
also clears holding of international conferences and sports
events in India. The Students Cell of the Division deals
with the selection, nomination and admission of foreign
self-financing students against reserved seats in the
medical and engineering institutions in the country. The
Coordination Division is assisting the Inter-State Council
Secretariat in organising the Fourth International
Conference on Federalism being hosted by the
Government of India at New Delhi from 5-7 November
2007.

External Publicity
The External Publicity Division, as the interface of the
Ministry with the media, continued to project India’s
foreign policy objectives through interaction with both
Indian and international media. The concerns and
viewpoint of the Government on various issues were
actively articulated and widely disseminated through

regular and special press briefings, statements,
backgrounders and postings on the website of the Ministry.

Public Diplomacy
The Public Diplomacy Division of the Ministry of External
Affairs was created in May 2006 to organize the outreach
activities inside and outside India, and audio visual and
print publicity. It is with these objectives in mind that the
Public Diplomacy Division has been engaging and
supporting institutions, universities and think tanks.
The External Affairs Minister, Pranab Mukherjee
launched the Global India Foundation, an independent
think tank, on 16 January 2006. Contacts have been
initiated with reputed international think tanks such as
the International Institute for Strategic Studies, London.
The Division participated in the 35th annual conference
on South Asia organized in University of Wisconsin
(USA), and a conference on “Challenges for Foreign
Ministries: Managing Diplomatic Networks & Optimizing
Value” on 31 May-1 June 2006 in Geneva.
The Division commissions/acquires documentaries aimed
at positive projection of India’s image abroad and sends
these to Indian Missions abroad for presentation, screening
and telecast on foreign TV channels. In addition, the
Division brought out booklets on Kailash Mansarovar
Yatra 2006, India’s Assistance Programme in Afghanistan,
brochures on official visits of President and Prime Minister.

Foreign Service Institute (FSI)
The 2005 batch of IFS Probationers completed their
training with the Institute in January 2007 and are now
on training in the Ministry in various Divisions. The 2006
Batch of the IFS Probationers have commenced their oneyear comprehensive training programme with the Foreign
Service Institute from January 2007.
The Institute maintains regular contacts with other training
institutions. A special training programme was organized
for the first time for officers from the Cabinet Secretariat
in May 2006. Since April 2006, four Basic Professional
Courses have been organized by the Foreign Service
Institute for the training of staff and officials of the Ministry.
The First Orientation Course for IFS(B) Grade-I Officers
was conducted by the Institute in July 2006.

xiii

Back to Contents

Indian Council of World Affairs

The 40th and the 41st Professional Courses for Foreign
Diplomats (PCFD) were organized from 1 February-10
March 2006 and 4 October-10 November 2006
respectively. Twenty eight diplomats from 26 countries
attended the 40th PCFD and twenty five diplomats from
21 countries participated in the 41st PCFD. A special four
week course for 20 diplomats from Afghanistan was
organized in April 2006.

During the period April-December, 2006, the Indian
Council of World Affairs organized a number of events
such as lectures, seminars, bilateral strategic dialogues and
background briefings. On an average, between 80-150
persons attended each of the lectures while the seminars
attracted between 50-100 persons each. ICWA’s magazine
‘India Quarterly’ was on track during 2006. Besides the
above, the ICWA has signed Memoranda of
Understanding with counterpart organizations in five
countries: Malaysia, Tajikistan, Mexico, Portugal and
Poland.

FSI hosted the Deans of counterpart institutes in Croatia,
Bulgaria and Mexico and issues such as mutual
cooperation and exchange programmes were discussed
with them.

Research and Information System for
Developing Countries (RIS)

Cultural Relations
The Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) was
formally set up in 1950, with the primary objective of
establishing, reviving and strengthening cultural relations
and mutual understanding between India and other
countries.

RIS, as an autonomous policy think-tank, conducted
policy research on international economic issues and
provided analytical support in preparations for major
Summit meetings and other important negotiations such
as the East Asia Summit and the ASEAN-India Summit,
NAM Summit, IBSA Summit, WTO negotiations, the
joint study group on comprehensive economic dialogue
with Japan, India-ASEAN FTA negotiations, among
others. It held policy dialogue on the relevance and the
way forward for an Asian Economic Community in
collaboration with leading policy think-tanks in Asia, and
has networked with policy think-tanks in other countries
to bring policy coherence and capacity building on
international economic issues and development
cooperation.

The Festival of India in Japan was inaugurated by the
Prime Minister in Tokyo in December 2006 and the ICCR
is coordinating various events during the India-Japan
Friendship Year, 2007 which will include business
seminars, exhibitions, performing art events, fashion
shows, a film festival, food festivals, seminars, talks/
lectures by eminent personalities and souvenir shops. The
Festival of India in Belgium was held for a period of four
months from October 2006 to January 2007 at the Palais
des Beaux-Arts. The ICCR also sponsored 67 cultural
delegations to 54 countries covering all the continents of
the world and in addition hosted a number of incoming
foreign cultural delegations. As part of its scholarship
programme, ICCR offered approximately 1300
scholarships under various Schemes.

xiv

Back to Contents

India’s Neighbours

Afghanistan

1

meeting in Dhaka on 1-2 August 2006. The formal
admission of Afghanistan as a member of SAARC would
be completed at the 14th SAARC Summit in New Delhi
on 3-4 April 2007.

T he

London Conference, held from 31 January-1
February 2006, produced the “Afghanistan Compact”,
symbolizing international community’s continued
commitment to Afghanistan’s reconstruction. The
Interim-Afghan National Development Strategy
(I-ANDS), finalized during this Conference, provided a
five-year road map with benchmarks to monitor the
progress of reconstruction of Afghanistan. The internal
democratic consolidation continued, with Afghan
Parliament playing more active role on issues such as
approval of Cabinet ministers, nominees to Supreme Court
and passage of annual budget.

Bilateral Relations
High-level interactions, the hallmark of India-Afghanistan
relations, continued during 2006. President Hamid Karzai
paid a State visit from 9-13 April 2006 with a large
delegation including six Cabinet Ministers and a number
of senior officials. President Karzai had meetings with
President of India and Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan
Singh. Three Memoranda of Understanding (MoU) were
signed as part of strengthening the bilateral cooperation
which include MoU on Cooperation in the field of Rural
Development, MoU on Cooperation in the field of
Education, and MoU on Cooperation in the Field of
Standardization between Bureau of Indian Standards and
Afghan National Standardization Authority. Besides, India
also agreed to provide a Line of Credit of US $50 million
to encourage bilateral business-to-business relations.
Foreign Minister of Afghanistan Dr. Spanta paid an official
visit to India from 29 June-1 July 2006.

The security situation worsened in the country particularly
in South and South-Eastern Afghanistan, with total
casualties reaching more than 4,000, almost three times
the casualties in 2005. Around one third of the casualties
were civilians. An unprecedented spike in the number of
suicide attacks affected the civilian life in many parts of
the country. The regrouping and resurgent Taliban
elements continued to threaten the peace and law and
order, despite major military operations launched by US
led coalition forces and NATO led International Security
Assistance Forces (ISAF). To review the situation in
Afghanistan, a 10-member UN Security Council
delegation visited Afghanistan from 11-17 November
2006. The UN continued to remain seized of the security
situation in Afghanistan and renewed the mandate for
the presence of international forces in Afghanistan. The
opium production registered a record 59% increase over
2005. The continued insurgency attacks, spreading into
hitherto relatively stable Provinces and severe drought
conditions also impinged on the effective governance.

President Karzai visited India again from 15-19 November
2006. He, along with Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan
Singh, inaugurated the Second Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference (RECC) on Afghanistan on 18
November 2006 at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi. President
Karzai also attended the concluding session of the parallel
Regional Business Conference (RBC) on Afghanistan,
which was hosted by three apex Indian business chambers,
namely, Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce and
Industry (FICCI), the Confederation of Indian Industry
(CII) and Associated Chambers of Commerce and
Industry of India (ASSOCHAM), in association with
Afghanistan Investment Support Agency (AISA) on 18
November 2006. High Level delegations from 20
countries, including 11 Ministers/Deputy Ministers, and
9 International Organisations attended the RECC.

Following the decision of 13th South Asian Association
for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) Summit at Dhaka in
November 2005, Afghanistan’s participation in SAARC
fora began with Foreign Minister of Afghanistan Dr
Rangin Dafdar Spanta attending the 27th Ministerial
1

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

construction of 5 toilet complexes in Kabul by Sulabh
International Social Service Organization, expansion of
TV coverage in twenty two provinces of Afghanistan by
Broadcast Engineering Consultants of India Limited
(BECIL), supply of 200 TATA mini buses to the Afghan
Ministry of Transport, provision of 26 tube wells in six
provinces (8 in Herat, 3 in Jawzjan, 3 in Samangan, 6 in
Balkh and 6 in Baghlan) by Water & Power Consultancy
Services (India) Ltd. India also gifted a set of musical
instruments to Afghan Ministry of Information, Culture,
Tourism and Youth and classical Indian music CDs to
Radio & Television of Afghanistan. On 12 September
2006, Telecommunications Consultant India Ltd. (TCIL)
signed an agreement with Ministry of Communication for
setting up of 12 multi-purpose community tele-centres in
Afghanistan. India also extended the tenures of Indian
Medical Missions (IMMs) in Kabul, Herat, Jalalabad,
Kandahar and Mazar-e-Sharif and that of 2-member
banking team at Afghan Millie Bank. Under Small
Developmental Projects Scheme (SDPS), projects in
health, education, rural development, vocational training
sectors were finalised for implementation. Project
proposals were under finalization for solar electrification
and rainwater harvesting of 100 villages. Under the
hospitality programme of India’s Tourism Ministry, five
Afghan tour operators/journalists were sent to India for a
familiarization tour. From 1 April-3 May 2006, Foreign
Service Institute, New Delhi provided training to 20
diplomats from Afghanistan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
India also extended training programme for a team of 20
doctors and paramedics of Indira Gandhi Institute of Child
Health, Kabul at All India Institute of Medical Sciences
(AIIMS) from 1 February- 30 April 2006 and contributed
US$ 200,000 for the Afghan Reconstruction Trust Fund
for the period 2006-07.

President Karzai had meetings with President, Prime
Minister and other senior officials of India, to review the
bilateral relations. President Karzai was also presented
with the Indira Gandhi Prize for Peace, Disarmament and
Development during this visit. The External Affairs
Minister, Pranab Mukherjee visited Kabul in January 2007
to invite President Karzai to the 14th SAARC Summit to
be held in New Delhi.
India reiterated its firm commitment to the reconstruction
and rebuilding of Afghanistan and stood by its resolve to
continue with its assistance projects, despite security
problems, including tragic killing of an Indian engineer
Bharat Kumar in February 2006 and K. Suryanarayan in
April 2006 by militants, three attacks involving lobbying
of grenades into the premises of Indian Consulate at
Kandahar and rocket attacks on the campsites of Indian
road construction company.
India’s assistance to Afghanistan
India increased its cumulative pledge of assistance by US$
150 million during the year, raising it to US$ 750 million.
Of this, the expenditure this year was about US$ 90
million. The on-going projects of India’s assistance showed
positive progress. In April 2006, India handed over the
5000 tonnes cold storage facility in Kandahar to the
Afghan Ministry of Agriculture. This cold storage facility
is expected to boost the commercial viability of Afghan
agro-products. In August 2006, India completed the new
Jalalabad TV Studio, together with a TV transmitter, a
mobile TV satellite uplink and five TV relay centers. The
220 KV Transmission Line from Pul-e-Khumri to Kabul
with a sub-station in Chimtala, reconstruction of Salma
Dam power project, reconstruction of Indira Gandhi
Institute of Child Health in Kabul in various phases,
equipment and supervision of execution of power project
in Faryab province, rehabilitation of Amir Ghazi and
Quargah Reservoir dam and provision of training at the
Common Facility and Tool Room Centre at Pul-e-Charkhi
Industrial park were some other projects which showed
progress. Designs and plans were advanced for the
construction of the new Parliament building.
Notwithstanding logistical difficulties and physical
challenges, work on the 218 km road from Zaranj to
Delaram made significant progress.

As part of project related work, several teams from India
visited Afghanistan. Some of these visits were: 5-member
team from Archaeological Survey of India from 16-25
January 2006 for preparing a report on Indo-Afghanistan
Collaborative Project on ‘Archaeology, Archive,
Monuments and Museums’, a 4-member team of Housing
& Urban Development Corporation (HUDCO) of India
from 15-20 April 2006 for establishing an institutional
framework for development of housing and urban
infrastructure in Afghanistan, a 5-member team from
Indian Ministry of Small Scale Industries from 15-29 April
2006 to undertake a study on development of rural

New projects
India has also undertaken new projects such as
2

Back to Contents

President Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam and Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh receiving
President of Afghanistan Hamid Karzai at Rashtrapati Bhavan in New Delhi on 10 April 2006.

The Union Minister of External Affairs Pranab Mukherjee and the King of Bhutan
Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck in New Delhi on 8 February 2007.

3

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

enterprises in Afghanistan, a 5-member team from
Department of Agricultural Research & Education of
India from 22-29 April 2006 for preparing a Biennial Work
Plan, a 2-member Planning Commission team from 6-10
June 2006 to present their Report on weaning away
farmers from poppy cultivation, a 2-member team of Photo
Division, Ministry of Information & Broadcasting from
28 October–6 November 2006 for digitization of negatives
in Bakhtar News Agency archives, Self Employed
Women’s Association (SEWA) delegation from 2-14
November 2006 for undertaking pre-feasibility study for
setting up Women’s Vocational Training Centre at Baghe-Zanana, Kabul, and a CII team from 31 October–6
November 2006 for the Skills Development Project.

Cooperation between India and Bangladesh for Preventing
Illicit Trafficking in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances. Both sides agreed that the institutionalized
bilateral mechanisms such as Joint Rivers Commission,
Joint Economic Commission, Joint Boundary Working
Groups and Home Secretary level talks would meet more
frequently to ensure movement in a positive direction and
their routine outcome monitored by the political
leadership on a continuous basis.
The other meetings that took place during the year
included, the meeting of Ministers of Water Resources of
both the countries and their joint visit to sites along the
common border rivers from 17-21 September 2006, the
7th Home Secretary level talks in Dhaka from 24-27
August 2006, the 3rd Joint Boundary Working Group on
16-17 July 2006, the 3rd meeting of the Joint Group of
Customs in Dhaka on 3-4 May 2006, the 4th Joint
Working Group on Trade in Agartala on 5-6 July 2006,
and the 9th meeting of the Standing Committee on Inland
Water Transit and Trade in Delhi on 27-28 September
2006.

ICCR Scholarships and ITEC training programme
From April 2006, the implementation of 500 ICCR
Scholarships and 500 ITEC training programmes for
Afghan students and officials commenced. Under the 500
ICCR Scholarship Scheme, 402 Afghan candidates were
accepted and are studying in various Universities through
out India. Under the ITEC Scholarship Scheme, 350
officials of Government of Afghanistan were covered for
training courses in diverse fields such as Information
Technology (IT), communications, English language
proficiency, Planning and development of human
resources, geo-informatics, textile mills management,
journalism, women empowerment and promotion of micro
enterprises. Twenty-two officers from Afghan National
Army (ANA) also attended training courses in India.

In addition, the large number of SAARC related meetings,
which were held in Dhaka, by virtue of Bangladesh holding
the SAARC Chair, also afforded an opportunity for
bilateral meetings on the sidelines. These include meetings
of the Home Minister, Minister of State for External
Affairs, Minister of State for Commerce, and Foreign
Secretary with their respective counterparts. Similarly,
visits by Bangladesh ministers to India for meetings of
regional or multilateral fora, viz. BIMSTEC Council of
Ministers, the UN-WHO, etc afforded an opportunity for
bilateral meetings on the sidelines.

Bangladesh
Relations with Bangladesh were guided by Ministry’s
consistent commitment to engage the Government of
Bangladesh on the entire gamut of relations between the
two countries. To this end, a number of high level visits
and exchanges helped strengthen and contribute to the
process of consolidating bilateral relations, including
through meetings of the institutionalized bilateral
mechanisms.

Pursuant to the decisions taken by the 36th Joint Rivers
Commission, the Ministers for Water Resources of
Bangladesh and India undertook joint visits to a number
of sites along common border rivers. The visits enabled a
better appreciation of each other’s position on the need
for embankment and bank protection works, ensuring
drinking water supply through minor lift irrigation schemes
and, undertaking dredging and de-siltation works to ease
drainage congestion. Additionally, the Joint Committee
on sharing of Ganga Waters at Farakka held its 32nd and
33rd meetings in Farakka/Kolkata from 5-8 February 2006
and in Dhaka on 3 May 2006. The Joint Committee
finalized and signed the agreed annual report in New Delhi
in July 2006. The Joint Committee reviewed the working

Prime Minister Begum Khaleda Zia visited India from 2022 March 2006. During the visit she held comprehensive
discussions with the Prime Minister of India on the entire
gamut of bilateral relations. They also discussed regional
and international issues of mutual interest. Two
agreements were signed during the visit. These being the
Revised Trade Agreement and the Agreement for Mutual
4

Back to Contents

India’s Neighbours

arrangement of sharing of dry season flows of Ganga from
January to May 2006 and examined the field data collected
in this regard. The releases made to Bangladesh were in
line with the provisions of the 1996 Ganga Waters Treaty.

ICCR and related programmes under the Colombo Plan
and the bilateral ITEC scheme.

Bhutan
India-Bhutan relations, which are based on shared
historical and cultural linkages, were further consolidated
in all areas.

During the 7th round of the Home Secretary level talks,
held in Dhaka from 24-27 August 2006, India reiterated
its concerns on the activities of Indian Insurgent Groups
(IIGs) operating from Bangladesh’s territory. India
expressed its deep concern with regard to growing antiIndia activities of the ISI from Bangladesh soil and, in
this context, pointed out that incidents of terrorism in
India have revealed clear links with Bangladesh
individuals/outfits like Harkat-ul-Jihad-i-Islami (HUJI).
Besides, issues related to security, border management,
illegal immigration, joint boundary, pending treaties and
consular matters were discussed.

Discussions were held between the two Governments to
review and update the Treaty between India and Bhutan
relating to the promotion of, and fostering the relations
of friendship and neighbourliness which was signed at
Darjeeling on 8th August 1949. Based on these
discussions, India and Bhutan reached agreement on the
text of an updated India-Bhutan Friendship Treaty to
reflect the contemporary nature of their relationship and
lay the foundation for their future development in the
21st century.

The 3rd meeting of the Joint Boundary Working Groups
(JBWG) took place in Dhaka after a gap of nearly four
years on 16-17 July 2006. The JBWG is tasked to deal
with the completion of demarcation of the un-demarcated
portions of the border, modalities relating to exchange of
enclaves and territories in adverse possession, erection of
permanent boundary pillars where necessary on the
demarcated boundary, and other related matters of the
1974 Land Boundary Agreement. The 3rd JBWG meeting
was marked by two important procedural breakthroughs.
Both sides agreed (a) to hold annual meetings of the
JBWG and (b) to undertake joint visits to enclaves and
territories under adverse possession at an early date.

The finalization of the India-Bhutan Friendship Treaty
coincided with Bhutan’s transition to a democratic
constitutional monarchy and reflected the desire of both
governments to put in place the framework for the future
growth of their relationship following the transfer of
responsibilities of the Monarch by Jigme Singye
Wangchuck to Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck, the
Fifth Druk Gyalpo of Bhutan on 9 December 2006.
The then King of Bhutan Jigme Singye Wangchuck,
accompanied by the then Crown Prince Trongsa Penlop
Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck, visited India from 2631 July 2006. During the visit, the two sides signed three
agreements-Agreement concerning cooperation in the
field of Hydroelectric power; Protocol to the InterGovernmental Agreement of 5 March 1996 on the setting
up of the Tala Hydroelectric Project; and the Agreement
on Trade, Commerce and Transit.

On the economic and commercial side, the Ministry
extended assistance to Bangladesh on rice supplies,
computers training programme, etc. The Fourth meeting
of the Joint Working Group on Trade was held in Agartala
on 5-6 July 2006. Issues relating to Non and Para-Tariff
barriers, Bilateral Free Trade Agreement and Revision of
the Bilateral Trade Agreement were discussed. The Cotton
Textile Export Promotion Council of India (TEXPROCIL)
organized the 1st Indian Cotton Yarn & Fabric Show –
2006 in Dhaka from 9-11 July 2006.

Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck paid his first visit
abroad as the Fifth Druk Gyalpo to India from 7-12
February 2007. During his visit, the India-Bhutan
Friendship Treaty was signed between the Fifth Druk
Gyalpo and External Affairs Minister, Pranab Mukherjee
on 8 February 2007. This marked a new stage in the further
intensification of relations between India and Bhutan.

In keeping with Government’s commitment to enhance
people to people contacts, India issued nearly 500,000
visas to Bangladesh nationals, enabling them to undertake
visits to India for purposes of pilgrimage, medical
treatment, tourism, education, etc. A large number of
scholarships were given to Bangladesh students under

Prof. Saifuddin Soz, Union Minister for Water Resources
visited Bhutan from 11-15 October 2006 and held
discussions with Bhutanese leaders and officials. The
Minister of External Affairs Pranab Mukherjee paid his
5

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

first visit abroad to Bhutan on 2-3 December 2006 during
which he met the King of Bhutan and conveyed the
invitation of the Prime Minister for the 14th SAARC
Summit to be held in India.

Buddhist studies. These scholarships were in addition to
facilities extended under ITEC/Technical Cooperation
Scheme (TCS) of Colombo Plan Schemes. A large number
of Bhutanese students continued to study in schools and
colleges in India contributing to greater awareness and
understanding between the two countries.

The then Foreign Secretary Shyam Saran visited Bhutan
on 18-19 April 2006. The Secretary, Department of Urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation, Ranjit Issar visited
Bhutan from 15-18 May 2006; Secretary (Culture), Badal
Das from 22-26 May 2006; Secretary (Power), R.V. Shahi
from 26-28 May 2006; and Member (Services), DoT, A.K.
Saxena from 12-15 June 2006. The Foreign Secretary,
Shivshankar Menon, visited Bhutan on 28-29 October
2006 and held discussions on bilateral issues.

Cooperation with Bhutan in the areas of security and
border management was further strengthened at the
Central Government level through Joint Working Groups
and at State Government levels through coordination
meetings with State officials. The last meeting of the IndoBhutan Border Management and Security Group was held
on 22-23 September 2006 in Thimphu. Arrangements for
regular coordinated patrolling by security forces of the
two countries continued to function smoothly, and there
was exchange of information between the two
governments on matters of security and maintenance of
peace.

Official exchanges were complemented by people-topeople contacts between the two countries. The IndiaBhutan Foundation met in Delhi on 3-4 May 2006. The
local Gelephu Chapter of Bhutan India Friendship
Association visited Assam. The book ‘Indo-Bhutan:
Along the friendship trail’ was translated in Dzongkha,
and released by the Crown Prince of Bhutan Trongsa
Penlop Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck on 11
November 2006.

China
The trend of development and diversification of IndiaChina relations further intensified during the year. The
continuing high-level political exchanges and the
activities organised to commemorate 2006 as the Year of
India-China Friendship helped to further enhance mutual
understanding and cooperation. People-to-people
contacts witnessed an increase with the increasing number
of tourists visiting each other’s country. The year also saw,
for the first time, structured exchange of large and
composite youth delegations. All this contributed to the
mutual objective of the two sides to substantiate and add
greater content to their strategic and cooperative
partnership, which was established in April 2005. While
working for a comprehensive and all-round development
of India-China relations, the two sides continued their
efforts to seek a resolution of their outstanding differences.

India continued to be the largest trade and development
partner of Bhutan. Bilateral development cooperation
encompassed projects in the areas of health, education,
roads and bridges, power, trade and industry, civil aviation,
culture, urban development and housing, media, human
resource development, Information Technology and
telecommunications. Projects agreed for implementation
under Bhutan’s 9 th Plan progressed satisfactorily. The
hydro power sector constituted an important area for
cooperation between the two countries. The 1020 MW
Tala Hydroelectric Project commenced commercial
operation on 31 July 2006 and is expected to be fully
commissioned in 2007. The Detailed Project Report
(DPR) for the proposed Punatsangchu-I Hydroelectric
Project was received, while agreements were signed for
preparation of the DPRs for the Punatsangchu-II and
Mangdechu Hydroelectric projects.

The State visit by President Hu Jintao of China from 2023 November 2006 was the highlight of the India-China
Friendship Year activities in 2006. During the discussions,
the leaderships of the two countries reviewed recent
developments in bilateral relations and discussed regional
and international issues of mutual interest. They expressed
satisfaction over the sustained positive momentum in the
bilateral relationship. The Joint Declaration issued during
the visit spelt out a ten-pronged strategy to upgrade IndiaChina relations to a qualitatively new level and to further

There was close cooperation between the two countries
in the field of education. Scholarships were granted to
100 Bhutanese students at the undergraduate and postgraduate level during the year 2006 to study in Indian
institutions. Ambassador’s scholarship was granted to
additional 100 students studying in India, including for
6

Back to Contents

The Vice President Bhairon Singh Shekhawat with the President of the People’s Republic of China
Hu Jintao in New Delhi on 21 November 2006.

The Union Minister of External Affairs Pranab Mukherjee with the President of Maldives
Maummon Abdul Gayoom in New Delhi on 29 January 2007.

7

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh and President Hu
Jintao exchanged views on the boundary question and
agreed that an early settlement would serve the basic
interests of both countries and should be pursued as a
strategic objective. They asked the Special
Representatives on the boundary question to intensify
their efforts towards arriving at a mutually agreed
framework for the settlement of the boundary question.

substantiate and reinforce the strategic and cooperative
partnership between the two countries. Thirteen
agreements/MoUs were signed during the visit.
A number of initiatives were announced to consolidate
institutional linkages between the two Governments. Both
sides agreed to hold regular summit level meetings and
decided to open new Consulates General in Kolkata and
Guangzhou. The Protocol between the two foreign offices
formalises the dialogue mechanisms before the two
countries and provides for the establishment of a hotline
between the Foreign Ministers. The two sides also decided
to set up an expert-level mechanism to discuss interaction
and cooperation on the provision of flood season
hydrological data, emergency management and other
issues regarding trans-border rivers. The longstanding
issue of the property of Indian Consulate General in
Shanghai was also resolved with the Chinese side agreeing
to provide a plot of land for the construction of the Indian
Consulate General in lieu of our original property.

Besides the visit of President Hu Jintao, the year witnessed
a number of high-level interactions between India and
China. Chinese Minister of Commerce, Bo Xilai visited
India on 15 -16 March 2006 for the 7th meeting of IndiaChina Joint Economic Group and the Chinese Finance
Minister, Jin Renqing visited India from 3-6 May 2006 to
attend the annual meeting of the Asian Development
Bank. The then Defence Minister, Pranab Mukherjee paid
a bilateral visit to China from 28 May-2 June 2006.
Minister for Petroleum and Natural Gas, Murli Deora
visited China from 14-16 June 2006 to attend the SCO
Summit and subsequently from 13-18 December 2006 for
the First Five-Country Energy Ministers’ Roundtable
Conference. Speaker of Lok Sabha, Somnath Chatterjee
led an Indian Parliamentary Delegation to China from 38 July 2006. Minister for Science and Technology and
Earth Sciences, Kapil Sibal paid a bilateral visit to China
from 6-12 September 2006. Minister for Tourism and
Culture, Ambika Soni visited China from 24-26 December
2006.

Comprehensive economic engagement was a major thrust
area with both sides deciding to fix a trade target of US$
40 billion by 2010 and mandating the Joint Task Force
studying the feasibility and benefits of an India-China
Regional Trading Arrangement to complete its work by
October 2007. The signing of the Bilateral Investment
Protection and Promotion Agreement would encourage
and facilitate bilateral investment flows. It was also agreed
to enhance trans-border connectivity and cooperation
through expansion of border trade by strengthening of
existing routes and exploring additional routes. India has
proposed to the Chinese side the opening of Demchok
and Bumla for border trade.

As part of the continued dialogue at the highest level,
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh and Chinese Premier
Wen Jiabao met on 14 January 2007 in Cebu on the
sidelines of the ASEAN meeting. Prime Minister Dr.
Manmohan Singh also had a Trilateral Summit with
Chinese President Hu Jintao and Russian President
Vladimir Putin in St. Petersberg on 17 July 2006. Chinese
Foreign Minister Li Zhaoxing is expected to visit India
from 12-14 February 2007 for the India-China-Russia
Foreign Ministers’ Trilateral Meeting as well as bilateral
interactions.

Both sides underlined the need to broadbase the
relationship through enhanced cooperation in the areas
of science & technology and culture, and greater peopleto-people exchanges. The initiatives announced in these
areas included: launching of India-China partnership in
Science &Technology, with the two sides agreeing to
undertake joint projects, decision to organise Festival of
India in China and vice versa, celebration of 2007 as
‘Friendship through Tourism Year’, decision to establish
an India-China Exchange Foundation to promote greater
academic exchanges, Chinese readiness to participate in
the regional initiative for redevelopment of Nalanda as a
major centre of learning, and a five-year programme for
exchange of youth delegations.

The growth of bilateral economic and commercial ties in
recent years has been one of the most visible indicators of
the developments in India-China relations. The pace of
growth of bilateral trade was maintained during the year.
As per Indian statistics, during the financial year 20052006 bilateral trade was US$ 17.62 billion, representing
a 38.65 percent increase over the previous financial year
8

Back to Contents

India’s Neighbours

developments in their financial sectors. Separately,
Securities and Exchanges Board of India (SEBI) and the
China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC) signed
an MoU, which provides a framework for increasing
mutual understanding and exchange of regulatory and
technical information. The State Bank of India became
the first Indian bank in China to upgrade from a
Representative Office when it started commercial
operations in China during the year. The 4th Made in India
Show was held in China in September 2006, with a
thematic exhibition showcasing India’s achievements in
the high technology areas. Two business summits were
also organised in China during the year.

during which it was US$ 12.71 billion. The intensification
and diversification of economic linkages between India
and China was also reflected in the growing mutual
investments in each other’s countries. As per Chinese
statistics, till September 2006, total contracted Indian
investments in China reached US$ 406 million, with a
realized investment value of US$ 136 million. During the
same period, Chinese investments in India reached US$
48 million. Similarly, the value of Chinese project
contracting in India was – i) total contract value (projects
signed/under implementation): US$ 6.9 billion; and ii)
value of projects already completed: US$ 1.4 billion. The
Bilateral Investment Protection and Promotion
Agreement between the two countries would further
facilitate and encourage flow of investments.

The Special Representatives of the two countries on the
boundary question continued their discussions towards a
mutually agreed framework for the boundary settlement
on the basis of the Agreement on Political Parameters
and Guiding Principles. The Eighth Round of talks
between the Special Representatives of India and China,
was held in Xi’an and Beijing from 25-27 June 2006.
During the visit of President Hu Jintao, the leaders of the
two countries asked the Special Representatives to
intensify their work. The two sides agreed that an early
settlement of the boundary question will advance their
basic interests and should be pursued as a strategic
objective. It was also agreed that pending the resolution
of the boundary question, peace and tranquillity will be
maintained in border areas. The Ninth Round of talks
between the Special Representatives took place from 1618 January 2007 in New Delhi.

To further boost economic and trade ties, the Joint
Economic Group (JEG) led by the Commerce Ministers
of the two countries met on 16 March 2006 in New Delhi
for its 7th session. The JEG undertook a comprehensive
review of bilateral trade and economic relations and took
decisions, which would contribute to the smooth and rapid
expansion and diversification of bilateral trade and deepen
economic ties. The JEG also called for the setting up of
an India-China CEO Forum to provide inputs of the
business communities to the government. The first
meeting of the CEO Forum was held in Mumbai in
November 2006 during the visit of Chinese President Hu
Jintao. The year also saw the resumption of border trade
through Nathula on 6 July 2006 in accordance with the
Memorandum on Expanding Border Trade signed between
India and China on 23 June 2003. According to reports,
at the close of trade for the year on 30 September 2006
the total trade across Nathula was around Rs. 12 lakhs.

The continuing progress in bilateral defence ties
manifested in a sustained level of defence exchanges, and
mutual participation in training courses and joint
activities. The then Defence Minister Pranab Mukherjee
paid an official visit to China from 28 May-2 June 2006.
Defence Minister and the Chinese Defence Minister,
General Cao Gangchuan signed a Memorandum of
Understanding for exchanges and cooperation in the field
of Defence. The MoU provides for an Annual Defence
Dialogue, more frequent high-level exchanges between
the two defence ministries and armed forces, and training
exchanges. This is the first such document between the
two countries.

The Joint Task Force (JTF) examining the feasibility and
benefits of India-China Regional Trading Arrangement
(RTA) held its first and second meetings in March and
September 2006 respectively. The second meeting
finalised the structure of the proposed report and the
methodology to be adopted for the proposed study. The
third session was held in New Delhi in 2007. The JTF has
been directed to complete its report by October 2007.
The first Financial Dialogue between India and China
was held in New Delhi on 7 April 2006 in which the two
sides exchanged views on global and Asian economic
prospects, strategies for sustainable growth and

To further strengthen confidence building in border areas,
the Border Personnel Meeting (BPM) at Kibithu-Damai
in the Eastern Sector of India-China border was
9

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

operationalised in November 2006. It may be recalled that
the two countries had agreed in the Protocol on
Confidence Building Measures signed in April 2005 for
additional border personnel meeting points at KibithuDamai (Eastern Sector) and Lipulekh (Middle Sector).
With the operationalisation of the BPM at Kibithu-Damai,
there are now four BPM points in India-China border
areas, the other three being at Spanggur (Western Sector),
Nathula (Sikkim Sector) and Bumla (Eastern Sector).

The momentum of parliamentary exchanges was
maintained during the year with the visit of Speaker of
Lok Sabha, Somnath Chatterjee leading a Parliamentary
delegation to Beijing, Zhengzhou and Shanghai from 3-8
July 2006 at the invitation of the Chairman of the
Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress
of China (NPC), Wu Bangguo. During the visit, Speaker
also met the Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao. An MoU was
signed between the Lok Sabha Secretariat and the
Chinese NPC to establish a mechanism for structured and
regular exchanges between the two Parliaments. From the
Chinese side, Liu Yandong, Vice Chairperson of the
Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference and
Minister of the United Front Work Department visited
India from 7-13 January 2007 and had a useful exchange
of views with Indian leaders. The visit took place under
the exchange programme of the Ministry of External
Affairs with the International Department of the
Communist Party of China. Other visit under this
programme was that of Member of the Secretariat of the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of China,
He Yong (6-12 April 2006). From the Indian side, Chief
Ministers of Uttranchal N. D. Tiwari and Chief Minister
of Haryana Bhupinder Singh Hooda visited China from
9-16 July 2006 and 26 November-2 December 2006
respectively.

Bilateral cooperation in the field of agriculture received a
fillip when during the visit of Chinese Agriculture Minister
Du Qinglin in March 2006, an MoU was signed for
cooperation in the field of agriculture. In addition, an
MoU on cooperation in the field of agricultural research
between the Indian Council of Agricultural Research and
the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences was signed
in November 2006 during the visit of the Chinese
President. Cooperation in the oil and gas sector received
a boost as a result of the visit of Minister for Petroleum
and Natural Gas Murli Deora to China from 13-18
December 2006, which provided an opportunity for
detailed discussions with Ma Kai, Chairman, National
Development Reform Commission. An MoU was signed
under which the two sides agreed to encourage their
energy enterprises to cooperate in the fields of global oil
trade and shipment, joint exploration and production,
development of oil and natural gas resources in third
countries, joint participation in existing oil and gas fields
of either party, and bilateral cooperation in third countries
in the field of oil and natural gas equipments.

The year 2006 was designated as the Year of India-China
Friendship, and a series of cultural events were organised
by the Indian side in China to celebrate the occasion.
These included: a photo-exhibition on India in Beijing
(May 2006); an ‘India Cultural Festival’ in Peking
University (May 2006); an Indian Film Festival in Beijing,
Shanghai and Luoyang (August–October 2006); National
Book Trust of India participated in the Beijing
International Book Fair (August-September 2006); and
an academic seminar on Indian Literature in Peking
University (October 2006). On 26 December 2006,
Minister of Tourism and Culture, Ambika Soni and
Executive Vice Foreign Minister of China, Dai Bingguo
jointly inaugurated in Beijing, a major exhibition of rare
specimens of ancient Indian art entitled “Treasures of
Ancient India.” The new Education Executive Plan (EEP)
was signed between the Ministry of Human Resource
Development and the Chinese Ministry of Education in
November 2006. Currently a maximum of 25 scholars on
each side are exchanged under the EEP. The start of the

Cooperation in the area of science and technology was
further strengthened with the visit of Minister of Science
and Technology and Earth Sciences, Kapil Sibal to China
from 6-12 September 2006 during which he met his
Chinese counter part, Xu Guanhua, Minister of Science
and Technology and signed an MoU on Science and
Technology Cooperation, which provides for the
establishment of a Joint Steering Committee to be headed
by the Ministers on both sides to coordinate and structure
the development of cooperation in this area. Four areas
were identified in which the two countries would
undertake joint projects including: (i) earthquake
engineering, (ii) climate change and weather forecasting,
(iii) nano technology with focus on advanced materials,
and (iv) bio-technology and medicine with focus on bionano.
10

Back to Contents

India’s Neighbours

favour, with India almost exporting twice the value of its
imports from Hong Kong. This trend continued into 200607. In the first quarter of April-June 2006, Indian imports
and exports stood at US$ 565 million and US$ 1036
million respectively.

construction of Indian-style Buddhist shrine in Luoyang
is another achievement of the Friendship Year. The
groundbreaking ceremony took place in April 2006 and
basic construction has been completed. The temple is
expected to be completed in 2007. Renovation of Xuan
Zang Memorial in Nalanda has been completed with the
Chinese side providing assistance, and is to be inaugurated
in February 2007. These two monuments are likely to be
enduring symbols of the age-old bonds of friendship and
exchanges between the two countries.

A large number of Indian cultural programmes,
showcasing Indian music and dance were organised in
Hong Kong as well as Macau. These included events like
the recital by U.Shrinivas, Bollywood music director AR
Rehman, Amjad Ali Khan, etc. In June 2006, the
Consulate and the Hong Kong Leisure and Culture
Department co-organized a programme “Culture in
Motion” showcasing the various dance and music forms
of India. A Kaleliya dance troupe from Rajasthan
participated in the Macau International Youth Dance
Festival.

Hong Kong
Friendly and cooperative interactions with Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic
of China continued. Hong Kong remained an important
trade partner for India. Trade in 2006 registered a robust
growth of 23 percent. A number of delegations from the
Central and State levels, including a Parliamentary
delegation led by Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha
Rahman Khan, a delegation led by Chief Minister of
Uttaranchal, Power Secretary and others visited Hong
Kong for promoting trade, investment and tourism.

Maldives
Our bilateral relations with the Maldives continued to be
close and friendly. Both India and the Maldives were
engaged in developing mutual understanding and closer
cooperation through exchange of high level visits and
organizing training programmes.

There was extensive representation from the Central and
State Governments for the PATA Travel Mart 2006, at
which Minister of Tourism of Meghalaya Robert G.
Lyngdoh, Minister of Tourism of Pondicherry Malladi
Krishna Rao, Minister of Tourism of Tamil Nadu Suresh
Rajan, Minister of Tourism of Uttaranchal Lt. Gen. (Retd.)
T.P.S. Rawat and Minister of State for Tourism of Gujarat
C.D. Patel were present. Substantial business delegations
were from the Apparel Export Promotion Council for the
Hong Kong Fashion Week, from the leather sector for
the Asia Pacific Leather Fair, from the Handloom and
Handicrafts Export Promotion Council for the Houseware
Fair, and from the Gem & Jewellery Export Promotion
Council for the Hong Kong Jewellery and Watch Fair. A
large official and industry delegation also participated in
the International Telecommunication Union’s Telecom
World 2006 on 4-8 December 2006.

Defence Minister Pranab Mukherjee visited Maldives on
15-16 April 2006 to participate in the transfer ceremony
of INS Tillanchang, a fast attack craft, to Maldives. Besides
holding talks with Maldivian Minister of Defence and
National Security, Defence Minister had also called on
President Gayoom and Foreign Minister of Maldives Dr.
Ahmed Shaheed. EAM visited Maldives on 10 January
2007 in the context of SAARC Summit to be hosted by
India in April 2007. EAM met President Gayoom and
discussed matters of bilateral interest. From the Maldivian
side, Dr. Ahmed Shaheed, Foreign Minister paid an official
visit to India from 23-28 October 2006. During his visit
Dr. Shaheed called on the Prime Minister, Defence
Minister and Leader of Opposition, Lok Sabha. Dr.
Shaheed again visited India from 25-28 November 2006
on a private visit to attend an event organized by a think
tank. Dr. Shaheed called on EAM on 27 November 2006
and exchanged views on matters of mutual interest. Ismail
Shafeen, Minister of Defence and National Security of
Maldives visited India from 7-10 January 2007. He met
Defence Minister and EAM and discussed matters of
mutual interest. President Gayoom of Maldives visited
India from 27 January-1 February 2007 as the head of the

During the year 2005-06 (for which trade figures for full
year are available), Indian exports to Hong Kong have
increased to US$ 4.471 billion from US$ 3.692 billion in
2004-05. Imports from Hong Kong in 2005-06 increased
from US$ 1.730 billion to US$ 2.207 billion in 2004-05.
Total bilateral trade in 2005-06 was US$ 6.678, marking
an annual increase of 23%. Trade balance is in India’s
11

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

Maldivian delegation to attend the Satyagraha
Conference.

among Bangladesh-China-India-Myanmar (BCIM) was
held in New Delhi on 30-31 March 2006. U Maung Myint,
Deputy Foreign Minister of Myanmar attended the
meeting. He held discussions with officials of the
Government of India on matters pertaining to mutual
interest.

The cooperation between the two countries in developing
the human resource development and infrastructure
facilities in Maldives got impetus with the signing of a
MoU on 10 July 2006 for setting up the Faculty of
Hospitality and Tourism Studies, a hotel management
training institute, in Maldives with Indian assistance to
the tune of Rs. 31 crores approximately. A 5-member
Maldivian delegation led by Mohamed Waheeddeen,
Minister of Atolls Development of the Government of
Maldives visited Kerala from 16-18 July 2006 to study
practices in local governance and decentralization
procedures.

Major General Hla Tun, Minister for Finance and Revenue
led a Myanmar delegation to India from 3-6 May 2006 to
attend the 39th Annual Meeting of Asian Development
Bank. The delegation also attended the meeting of ViceGovernors of Central Banks of ASEAN+3 and Ninth
Finance Ministers Meeting of ASEAN+3. Brig. General
Tin Naing Thein visited India on 12-13 May 2006 to
participate in the Second Joint Trade Committee Meeting
held in New Delhi. Myanmar delegation led by Foreign
Minister U Nyan Win participated in the Ninth Ministerial
Meeting of BIMSTEC Member countries held in New
Delhi on 9 August 2006.

India continued to provide training facilities to Maldivian
nationals in areas such as defence, police, education, etc.
under its aid assistance programmes.

Myanmar

A delegation led by Shyam Saran, the then Foreign
Secretary visited Myanmar to attend the Seventh Foreign
Office Consultations from 18-21 June 2006. The
delegation-level talks were held on 18 June 2006 at
Yangon. The two sides had comprehensive discussions on
all areas of mutual interest and concern. Both sides
expressed mutual resolve and commitment to further
expansion and diversification of bilateral relations and,
in this context, highlighted the importance of continuing
bilateral high-level exchanges.

India’s policy to develop ties with Myanmar was
strengthened by the visit of President Dr.A.P.J. Abdul
Kalam to Myanmar in March 2006. It was the first visit
by an Indian President to Myanmar and first Head of State/
Head of Government level visit from India to Myanmar
after Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi’s visit in 1987. The
President had delegation-level discussion and also têteà-tête with Senior General Than Shwe. During the
delegation-level discussions, other attendees from
Myanmar side were Vice-Chairman of the SPDC, Vice
Sr. General, Mong Aung, Member of the SPDC Council
General Thura Shwe Mann, Prime Minister General Soe
Win, Secretary-I of the SPDC Lt. General Thein Sein,
Foreign Minister U Nyan Win. Heads of State of the two
countries witnessed the signing of - (i)Framework
Agreement for Mutual Cooperation in the field of Remote
Sensing between Government of India and Government
of Union of Myanmar; (ii) Memorandum of
Understanding on Cooperation in the Petroleum Sector
between Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas of India
and Ministry of Energy Myanmar; (iii)Memorandum of
Understanding on Cooperation in Buddhist Studies
between the Indian Council for Cultural Relations(ICCR)
and Ministry of Religious Affairs of Myanmar. President
also visited Mandalay.

A Myanmar delegation led by Brig. General Phone Swe,
Deputy Minister for Home Affairs visited India to attend
the Twelfth National Level Meeting between the two
countries. The Indian delegation was headed by the Home
Secretary. The discussions focussed on effective border
management between the two countries. The Fourteenth
Sectoral-level Meeting was held from 28-30 May 2006 at
Monywa and Mandalay in Myanmar. A ten-member
Indian delegation participated in the meeting.
A goodwill delegation led by Defence Secretary visited
Myanmar from 20-24 September 2006. He called on ViceChairman of the SPDC, Deputy Commander-in-Chief
(Army), Vice Senior General Maung Aye and Deputy
Minister Major General Kyi Win at Nay Pyi Taw.
A two-member delegation from Ministry of Finance visited
Myanmar in May 2006 to hold first round of discussions

The Sixth forum on Regional Economic Cooperation
12

Back to Contents

The President Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam with the Senior General Than Shwe at the
Parliament House building in Yangon on 9 March 2006.

The Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh receiving the
Prime Minister of Nepal G.P. Koirala in New Delhi on 6 June 2006.

13

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

External Affairs Minister Pranab Mukherjee visited
Myanmar from 19-21 January 2007 at the invitation of U
Nyan Win, Foreign Minister of Union of Myanmar.

to finalise the Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement
between India and Myanmar. Substantial work on the first
draft was completed. A five-member delegation from
Government of Mizoram led by the Secretary, Trade &
Commerce Department visited Myanmar in May 2006
and had meetings with the Central Executive Committee
members of Union of Myanmar Federation of Chamber
of Commerce & Industry (UMFCCI), Myanmar Timber
& Forests Products Merchant Association and Indian
Association of Myanmar. A two-member delegation from
TERI visited Myanmar from 31 July-3 August 2006 for
installation of bio mass gasifier (phase-II) for generating
electricity and water pumping in Kokke. A four-member
delegation from Union of Myanmar Federation of
Chambers of Commerce & Industry attended ASEAN
Trade Mission for Business Linkages and Partnerships
between ASEAN and India SME held in New Delhi from
22-25 August 2006.

Nepal
The year 2006 witnessed far reaching changes in Nepal
and was a turning point in nation’s history. The restoration
of the House of Representatives and formation of a
government consisting of the Seven Party Alliance under
the leadership of Prime Minister Girija Prasad Koirala in
April-May, 2006, and subsequent political developments
opened a new chapter in Nepal’s political history. They
were a tribute to the courage, sacrifice and determination
of the people of Nepal to see a return of multi-party
democracy in Nepal.
Soon after assuming office, the Seven Party Alliance and
Government of Nepal began negotiations with the Maoists
to end the 11-year old insurgency. The peace talks
culminated in the signing of a Comprehensive Peace
Agreement between the Government of Nepal and CPN
(Maoist) on 21 November 2006. The Agreement
addressed the major issues of arms management and
political reforms leading upto elections to a Constituent
Assembly by May-June, 2007. In pursuance of this, the
interim Constitution was promulgated on 15 January 2007
and an interim Legislature, with inclusion of
representatives of CPN (Maoist) has been constituted.

The Sixth Meeting of Survey Departments of India and
Myanmar was held in New Delhi on 27-28 November
2006. The Indian delegation was headed by Major General
M. Gopal Rao, Surveyor General of India and the
Myanmar side was headed by U Myint Thein, DirectorGeneral, Survey Department, Ministry of Agriculture and
Irrigation. Both sides discussed issues in respect of joint
inspection, repairs, restoration, reconstruction and
maintenance of boundary pillars on the India-Myanmar
Boundary.

India closely followed the events in Nepal. India’s
approach was to support efforts which would restore
political stability in the country and place Nepal on the
path of economic recovery. India welcomed the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement as a significant step in
Nepal’s journey towards a settled constitutional order in
which the people of Nepal could realize their aspirations
for peace and prosperity. The Government of India was
of the view that the people of Nepal should have the right
to freely choose and decide their future without the fear
of gun. India conveyed its readiness to extend its support
to the efforts of the Government of Nepal.

India remains committed to providing assistance in
developing infrastructure within Myanmar. A number of
projects are under consideration / implementation
between the two countries including the Kaladan MultiModal Transit Transport Project, Trilateral Highway
Project, resurfacing of Tamu-Kalewa-Kalemyo Road,
upgradation of Rhi-Tidim, Rhi-Falam Roads, Tamanthi
Hydel Project.
Co-operation and exchanges in the defence sector
continued through the mechanism of border liaison
meetings. The highlight in this sector was visit of General
Thura Shwe Mann, Chief of Joint Staff of Union of
Myanmar from 4-9 December 2006.

The year witnessed several high-level exchanges. Dr.
Karan Singh, MP visited Nepal as Prime Minister’s Special
Envoy in April 2006. Following the establishment of the
government of the Seven Party Alliance, Prime Minister
Girija Prasad Koirala paid his first visit abroad to India
from 6-9 June 2006. India announced an economic
assistance package of around Rs. 1000 crore to address

Major General Maung Oo, Home Minister of Myanmar
visited India from 17-22 December 2006. He held
delegation-level talks with Shivraj Patil, Home Minister
of India. He visited Bangalore and Hyderabad also.
14

Back to Contents

India’s Neighbours

the immediate needs and priorities of the Government of
Nepal. Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs, KP Sharma Oli paid a goodwill visit to India from
5-8 November 2006. Foreign Secretary S. Menon visited
Nepal from 29 November-1 December 2006.
External Affairs Minister Pranab Mukherjee visited
Kathmandu on 17 December 2006 to personally extend
an invitation to the Prime Minister of Nepal for the 14th
SAARC Summit in India.

were invited for training programme in different sectors
under ITEC, and the Colombo Plan. During 2006-2007,
the number of scholarships/seats under the Mahatma
Gandhi and Golden Jubilee Scholarship Scheme for
meritorious students for pursuing undergraduate courses
in Nepal was doubled to 1000 and 100 seats respectively.

Pakistan

India continued to contribute to the development efforts
of Government of Nepal by undertaking development
projects in the areas of infrastructure, health, rural and
community development, education under the Small
Development Project Scheme that already has more than
160 projects implemented or under implementation. Two
big projects viz. Bir Hospital Expansion at the cost of Rs.
65 crores and Manmohan Adhikari Polytechnic at the
cost of Rs 20 crores were under implementation, while
the Mahendra-Nagar Tanakpur Road Link and Hetauda
Polytechnic projects were at take off stage. The
Government laid particular emphasis on the improvement
of border infrastructure as well as initiating work on other
infrastructure projects in Nepal in consultation with the
Government of Nepal.

Constructive Engagement
The Composite Dialogue on eight major subjects viz.,
Peace and Security including Confidence Building
Measures (CBMs), Jammu & Kashmir, Terrorism and Drug
trafficking, Friendly Exchanges, Economic and
Commercial cooperation, Tulbul Navigation Project, Sir
Creek and Siachen, gave a structural basis to deepen and
expand the bilateral relations since 2004. The third round
of the Composite Dialogue commenced with the meeting
of the Foreign Secretaries in January 2006 and concluded
in November 2006 when the Foreign Secretaries met again
in New Delhi. The third round helped further the
engagement between the two countries and resulted in
the signing of a Revised Shipping Protocol and the
initialing of an agreement on ‘Reducing the Risk from
Accidents relating to Nuclear Weapons’. A
communication link established earlier between the Coast
Guard of India and Pakistan Maritime Security Agency
was operationalised. There was satisfaction at the
implementation of the Agreement on the Pre-notification
of the Flight Testing of Ballistic Missiles. The transport
links established in the previous rounds of the dialogue
continued to operate successfully, facilitating the
movement of the people. While the Thar Express
witnessed substantial growth in demand, the one-way
passenger traffic per week at one point rising to more than
a thousand, India renewed its request for opening this
route for trade. Further links across LoC between Kargil
& Skardu and Jammu & Sialkot were awaiting Pakistan’s
acceptance. Poonch-Rawalakot bus across the LoC came
into operation on 20 June 2006. Efforts were also underway
to start Srinagar–Muzaffarabad truck service across the
LoC for trade.

India-Nepal cooperation in the area of human resource
development and training was strengthened further. Over
250 scholarships were provided to Nepalese nationals for
undergoing various courses at the post-secondary level.
Professionals and officials of the Government of Nepal

Other important Developments
There were further discussions on issues such as Siachen
and Sir Creek. On Sir Creek, Experts met in Islamabad
in December 2006 and agreed on the coordinates of a
Joint Survey to commence from 15 January 2007. It was

The India-Nepal Treaty of Transit was renewed in April
2006 for a period of seven years. Discussions began on
renewing the India-Nepal Treaty of Trade, due for renewal
in March, 2007.
Bilateral mechanisms dealing with various aspects of our
bilateral cooperation – border management and security,
trade and commerce, transit, water resources and
economic cooperation were revived and reinvigorated.
Bilateral trade continued to remain robust and was on
the upswing. By the end of the Nepalese fiscal year 200405, bilateral trade with India of US$ 1.8 billion accounted
for 65.8 percent of Nepal’s total external trade. India’s
share in Nepal’s imports stood at 64.9 percent. India, on
the other hand, absorbed about 67.7 percent of Nepal’s
exports.

15

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

also agreed that the survey would verify the outermost
points of coastline of both countries based on equidistance
method. Further ideas on Siachen were also exchanged
during the third round of the Composite Dialogue both
at Defence Secretary and Foreign Secretary talks. A final
determination on the Baglihar Hydroelectric Project by
the Neutral Expert was scheduled to be delivered in
February 2007. The two Governments also agreed in
principle to expand the list of pilgrimage sites to be visited
by pilgrims from both sides by revising the Protocol signed
in 1974. India was awaiting a response from Pakistan to a
suggested expanded list of such religious shrines. Revision
of the Visa Agreement and of the Protocol on Consular
Access was under consideration. All these developments
were reflective of India’s desire for a broad based relation
with Pakistan so as to create an atmosphere of trust, peace,
friendship and stability – a vision that was declared by
the Indian Prime Minister in March 2006. The fourth
round of the Composite Dialogue was scheduled to
commence in March 2007.

Commerce and Trade
Promotion of commercial interaction was an important
component of India’s policy of engagement with Pakistan.
The financial year 2006-07 witnessed substantial growth
in bilateral trade, from US$ 320 million during AprilAugust of 2005 to US$ 759 million during the same period
in 2006, an increase of 137%. Exports from Pakistan
registered a rise of 122% though the trade balance
remained in favour of India. Pakistan expanded its positive
list allowing import of Indian goods from 773 to 1075
items, though the Wagah land border continued to be
opened by Pakistan only for a handful of select goods such
as onions, tomatoes, potatoes, garlic, meat and a few
others. When the Commerce Secretaries of the two
countries met in June 2006, India renewed its offer to
conclude a Mutual Recognition Agreement on
standardization so that Pakistan’s perceived concerns on
non-tariff barriers could be addressed. Pakistan, however,
continued with its policy of linking economic and
commercial engagement to political issues. Pakistan also
did not meet its obligations under South Asia Free Trade
Agreement (SAFTA) when it refused to extend tariff
concessions under it to India. Pakistan also did not agree
to transit for trade with Afghanistan and beyond.

Humanitarian Approach to Prisoners
Another achievement of the dialogue process was the
continued commitment to the understanding that the
prisoners issue would be dealt with on a humanitarian
basis by notifying the arrests immediately, providing
consular access within three months and releasing
prisoners as soon as the prison term was over. Prisoners
and fishermen were released in May/June and again in
December 2006. There was disappointment, however,
when Pakistan released only 20 fishermen in June 2006
though the national status of 240 fishermen had been
confirmed by India. Foreign Secretaries during their talks
in November 2006 agreed to release once again eligible
prisoners in each other’s custody by 25 December 2006
and to examine the release of prisoners charged with minor
offences. Accordingly India, on 22 December 2006,
released 24 Pakistani prisoners, along with three children,
who had completed their sentence and all 30 Pakistani
fishermen whose national status had been confirmed. India
was disappointed a second time when Pakistan released
only 50 of the 412 Indian fishermen whose national status
had been confirmed and 20 prisoners on 23 December
2006. Pakistan released another 115 fishermen on 10
January 2007. There were 367 Indian fishermen still in
custody in Pakistan.

The Summit Meeting in Havana
The Mumbai serial blasts on 11 July 2006 which claimed
about 200 lives pointed towards cross-border terrorist
groups. These blasts resulted in the postponement of the
Foreign Secretary talks which were due in July 2006. In the
aftermath of this, Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh met
President Musharraf in Havana on 16 September 2006 in
the margins of the NAM Summit and discussed the Mumbai
blasts. While strongly condemning all acts of terrorism, they
agreed upon an India-Pakistan counter-terrorism
institutional mechanism. The two leaders also directed that
the Composite Dialogue be resumed, and in pursuance of
this directive the Foreign Secretary talks were held on 1415 November 2006 in New Delhi. A 3-member joint antiterror mechanism headed at Additional Secretaries level
was put in place. India attaches considerable significance
to this mechanism as the forward movement in constructive
engagement with Pakistan would be pivoted on Pakistan’s
sincerity and commitment to cooperate with India in
fighting terrorism.
16

Back to Contents

The Union Minister of External Affairs Pranab Mukherjee calls on the President of the Democratic Socialist
Republic of Sri Lanka Mahinda Rajapakse in New Delhi on 28 November 2006.

The Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh with the President of Pakistan Gen. Pervez Musharraf at
Havana on 16 September 2006. The Minister of State for External Affairs Anand Sharma is also seen.

17

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

EAM’s Visit to Pakistan
Taking forward the constructive engagement with
Pakistan, External Affairs Minister Pranab Mukherjee
visited Pakistan on 13-14 January 2007 to convey
invitation to attend the 14th SAARC Summit in New
Delhi on 3-4 April 2007 and also to review the progress
achieved in the third round of the Composite Dialogue.
He held delegation level talks on a wide range of bilateral
issues and also called on President Musharraf and Prime
Minister Shaukat Aziz. He extended an invitation to
Pakistan Foreign Minister to visit India for the 5th Joint
Commission meeting scheduled to meet in 2007.

Sri Lanka
India-Sri Lanka relations continued to be further
strengthened with expansion in political, economic and
cultural linkages. The period saw exchange of several visits
at the highest political level between the two countries.
President Mahinda Rajapakse visited India from 25-29
November 2006 and held discussions with the Prime
Minister, Chairman UPA, Leader of Opposition, External
Affairs Minister and other senior political leaders and
officials. At the delegation-level talks headed by the
External Affairs Minister and his counterpart, discussions
were held on all aspects of bilateral relations. Several ongoing economic projects between the two countries were
also reviewed. Earlier, Foreign Secretary Shivshankar
Menon paid a visit to Colombo on 23 November 2006
and held discussions with the President, Prime Minister,
Leader of Opposition, Foreign Minister and senior officials.
President Rajapakse and Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan
Singh had also met on 16 September 2006 on the sidelines
of the 14 th Non-Aligned Movement Summit held in
Havana. There were several other visits from either side.
Foreign Minister of Sri Lanka paid visits to India in May,
June and August 2006. The Leader of Opposition Ranil
Wickremesinghe also visited India in April, July and
November/December 2006 and met senior leaders. From
the Indian side the visits included those of Finance
Minister P. Chidambaram in September 2006 to attend
Commonwealth Finance Ministers’ Meeting, Minister of
Panchayati Raj and Youth Affairs & Sports Mani Shankar
Aiyar in September 2006 to deliver the Annual
Bandaranaike Commemorative Lecture and Minister for
Water Resources Saifuddin Soz for attending an
International Conference on Rainwater Harvesting in
September 2006. The then Foreign Secretary Shyam Saran

visited the country in July 2006. EAM visited Colombo
on 9-10 January 2007 to extend the invitation for SAARC
Summit to the Sri Lanka President Mahinda Rajapakse.
Besides President, he met Prime Minister and Foreign
Minister. Sri Lankan Prime Minister Ratnasiri
Wickramanayake visited India in January 2007 to attend
Satyagraha conference. Newly appointed Sri Lankan
Foreign Minister Rohitha Bogollagama visited India on
30-31 January 2007. The bilateral visits from both sides
provided opportunities to review bilateral relations on a
constant basis. The Sri Lankan side kept India briefed on
the internal situation in Sri Lanka and the peace process.
India reiterated its firm commitment to the unity,
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Sri Lanka and
stressed the need for a negotiated political solution, which
will meet the aspirations of all communities. India
expressed its conviction that there cannot be a military
solution to the ethnic problem and that political dialogue
was the only way to resolve outstanding issues. India also
offered to share its constitutional experience with Sri
Lanka in its quest of resolving the ethnic issue. A
delegation of the All Party Representatives Committee
visited India from 25-30 October 2006 to study the Indian
model of devolution of powers and Panchayati Raj.
On the economic side, the momentum generated by Free
Trade Agreement (FTA) was sustained. Bilateral trade
for the period April-October 2006 exceeded US$ 1 billion.
Negotiations on a Comprehensive Economic Partnership
Agreement (CEPA), which will widen and deepen the
Free Trade Agreement by including trade and services
and investments, continued. India became the 2nd largest
overall investor in Sri Lanka. The major Indian investors
include Indian Oil Corporation, ICICI, SBI, TATA,
CEAT, Nicholas Piramal and VSNL. India has extended
a number of credit lines to Sri Lanka in the past. The
US$ 31 million credit line for supply of wheat and buses
and the US$ 150 million credit line for purchase of
petroleum products were fully utilized. India continued
to play a role in developing infrastructure in Sri Lanka.
The BSNL-Sri Lanka Telecom submarine cable was
inaugurated augmenting the voice and data transfer
capacity. Cooperation between India and Sri Lanka in civil
aviation and tourism received a boost as the two sides
agreed to further increase the number of flights between
the two countries. During the bilateral civil aviation
negotiations held in Colombo in October 2006, India
18

Back to Contents

India’s Neighbours

boats and nets to Tsunami affected people is also under
implementation. These projects would benefit all
communities and would broadly conform to the
Millennium Development Goals identified by the
Government of Sri Lanka. A new scheme of awarding
Mahatma Gandhi scholarships to 100 students each year
from all the 25 districts of Sri Lanka has been instituted.
The selected students will receive a financial assistance
for a period of two years to enable them to successfully
pursue their ‘A’ level courses. These scholarships are in
addition to various other scholarships provided by India
to meritorious Sri Lankan students.

offered additional 7 weekly flights to Mumbai and
Bangalore and 7 new weekly flights to Coimbatore and
Pune. This is in addition to the permission to operate daily
flights to six metropolitan cities and unlimited flights to
18 tourist destinations in India. India also accounted for
the largest number of tourist arrivals to Sri Lanka. The
exchange of information on the Sethusamudram Ship
Channel Project continued. India also offered two berths
to Sri Lanka for the next Antarctic expedition and agreed
to cover Sri Lanka in the tsunami early warning system
which will become operational in 2007. On 29 December
2006, NTPC and Ceylon Electricity Board signed
Memorandum of Agreement in Colombo on setting up of
a 2x 250 MW thermal power plant in Trincomalee.

On the cultural side, the regular activities of the Indian
Cultural Center including visits by eminent persons from
the world of art and culture and cultural troupes from
India continued. Dr. Karan Singh, President, Indian
Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR), visited Colombo
to deliver the first Lakshman Kadirgamar Memorial
Lecture on 10 August 2006.

India’s development assistance to Sri Lanka was further
sought to be expanded through the new initiative of
providing assistance to Small Development Projects. India
provided assistance to Sri Lanka in setting up 20 Nenasalas
(computer centres). Another project on supplying fishing

19

Back to Contents

2

South East Asia and the Pacific

Australia

Air Staff, Air Chief Marshal S.P.Tyagi from 6-10 December
2006; and Chief Minister of Uttranchal N.D. Tiwari from
14-17 December 2006.

India-Australia bilateral relations continued to develop
further with several high level bilateral visits during the
year.

From Australia, Minister for Industry, Tourism &
Resources, Ian Macfarlane visited India from 20-24
November 2006. The Minister attended an international
mining exhibition in Kolkata and met several Indian
leaders including Minister of Commerce and Industry and
Chief Minister of West Bengal. Several delegations from
the States of Australia also visited India.

Minister of State for Petroleum and Natural Gas Dinsha
J. Patel visited Australia in April 2006 for roadshows aimed
at promoting investor interest in the petroleum and coal
sectors in India. Minister of State for Non-Conventional
Energy Sources Vilas Muttemwar visited Australia from
18 -21 September 2006 to attend the Global Wind Power
2006 Conference in Adelaide. Minister of Overseas Indian
Affairs, Vayalar Ravi visited Australia from 15-18 October
2006. He had meetings with Minister for Immigration &
Multicultural Affairs Senator Amanda Vanstone; Minister
for Education, Science & Training Julie Bishop; and Lord
Mayor of Melbourne, John So. The Minister participated
in the Deepavali function at the Federal Parliament of
Australia and interacted with Indian community members
in Sydney, Canberra and Melbourne, and invited them to
attend the Pravasi Bharatiya Divas in Delhi. Finance
Minister P. Chidambaram paid a bilateral visit to Australia
from 15–17 November 2006, prior to attending the G-20
Ministerial Meeting in Melbourne. The Finance Minister
called on Prime Minister John Howard and met Treasurer
Peter Costello. The Finance Minister also interacted with
Australian and Indian business and industry
representatives in Sydney and Melbourne. Dr. Y.V. Reddy,
Governor of Reserve Bank of India also attended the G20 Meeting of Finance Ministers and Central Bank
Governors.

India-Australia trade relations continued to grow. Bilateral
trade was A$ 8.2 billion in 2005. Indian companies
continued to show investment interest in Australia
particularly in the mining, chemicals and hospitality
sectors. Business delegations from CII, FICCI and
NASSCOM visited Australia. Indian companies also
discussed the possibility of purchase of gas and investment
in the oil and gas sector in Australia. There were visits of
several business delegations also from Australia to India.
Many Australian companies set up offices and offshore
centers in India.
Relations between India and Australia in the field of
defence continued to grow. Chief of Naval Staff and
Chairman, Chiefs of Staff Committee, Admiral Arun
Prakash, visited Australia in May 2006. INS Tabar, a
guided missile frigate, visited Australian ports in June 2006
and conducted exercises with Australian Navy.
The second resident Consulate General of India in
Australia was opened in Melbourne in September 2006.

Other visits included a delegation of Chairpersons of State
Public Service Commissions of Tamil Nadu, Karnataka,
Maharashtra and Nagaland in April 2006; a Legislative
Assembly delegation from Chattisgarh in April 2006; a
delegation from the National Defence College in May
2006; Dr. K. Kasturirangan, MP and Director, National
Institute of Advanced Studies in July 2006 for the annual
K. R. Narayanan Oration; a Legislative Assembly
delegation from Maharashtra in October 2006; Chief of

India and Australia continued to interact at international
and multilateral organisations, including in the framework
of the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), East Asia Summit,
WTO and Asia-Pacific Partnership on Climate and Clean
Development.

Brunei Darussalam
Brunei Darussalam is the smallest country in ASEAN with
20

Back to Contents

South East Asia and the Pacific

whom India enjoys cordial and friendly relations with
active interactions in the political, defence and
commercial fields.

energy, oil and gas, defence, education and training and
cultural exchanges. The two sides also exchanged views
on regional and international situations.

The Minister of Foreign Affairs & Trade-II, Pehin Lim
Jock Seng paid an official visit to India from 10-14 October
2006. He held meetings with Minister of State for External
Affairs, E. Ahamed, Minister of State for Communications
& IT, Dr. Shakeel Ahmad and Minister of Defence. He
participated in a Roundtable at FICCI and also visited
the Software Technology Park in NOIDA. He also called
on the Leader of Opposition L.K. Advani.

Defence cooperation between India and Cambodia
entered an intense and productive phase. Coming close
on the heels of the visit of General Ke Kim Yan,
Commander-in-Chief, Royal Cambodian Armed Forces
earlier in the year 2006, Vice Admiral Sureesh Mehta,
Flag Officer Commanding-in-Chief of Eastern Naval
Command visited Cambodia from 13-18 June 2006. He
paid a courtesy call on Minister of National Defence Tea
Banh. Simultaneously, two Indian naval ships INS Rana
and INS Jyoti paid a goodwill visit to Sihanoukville Port
from 15-19 June 2006. During the port call, the Indian
Navy organized training exercises on INS Rana for the
Cambodian Navy. Further high-level exchanges in the
defence field including a return visit by Chairman, COSC,
Air Chief Marshal S.P. Tyagi, are in the pipeline.

Dr. Shakeel Ahmad, Minister of State for
Communications & IT participated in the 2nd TELMIN
+ India Meeting which reviewed the ongoing partnership
between ASEAN and India in the field of Information
and Communication Technology. On the sidelines of the
meeting, MOS (C&IT) also held bilateral meetings with
his counterparts from Brunei, China, Japan, Myanmar and
South Korea.

The Cambodia-India Entrepreneurship Development
Centre was set up in Phnom Penh by India under IAI
programme. The Centre has since been operationalised
and two courses for training the Cambodian entrepreneurs
have been completed.

Two Indian Naval ships INS Rana and INS Kulish from
the Eastern Fleet of the Indian Navy paid a goodwill visit
to Brunei from 1-4 June 2006.

Cambodia

Tourism Minister of Cambodia Lay Prohas led a sixmember delegation to India from 16-20 July 2006 to
organize ‘road shows’ in New Delhi and Bangalore to
promote tourism from India to Cambodia. He met Ambika
Soni, Minister of Tourism & Culture, for discussions on
bilateral cooperation in the field of tourism and culture.

India’s bilateral relations with Cambodia were further
strengthened through regular interactions and exchange
of visits. In the spirit of close and excellent political
relations existing between the two countries, Cambodia
continued to lend its support to India at international
fora, most notably to India’s candidature to the UN
Human Rights Council. There were several high level
exchanges between the two countries during the year.

Prof. S.D. Muni, representative of the Ministry of External
Affairs visited Cambodia from 20-22 October 2006 to take
part in the Open Academic Forum organized on the
occasion of the 15 th Anniversary of the Paris Peace
Agreements that brought the Cambodian conflict to an
end. Prof. Muni presented a paper at the Forum
highlighting India’s role in the Cambodian peace process.

The first meeting of the India-Cambodia Joint
Commission on Trade, Economic, Scientific and
Technological Cooperation was held in Phnom Penh on
25-26 May 2006. Minister of State for External Affairs,
E. Ahamed, led a delegation of officials from the Ministries
of External Affairs, Commerce & Industry, Agriculture,
Finance, ICCR, and National Informatics Centre. Besides
co-chairing the JCM, MOS called on Prime Minister Hun
Sen and other Ministers. At the JCM, the two delegations
discussed cooperation in the areas of agriculture, forestry
and fisheries, tourism, civil aviation links, information
technology, investment, trade and economic cooperation,
water resources and meteorology, industry, mines and

A twelve-member Kepemchim Kirnnam cultural troupe
led by Evaristo Cirilo Goes, sponsored by the Indian
Council for Cultural Relations, visited Cambodia from
24-27 September 2006. The troupe gave two performances
at the prestigious Chaktomouk Convention Hall in
Phnom Penh on 25-26 September 2006.
Seventy-six Cambodian officials were sent to India for
training in various courses under ITEC programme during
21

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

Defence cooperation between the two countries received
an impetus with the visit of Indian naval ship INS ‘Tabar’
to Suva on a goodwill mission from 13-16 July 2006. Fijian
Navy conducted anti-piracy and search and rescue
exercises with the Indian warship.

the year 2005-06. The same numbers of trainees are
expected to avail of ITEC scholarships during 2006-07
also.

Fiji
India’s relations with Fiji go back to the year 1879 when
Indian indentured labourers were brought to Fiji to work
on sugarcane plantations. Their descendants now
comprise 43 percent of the population. India’s relations
with Fiji have been steadily improving since the visit of
the Prime Minister of Fiji to India in October 2005. There
were several other high-level exchanges between India
and Fiji leading to further consolidation of bilateral
relations.

On cultural front, ICCR sponsored cultural troupes to
perform Bharatnatyam and Veena recitals in Fiji in July
2006. Their performances were widely acclaimed by the
entire cross section of the Fijian society. ICCR also
deputed Prof. A. Gnanam for delivering a key note address
and interaction with the local academicians.
On 5 December 2006, the Fiji Military staged a bloodless
coup ousting the elected government led by Prime
Minister Laisenia Qarase. Military Commodore Josaia
Voreqe Bainimarama declared himself as the Acting
President and assumed all executive powers. On 4 January
2007, Bainimarama returned power to President Ratu
Josefa Iloilo and became interim Prime Minister on 5
January 2007. He has vowed to hold the elections for a
new government soon.

Minister of State for External Affairs, E. Ahamed paid a
bilateral visit to Fiji from 26-28 October 2006 to coincide
with the 18th Post Forum Dialogue Partners’ Meeting of
the Pacific Islands Forum in Nadi. MOS had meetings
with Vice President Ratu Joni Madraiwiwi, Prime Minister
Laisenia Qarase and Minister of Foreign Affairs and
External Trade Kaliopate Tavola and discussed matters
of mutual interest. A Memorandum of Understanding on
Development Cooperation between the Republic of India
and Fiji Islands was also signed during the visit of MOS.

Indonesia
Indonesia is the largest country in ASEAN with whom
we share a maritime boundary, ancient cultural links,
memories of recent colonization and strategic interests
stretching well into the future. Indian businesses are well
established in this country from the 1970’s although a
wave of new investments is being witnessed in the last
few years.

Vayalar Ravi, Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs visited
Fiji from 19-21 October 2006. The Minister interacted
with the Fijian scholars and local eminent dignitaries at
the round-table organized by the University of Fiji to
understand and contextualize the particularities of the
Indo-Fijian community. The Minister also met Vice
President Ratu Joni Madraiwiwi and Prime Minister
Laisenia Qarase. The Indian Cultural Centre in Suva was
inaugurated by the Minister on 20 October 2006.

Subsequent to the signing of a Joint Declaration between
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh and Indonesian
President Dr. Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, which
established a New Strategic Partnership between India
and Indonesia in November 2005, the year 2006 witnessed
a steady consolidation of our bilateral relations. The year
also witnessed internal political consolidation and
economic recovery for Indonesia.

Minister for Foreign Affairs and External Trade of Fiji,
Kaliopate Tavola led a high level trade and investment
delegation to India from 20-29 November 2006. The
delegation included the Minister of Commerce and
Industry and the Minister of Labour and Industrial
Relations. The delegation visited New Delhi, Ahmedabad,
Mumbai and Kolkata and held discussions with apex trade
bodies as well as individual business houses. During his
stay in Delhi, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and External
Trade along with his Ministerial colleagues called on
Minister of External Affairs, Minister of Commerce and
Industry, Minister of Tourism and Culture and Minister
of State for External Affairs E. Ahamed.

There were several Ministerial and official visits from both
sides including the visits of Minister of Commerce and
Industry, Kamal Nath and MOS for Agriculture, Dr.
Akhilesh Prasad Singh to Indonesia and the Indonesian
Minister of Finance Sri Mulyani Indrawati to Hyderabad,
India in May 2006 for the ADB General Body meeting.
In the aftermath of the devastating earthquake in
Yogyakarta in May 2006, where nearly 6000 people lost
22

Back to Contents

South East Asia and the Pacific

Course and higher Defence Management Course visited
Indonesia over the year. Several Indian Public Sector
Undertakings including BrahMos Aerospace participated
in the Indo Defence Expo held in Jakarta from 22-25
November 2006. A LEMHANNAS (Indonesian
equivalent of NDC) delegation led by its Governor visited
India in September 2006. Another delegation of 30
members from the Indonesian Police School of
Administration and Leadership visited India in November
2006. Senior Indian Armed Forces officers underwent
training in the Indonesian Staff College. Six Indonesian
officers underwent training in India.

their lives, India announced US$ 2 million as immediate
humanitarian assistance. Two Indian Air Force IL-76
aircrafts carrying tents, blankets, food, relief supplies and
medicines landed on 30 May and 1 June 2006 respectively
at Solo in Indonesia. Further, two Indian naval ships viz.
INS Rajput and INS Tabar arrived at Jakarta carrying a
team of doctors, and relief and medical supplies. INS
Rajput, which arrived on 30 May 2006, was the first naval
vessel to arrive in Indonesia after the earthquake, carrying
relief supplies. Two medical teams from INS Rajput
rendered medical assistance in two villages of the worst
devastated Bantul district and did commendable work in
difficult conditions. Their work was commended by
Minister of Health and the Dy. Governor of Yogyakarta.
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh announced India’s
offer to send a team from the Archaeological Survey of
India to help in the restoration of the damage caused to
the Prambanan Temple Complex by the earthquake in
May 2006. A team from ASI visited Yogyakarta in
September 2006 and made a detailed survey of the
damage.

On commercial side, an 11-member delegation from Basic
Chemicals, Pharmaceuticals & Cosmetics Export
Promotion Council (Chemexil) and Pesticides
Manufacturers & Formulators Association of India
(PMFAI) visited Indonesia from 20-22 June 2006 and
participated in a Buyer-Seller Meet. Subsequently, an 11member Pharmaceuticals Export Promotion Council
(Pharmexcil) delegation visited Indonesia from 28 June4 July 2006. They held a Buyer-Seller Meet and called on
Aburizal Bakrie, Coordinating Minister for People’s
Welfare.

A significant development in the year has been the
frequent visits by Parliamentary delegations from
Indonesia to India. The first was a 7-member delegation
from House Commission I, led by Tosari Widjaja, which
visited India from 14-17 August 2006. They met with
Deputy Speaker of Lok Sabha and Minister of Information
and Broadcasting. The delegation also visited the Plant
of Bharat Electronics Ltd. in Ghaziabad. Another 6member delegation from House Commission VIII, led by
Widada Bujowiryono, visited India from 11-15 September
2006. The delegation met with the MOS for Urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation and visited Rajiv
Gandhi Foundation and Aligarh Muslim University. A
third delegation of the Indonesian Parliament visited India
in December, 2006.

Bilateral economic and commercial cooperation showed
a distinct upward trend in 2006 as several prominent
Indian companies continued to look at Indonesia for
business opportunities. At the Indonesia Infrastructure
Conference-cum-Exhibition 2006 held in Jakarta from 13 November 2006, four major Indian companies, namely
BHEL, ESSAR, Punj Llyod and TCS, participated in both
segments while a few others participated in the
Conference alone. Bajaj Auto formally launched its CNG
three-wheelers in Jakarta in August 2006. State Bank of
India completed its acquisition of controlling shares of
Bank Indomonex in Indonesia. Bilateral trade is expected
to reach US$ 4.3 billion in 2006 as against US$ 3.93 billion
in 2005.

In 2006, defence ties between the two countries have
strengthened further. The Chief of Army Staff Gen. J.J.
Singh visited Indonesia in March 2006. He was received
by the Defence Minister and held talks with his Indonesian
counterparts. A month-long bi-annual India-Indonesia
coordinated patrolling between the navies of the two
countries was held in April and October 2006 respectively.
INS Tir and INS Sujata made port calls at Port Belawan
in Medan in October 2006. Indian delegations from the
Army High Command Course, Naval High Command

For the first time, regional bodies, viz. the Investment
Boards of Riau and Jakarta respectively, sent business
delegations to India. Riau Investment Board was received
by FICCI while the Jakarta Investment Board was received
by CII. More than 40 Indian companies participated in
the 7th Bandung Intertex 2006. Also for the first time two
prominent Indonesian business houses Ciputra and Salim,
invested in India. Adhi Karya won a railway contract in
India.
23

Back
Backto
toContents
Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

in Vientiane and friendly matches of the Indian National
Football (U-20) team from 8-10 October 2006.

India-Indonesia bilateral cooperation in science and
technology continued to strengthen, especially in Space
which remained the centerpiece of bilateral Science and
Technology cooperation. ISRO expanded its facilities at
Biak in the Papua Province of Indonesia by constructing
a Second Telemetry, Tracking and Command Ground
Station for satellites and GSLVs. This is now ready for
inauguration. ISRO launched a piggy back of Indonesia’s
TUBSAT Micro Satellite in January, 2007.

The 5th Indo-Lao Joint Commission meeting was held in
Vientiane on 27 May 2006. The Joint Commission meeting
was chaired by the Minister of State for External Affairs
E. Ahamed on the Indian side and Phongsavath Boupha,
Vice Foreign Minister, on the Lao side. The Joint
Commission meeting discussed various proposals on
bilateral cooperation in the areas of agriculture, grant aid
and credit, trade and investment, mining and industry,
transport and tourism, education and culture, ICT,
defence and science and technology. MOS inaugurated
the National Data Centre, which was set up with Indian
assistance as part of the IT Centre, during the visit to Lao
PDR. MOS also called on the Prime Minister of Lao PDR
and discussed issues of mutual interest.

India’s two Cultural Centres in Indonesia (Jakarta and
Bali) continued to play a prominent role in strengthening
bilateral cultural relations. Several outreach programmes
were conducted, including in Medan, Bandung, Batam
and Lombok. Jawaharlal Nehru India Cultural Centre
(JNICC) collaborated in presenting a dance programme
“Bharata Katha”. A 12-member Indonesian dance troupe
from Taman Mini Indonesia Indah visited Gujarat in
September 2006 at the invitation of the State Government
to perform during the Navratri festivities. Two Indian
authors were sponsored by ICCR to participate in the
Ubud Literary Festival in October 2006. Painting
exhibitions, musical performances hosted by the local
Indian organizations and dance recitals continued to bring
Indian art and culture to a wider audience

Secretary (East), Ministry of External Affairs, visited
Vientiane to attend 9th India–ASEAN Working Group on
25-26 April 2006 and the 8 th India-ASEAN Senior
Officials Meeting on 28-29 April 2006, which were
organized by Lao PDR as Country Coordinator.
As part of its commitment under Development
Partnership with Lao PDR, India continued to provide
project assistance and aid to Lao PDR. Some of the
prominent projects completed under this partnership are
115 Kv power transmission line constructed by Jaguar
Overseas Limited, establishment of National Data Centre
by NIC, continuing work on Lao-India Entrepreneurship
Development Centre and human resource development
and capacity building through ITEC programme. The
National Data Centre is the state-of-the-art system, which
will be the hub of major e-governance activities of Lao
PDR.

An Indonesia based NGO, The World Peace Committee,
donated the World Peace Gong to India as a symbol of
Peace and Friendship. The World Peace Gong was installed
at the Gandhi Smriti Centre in New Delhi on 11
September 2006 on the occasion of the 100th anniversary
of the launching of Satyagraha Movement by Mahatma
Gandhi.
India continued to extend training and educational
scholarships to Indonesia. A total of 147 ITEC training
and scholarship slots were allotted to Indonesia under
ITEC, Colombo Plan and GCSS schemes for 2006-07.

Bilateral defence cooperation continued. The Indian
Army Training Team on deputation at the Kayasone
Phomvihane Academy of National Defence (KAND)
continued its training programmes for Lao Army
personnel. The Commandant of KAND visited India from
19-27 September 2006, which further promoted defence
cooperation between the two sides.

Lao People’s Democratic Republic
The year 2006-2007 marks the 50 th anniversary of
establishment of diplomatic relations between India and
Lao PDR. The occasion was marked by organization of
several special events such as “Path of Compassion” – an
exhibition of photographs of Buddhist art and heritage by
Benoy Behl from 4-10 April 2006; performances by 12member Goan folk and music troupe “Kepemchim
Kirnnam” sponsored by ICCR on 22-23 September 2006

Malaysia
An overview of bilateral activities since April 2006
indicates that bilateral relations in many aspects have been
growing steadily. The exchange of visits at several levels
24

Back to Contents

South East Asia and the Pacific

Kinabalu, Malaysia from 31 May-4 June 2006.

added momentum to the political, economic and defence
relations between the two countries.

New Zealand

Secretary (East), visited Karambunai from 18-20 May 2006
for ASEAN Regional Forum Senior Officials Meeting and
East Asia Summit Senior Officials Meeting. Anand
Sharma, Minister of State for External Affairs, visited
Kuala Lumpur from 28-31 May 2006 in connection with
the NAM-Coordinating Bureau meeting. Rao Inderjit
Singh, Minister of State for Defence Production, visited
Kuala Lumpur from 26-29 July 2006 and represented India
in the 13th ASEAN Regional Forum meetings. Kamal
Nath, Minister of Commerce and Industry, represented
India at the ASEAN Economic Ministers meeting held
in Kuala Lumpur, on 24-25 August 2006.

India and New Zealand have enjoyed cordial and friendly
relations rooted in the linkages of Commonwealth,
parliamentary democracy and English languages. The
bilateral relations have continued to improve on account
of several high level exchanges.
The Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs Vayalar Ravi
visited New Zealand on 20-21 October 2006. The Minister
inaugurated the Diwali Celebrations in Wellington
together with the Governor General of New Zealand
Anand Satyanand. He held discussions with the Minister
of Ethnic Affairs Chris Carter on further facilitating the
flow of skilled Indian personnel and professionals into New
Zealand.

Minister of Science and Technology, Kapil Sibal, visited
Kuantan to attend the informal ASEAN+India
Ministerial Meeting on Science and Technology from
27-29 August 2006. Vayalar Ravi, Minister of Overseas
Indian Affairs, visited Malaysia from 12-16 August 2006
to discuss the issue of migration of Indian workers with
the Malaysian Government.

P. Chidambaram, Minister of Finance visited New Zealand
from 19 – 23 November 2006 at the invitation of New
Zealand Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister
Michael Kullen. He held talks with Deputy Prime Minister
and Finance Minister, and Minister of Trade and Defence.
Chidambaram also had interaction with cross sections of
New Zealand Trade and Industry.

The bilateral trade for the period January-August, 2006
is US $ 3,971.95 million, as against US $ 3,161.08 million
during the corresponding period of the previous year, and
represented 25.65% increase.

The Chief Minister of Uttranchal N.D. Tiwari led a sixmember delegation to New Zealand from 17-21 December
2006. He held discussions with the Minister of
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Jim Anderton and
Minister for Conservation, Housing and Ethnic Affairs
Chris Carter.

Defence relations have been further strengthened with
several high level exchanges. Deputy Prime Minister and
Defence Minister Dato’ Najib visited India from 6-13 June
2006. He was accompanied by the Chief of RMAF Gen
Tan Sri Dato Sri Nick Ismail. A 15 member National
Defence College team visited Malaysia as a part of foreign
country tour from 14-20 May 2006. The 5th Malaysia –
India Defence Cooperation Committee (MIDCOM)
meeting was held on 19 September 2006 in Kuala Lumpur
(Malaysia). It was co-chaired by Shekhar Dutt, Defence
Secretary and Dato Haji Ahmad Latffic bin Hashim,
Secretary General, Ministry of Defence Malaysia. Defence
Services Asia (DSA) 2006 was held from 24-27 April 2006
at Subang, Kuala Lumpur. India had a pavilion in which
BEML, MDL, Midhani, GSL, OFB, GRSE, BEL, DRDO,
DEO, HAL and ZEN technology took part. BRAHMOS
AEROSPACE had a separate pavilion. The official
delegation to the DSA 2006 was led by Rao Inderjit Singh,
Minister of State for Defence Production. Two Indian
naval ships, INS Jyoti and INS Kirpan, visited Kota

Anand Satyanand, a person of Indian origin from Fiji,
was sworn in Governor-General of New Zealand on 23
August 2006. Both Prime Minister Helen Clark and the
Governor-General, in their formal speeches,
acknowledged Anand Satyanand’s Indian origin.
Trevor Mallard, Minister for Economic Development
visited India in May 2006 to attend Asian Development
Bank meeting in Hyderabad. He used the opportunity to
lead a delegation of educationists to promote the flow of
students from India to New Zealand for tertiary education.
Foreign Office consultations between India and New
Zealand were held in New Delhi on 21 September 2006.
The consultations covered entire range of bilateral and
international issues.

25

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

Kalam to the Philippines from 3-6 February 2006.
Agreement on Defence Cooperation, Agreement on
Cooperation in the Field of Tourism and MoU on
Cooperation in the Field of Agriculture and Related Fields
were signed during the visit.

Cooperation in the field of Defence also showed an upward
trend during the year. In June 2006, Rear Admiral David
Ledson, Chief of the Royal Navy of New Zealand visited
India and oversaw the joint exercises which the New
Zealand Naval frigate “Te Mana’’ held with Indian Navy.
The NZ ship called at Indian ports of Kochi and Mumbai.
Indian naval ship INS ‘Tabar ’visited Auckland from 2-6
July 2006. Vice Admiral Sureesh Mehta, Flag Officer
Commanding-in-Chief Eastern Naval Command also
visited New Zealand from 2-7 July and held discussions
with Chiefs of Army, Air Force and Navy in Wellington,
on matters of mutual interest.

As a follow up of the President visit, a NASSCOM
delegation led by its President Kiran Karnik visited the
Philippines from 3-7 September 2006. The delegation
called on the President of the Philippines, participated in
a briefing session organized by the Business Process
Association of the Philippines (BPAP) and visited selected
IT companies and institutions. NASSCOM and BPAP
signed an MoU for cooperation.

On cultural front, 2006 Diwali celebrations were
inaugurated in October in Auckland by the GovernorGeneral Anand Satyanand and the Prime Minister Helen
Clark, and in Wellington by the Governor-General and
Vayalar Ravi, Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs. Diwali
celebrations in Auckland attracted the participation of
over 100,000 people, and in Wellington over 30,000.

Philippines hosted ASEAN Summit and East Asia Summit
at Cebu from 13-15 January 2007. Summits were preceded
by Senior Officials’ Meeting and Ministerial meeting.
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh participated in the
Summit Meeting while EAM participated in the
Ministerial meeting.

Papua New Guinea

Bilateral trade between India and the Philippines increased
by 21.76% during 2005-2006 reaching US$ 730 million
from US$ 599 million in 2004-05. Exports from India to
the Philippines were valued at US$ 494.66 million and
imports US$ 235.49 million.

Bilateral relations between India and Papua New Guinea,
which have been steadily growing ever since the
establishment of diplomatic relations between the two
countries in 1996, witnessed further consolidation. The
opening of Papua New Guinea’s resident Diplomatic
Mission in New Delhi is a witness of Papua New Guinea’s
desire to enhance relationship with India. PNG currently
has resident diplomatic Missions only in 13 other
countries, which shows the importance it attaches to
India.

India contributed US$250,000 for relief and rehabilitation
of communities affected by super typhoon “Reming” that
struck Central Philippines in November 2006.
The Philippines is one of the largest beneficiaries of ITEC
and Colombo Plan training with more than 90% utilisation
of the allotted slots in the last three years. During 200506, out of 25 slots under ITEC, 22 slots were utilised and
all the 43 slots under Colombo Plan were utilised. For the
current financial year, 11 of the 25 slots under ITEC and
22 of the 43 Colombo Plans slots have been utilised so
far.

The visit of Indian naval ship ‘INS Tabar’ to Port Moresby
in the last week of July, 2006, was the first ever visit of an
Indian Naval Ship to Papua New Guinea. The Governor
General, Deputy Prime Minister, Defence Minister,
Commander of Defence Forces, Foreign Secretary and
several other dignitaries participated in the Reception on
board the ship.

Singapore
There has been a steady progress in existing friendly
relations between India and Singapore in various fields.
The bilateral trade has reached a figure of US$10 billion.
Singaporean companies have shown substantial interest
in the infrastructure projects in India. Civil Aviation,
water treatment, real estate development and transport
sectors in India have received increased attention from
the Singapore companies. There have been a number of

India’s assistance in the form of capacity building by
training programmes under ITEC scheme received great
appreciation from all quarters. Twenty slots are offered to
Papua New Guinea under ITEC.

Philippines
Bilateral relations between India and the Philippines got
a big boost with the state visit of President Dr. A.P.J. Abdul
26

Back to Contents

South East Asia and the Pacific

Yong led an Infrastructural Services Business Mission from
Singapore to India in August, 2006. Senior Minister of
State for Foreign Affairs, Dr. Balaji Sadasivan,
accompanied by a high-level official, business and
educationist delegation paid an official visit to India in
September 2006. Minister for Manpower and Second
Minister for Defence, Dr. Ng Eng Hen paid an official
visit to India in mid October 2006. Minister of State for
Trade & Industry, S. Iswaran visited India in the month
of October 2006.

high-level exchanges both of officials as well as business
delegations between the two countries. Substantive
progress was witnessed in the fields of culture and
education.
There were several bilateral high-level visits in the year.
Union Minister of Commerce & Industry, Kamal Nath
paid official visit to Singapore in April 2006 for mid-term
review of Comprehensive Economic Cooperation
Agreement (CECA). Minister of Home Affairs, Shivraj
V. Patil paid a four-day visit to Singapore from 30 May-2
June 2006 to foster co-operation between Home ministries
of the two countries and to discuss security and counterterrorism issues. Union Minister of Communications and
Information Technology, Dayanidhi Maran visited
Singapore from 22-25 June 2006. The visit was aimed to
explore investment opportunities from Singapore in the
fields of IT and communications. The Deputy Chairman
of the Planning Commission, Dr. Montek Singh Ahluwalia
paid a three-day visit to Singapore from 11-14 July 2006.
He delivered the first of the Eminent Persons Lecture
Series under the auspices of the National University of
Singapore. Kapil Sibal, Minister for Science & Technology
and Earth Sciences visited Singapore on 13 September
2006. He met S. Iswaran, Minister of State for Trade &
Industry and discussed the areas of mutual interest. Chief
Justice of India, Y.K. Sabharwal paid a three-day visit to
Singapore from 11-13 August 2006. He met Chief Justice
of Singapore and other officials of the Supreme Court.
Chief Minister of Haryana Bhupinder Singh Hooda visited
Singapore on 2-3 December 2006. Chief Minister of
Madhya Pradesh Shivraj Singh Chauhan led an official
and business delegation to Singapore from 10-12
December 2006 to participate in a Road Show titled
“Destination Madhya Pradesh”. Chief Minister of
Uttranchal N.D. Tiwari visited Singapore on 21-22
December 2006 and met representatives of Trade and
Industry.

Singapore had organized few prominent multi-lateral
conferences which were attended by high-level Indian
delegations. Pranab Mukherji, Defence Minister visited
Singapore from 2-4 June 2006 to participate in the
Shangri-La Dialogue, annual Asian Security Conference,
coordinated by the International Institute for Strategic
Studies (IISS). He delivered a lecture on “India: A Rising
Global player” at the Conference. P. Chidambaram,
Finance Minister led a high-level delegation including Y.V.
Reddy, Governor of Reserve Bank of India to International
Monetary Fund (IMF)/World Bank’s Annual Meetings
held in Singapore in September 2006. Kamal Nath,
Minister of Commerce & Industry and Dr. Montek Singh
Ahluwalia, Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission also
participated in IMF/World Bank Meeting.
There was further strengthening of Security and Defence
Cooperation between India and Singapore. 2nd IndiaSingapore Joint Working Group Meeting on Intelligence
Cooperation on Combating Terrorism and Transnational
Organised Crimes was held in Singapore on 13 April 2006.
The 3 rd Defence Policy Dialogue between the two
countries, which is a subset of the Defence Co-operation
Agreement, was held at Singapore on 10 -11 October
2006, co-chaired by Shekhar Dutt, the Defence Secretary
and Chiang Chie Foo, Singaporean Permanent Secretary
(Defence). The annual Staff Talks between each of the
three services were also conducted.

The Eighth India–Singapore Foreign Office consultations
were held on 24 September 2006 at Singapore. Peter Ho,
Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Government of Singapore led the Singapore side at the
Consultations while Indian delegation was led by Secretary
(East) in the Ministry of External Affairs.

On cultural front, a number of Indian troupes performed
in Singapore. Most of these events were organized on a
commercial basis by local event organizers. The Indian
High Commission, in collaboration with various local
cultural organizations and sponsors, organized a week long
cultural-cum-commercial event under the caption
“Celebrating India 2006” from 10-16 April 2006. It was a
gala soiree of lifestyle exhibitions, fashion extravaganzas,

There were several bilateral visits from Singapore also.
Minister of State for Education and Manpower, Gan Kim
27

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

art shows, cultural performances, cuisine and tourism fairs.
A cultural troupe of 14 members led by Usha
Venkateswaran and sponsored by ICCR visited Singapore
in May 2006 performed a dance drama “Baliyatra” on 17
May 2006.

accompanied by his wife Phornthip Pukbasuk, Air Vice
Marshal Prajin Juntong, Director of Intelligence and Flt
Lt Sorawat Suchart visited India from 13-16 September
2006 at the invitation of Chief of the Air Staff, Indian
Air Force.

Nalanda Symposium was held in Singapore on 13
November 2006. President, Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam
delivered the Key note address via live videocast from
New Delhi. Opening Address at the Symposium was given
by Minister for Foreign Affairs of Singapore, George Yeo.
N.K. Singh, Deputy Chairman, Bihar Planning
Commission participated in the Symposium. The universal
“mission” of the proposed Nalanda University is to serve
as a seat of learning for “providing leadership in world
peace,” said President at the inauguration of the
symposium.

Bilateral trade continued its steady growth. India’s exports
to Thailand during January – September, 2006 amounted
to US$ 1.206 billion, a growth of 22.7 % compared to the
same period last year, whereas Thailand’s exports to India
during the same period reached US$ 1.26 billion,
representing a growth of 12.94 %. Trade delegations that
visited Thailand included a joint trade delegation of the
Basic Chemicals, Pharmaceuticals and Cosmetics Export
Promotion Council (CHEMEXIL) and the Pesticides
Manufacturers and Formulators Association of India
(PMFAI) from 16-19 June 2006; a trade delegation of the
Pharmaceutical Export Promotion Council
(PHARMEXCIL), from 4-9 July 2006. A Thai business
delegation comprising officials of the Board of Trade of
Thailand and representatives from 10 companies visited
India in May 2006 and had interactions with the apex
trade bodies including CII and FICCI. Inspector General
in the Thai Ministry of Commerce led a business
delegation to India from 19-23 June 2006. Ministry of Food
Processing Industries, Federation of Indian Chambers of
Commerce and Industry (FICCI) and Agricultural and
Processed Food Products Export Development Authority
(APEDA) along with the Embassy of India, organized a
seminar titled ‘Destination India: Opportunities for
Investment in Food Processing’ on 7 September 2006 at
Bangkok. The seminar was inaugurated by Suriya
Jungrungreangkit, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
of Industry, Government of Thailand.

Thailand
India’s relationship with Thailand continued to strengthen
and widen, despite Thailand’s preoccupation with adverse
domestic political developments, through visits and
deepening of economic, commercial and defence links.
Foreign Minister of Thailand, Dr. Kantathi
Suphamongkhon paid an official visit to New Delhi on 8
August 2006 ahead of the 9 th BIMSTEC Ministerial
Meeting. He had bilateral talks with E. Ahamed, MOS.
Praful Patel, MOS for Civil Aviation, visited Bangkok on
15-16 April 2006 on the inaugural Nagpur-Bangkok flight
of Indian Airlines.
Cooperation in Defence sector between India and
Thailand has made steady progress. The second IndiaThailand Coordinated Patrol was held from 24-28 April
2006 in Phuket. The Indian Naval Ship INS Trinkat
visited Phuket from 24-26 April 2006 for the inaugural
ceremony and thereafter sailed together with Royal Thai
Navy Ship HTMS Khamronsin for the coordinated patrol
in the Andaman Sea. For the first time, a Dornier aircraft
participated in the patrolling. Three Indian naval ships
INS Rajput, INS Kirpan and INS Kulish arrived in
Bangkok on 16 June 2006 on a four-day goodwill visit.
The Third Indo-Thai Joint Working Group Meeting
(Navy) was held in Bangkok from 21-25 August 2006.
An Indian Army – Royal Thai Army combined Counter
Terrorism exercise was held in Lopburi, Thailand from 28
August-17 September 2006. Air Chief Marshal Chalit
Pukbhasuk, Commander-in-Chief, Royal Thai Air Force

Important cultural events included performance of the
dance drama ‘Bali Yatra’, at the Thailand Cultural Centre,
Bangkok, on 21 May 2006 by a 13-member troupe from
Natyalakshana, led by Usha Venkateswaran. The
Kalashetra gave a performance of the Ramayana on 1
October, 2006 as part of the Bangkok International Dance
and Music Festival. India also participated in the Royal
Flora Ratchaphruek, 2006, a horticultural exposition
organized at Chiang Mai by the Thai Government from
November 2006-January 2007 in commemoration of the
60th anniversary of the King’s accession to the Throne.
An Indian Garden has been constructed by the Indian
National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage (INTACH).
28

Back to Contents

East Asia

Vietnam

India donated HIV/AIDS medicines to the Vietnam
Administration of HIV/AIDS Control at Bach Mai
Hospital in Hanoi on 12 July 2006.

India maintained its close and cordial relations with
Vietnam. A four member delegation led by Vice Admiral
JS Bedi, Deputy Chief of Naval Staff visited Vietnam from
15-20 May 2006. He called on Vice Admiral Nguyen Van
Hien, C-in-C, Vietnam People’s Navy and Lt Gen Nguyen
Nang Nguyen, Deputy Chief of General Staff, Vietnam
People’s Army. Discussions were held on enhancing naval
cooperation between the two countries. A three member
delegation led by Shekhar Dutt, Defence Secretary, visited
Vietnam on 12-13 October 2006 for the second meeting
of India-Vietnam Security Dialogue. The Defence
Secretary called on Col Gen Phung Quang Thanh,
Minister of National Defence of Vietnam and held
discussion with Col Gen Le Van Dung, Vice Minister of
Defence and Chief of General Political Department and
Col Gen Nguyen Huy Hieu, Vice Minister of National
Defence.

A Vietnamese cultural troupe visited India in September,
2006 on the occasion of Vietnam’s National Day.

Pacific Islands Forum
India participated in the Post-Forum Dialogue (PFD)
Partners’ Meeting held after the conclusion of the Pacific
Islands Forum Meeting. The PFD meeting was held on
the forenoon of 27 October 2006 in Nadi. Indian
delegation was led by Minister of State for External Affairs,
E. Ahamed.
The Pacific Islands Forum (PIF), an organization of Heads
of Government of independent and self-governing
countries of the South Pacific Islands, comprises of 16
countries, namely, Australia, Cook Islands, Federated
States of Micronesia, Fiji Islands, Kiribati, Marshall
Islands, Nauru, New Zealand, Niue, Palau, Papua New
Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu and
Vanuatu. Post Forum dialogue, which is held immediately
after the PIF Summit gives an opportunity to have
extensive interaction with small Pacific Island countries.

The Vietnam-India Entrepreneurship Development
Centre (VIEDC) was launched on 8 May 2006 in Hanoi
by Ambassador of India and Vietnam’s Vice Minister of
Planning and Investment Nguyen Ngoc Phuc. The first
Entrepreneurship Development Programme at VIEDC
was conducted from 8 May-16 June 2006. Twenty-five
participants successfully completed the programme.

During the Post Forum Dialogue, MOS(EA) announced
India’s “Regional Assistance Initiative” for Pacific Island
Forum members. Under this initiative over the coming
years India will implement the following assistance
package for Pacific Island countries:

Three Indian naval ships, INS Rajput, INS Kulish and
INS Kirpan paid a goodwill visit from 8-11 June 2006 to
Tien Sea Port at Da Nang city. Rear Admiral D. K. Joshi,
Flag Officer Commanding Eastern Fleet led the ships.

Grant aid of US$ 100,000 each for 14 eligible Pacific
Island countries for the supply of equipment and
materials for social and economic programmes and
for sustainable development.

Bilateral trade has maintained its growth. Bilateral trade
during the period January-September 2006 was US$
727.68 million. India’s exports were US$ 625.36 million
and imports were US$ 102.32 million. The Embassy and
the Consulate General of India organized various trade
promotion activities and facilitated visits of various trade
and industry delegations, including from industry
associations. The Embassy of India in Hanoi organized a
catalogue show at the Vietnam International Industrial
Fair held from 17-21 October 2006 in Hanoi. More than
200 Indian companies sent their catalogues for this. Eleven
Indian companies participated in the Fair. Production
sharing contracts were signed on 24 May 2006 in Hanoi
for Blocks 127 and 128, offshore Viet Nam in the Phu
Khanh Basin, by ONGC Videsh Ltd of India and the Viet
Nam Oil and Gas Corporation (PetroVietnam).

A ‘Workshop on Sustainable Development’ for
dofficials of Pacific Island countries to be organized
by the Tata Energy Research Institute in Suva (Fiji).
A course for diplomats of Pacific Island countries in
the Foreign Service Institute in New Delhi.
A course on SME promotion in developing
economies for officials from Pacific Island countries
under the ITEC programme.
The grant of one scholarship for undergraduate or
post graduate studies to each Pacific Island
country.

29

Back to Contents

3

East Asia

Japan

Meeting of ADB in Hyderabad and had a meeting with
his Indian counterpart.

India values its close, friendly and cooperative relations
with Japan. India-Japan relations have undergone a
significant and qualitative shift in recent years, propelled
by the successful visit of PM Koizumi in April 2005 and
recently the visit of Prime Minister to Japan. The relations
have been upgraded to a Global and Strategic Partnership
during the transformational visit of Prime Minister Dr.
Manmohan Singh to Japan from 13-16 December 2006.
This would also involve closer political and diplomatic
coordination on bilateral, regional, multilateral and global
issues, comprehensive economic engagement, stronger
defence relations, greater technological cooperation as
well as working towards a quantum increase in cultural
ties, educational linkages and people-to-people contacts.
During the visit a Joint Statement was signed to upgrade
our relations to a Strategic and Global partnership, initiate
a series of measures for comprehensive economic
engagement, including the launch of negotiations for
Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement,
enhance S&T cooperation, set up consultation
mechanism to facilitate high-technology trade and foster
closer people-to-people linkages. Joint Ministerial
Statement for CEPA negotiations, MoU on Delhi-Mumbai
Industrial Corridor, two MoUs in Science and Technology
cooperation, Memorandum between ICCR and Japan
Foundation were some of the important documents signed
during the visit. It was also agreed that the Japanese side
would open a Consulate in Bangalore.

Defence Minister Pranab Mukherjee visited Japan
from 25-28 May 2006. He had detailed interactions with
the Japanese Minister of State for Defence, Chief Cabinet
Secretary, Foreign Minister and Minister for Land,
Infrastructure and Transport. The Joint Statement signed
during the visit states the objectives of India-Japan
defence and security relations, identifies specific areas of
cooperation, especially in the field of maritime security
and spells out mechanisms of implementation. It was
agreed to expeditiously finalise an annual calendar of
cooperation and exchanges to implement the various
decisions taken during the visit. A Joint Press Statement
was separately issued with the Minister of Land,
Infrastructure and Transport Kazuo Kitagawa on
cooperation between the two Coast Guards. A
Memorandum of Cooperation between the two Coast
Guards has since been signed on 13 November 2006 to
establish a collaborative relationship to combat crimes at
sea and to develop regional cooperation.
Minister of Commerce and Industry (C&IM) Kamal Nath
visited Japan on 14-17 June 2006 to attend India-Japan
Business Summit, World Economic Forum and East Asia
Summit. During the visit, he held talks with Japan’s
Minister of Economy, Trade & Industry (METI), Minister
of Agriculture, Forestry & Fisheries and Minister for
Foreign Affairs. It was agreed to set up an India-Japan
Energy Forum, the first meeting of which was since held
in New Delhi on 6 –7 December 2006. A Joint Statement
was issued on action plan to promote Japanese investment
in India with special focus on Small and Medium
Enterprises. This included creation of an “India New
Window” for investors in cooperation with Japan External
Trade Organisation (JETRO) and CII and opening of
JETRO office in Bangalore.

The year 2006 saw a substantial increase in the number
of high-level exchanges. Finance Minister P. Chidambaram
visited Japan from 17-20 January 2006. During his visit,
he met Taro Aso, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Toshihiro
Nikai, Minister for Economy, Trade and Industry (METI),
Kazuo Kitagawa, Minister of Land, Infrastructure and
Transport and Shinzo Abe, Chief Cabinet Secretary.
Finance Minister of Japan, Sadakazu Tanigaki visited India
from 3-6 May 2006 to attend the 39th Annual General

Minister of Power Sushil Kumar Shinde visited Japan on
21-28 June 2006 to promote Japanese companies’
30

Back to Contents

East Asia

Railway Minister, Environment Minister, among others.
Tsuneo Nishida, Deputy Minister, Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Japan visited New Delhi on 13 November 2006
for the 13 th round of Foreign Office Consultations.
Masakazu Sekiguchi, Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Japan visited India from 18-19 November 2006 to attend
the “2nd Regional Conference on Afghanistan”. Takumi
Nemoto, Special Adviser to PM Abe visited India from
27-29 November 2006 to attend India Economic Summit
held by the World Economic Forum.

investment in power sector particularly ultra mega power
projects in India. During the visit, he held useful talks
with METI Minister and representatives of Japanese
companies and banks.
Minister of Environment & Forests A. Raja visited Japan
during 23-27 June 2006 to attend ECO ASIA 2006.
Minister of Chemical & Fertilizers and Steel Ram Vilas
Paswan visited Japan from 9-16 July 2006 and met
Japanese companies to promote investment in these
sectors. Minister of State for Women and Child
Development Renuka Chowdhury visited Japan from 30
June-1 July 2006 to attend ‘East Asia Gender Equality
Ministerial Meeting’. Minister of Science and Technology
Kapil Sibal paid a visit to Japan for bilateral S&T Meeting
at the invitation of Minister of Education, Culture, Sports,
Science and Technology (MEXT) of Japan from 17-20
October 2006. Nirupam Sen, Minister of Commerce &
Industry, West Bengal State Government visited Japan at
the invitation of Japanese Government from 15-22
October 2006.
National Security Adviser M.K. Narayanan visited Japan
from 22-25 October 2006 and had interactions with Prime
Minister of Japan, Foreign Minister, Chief Cabinet
Secretary, Minister of Land, Infrastructure & Transport,
Japanese Minister of State for Defence and Special
Adviser to Japanese PM on security issues. This was
followed by a visit of Principal Secretary to Prime Minister
T.K.A Nair from 27-28 November 2006 in connection
with the preparations for the PM’s visit. A 5-member
Parliamentary delegation led by Member of Lok Sabha
Suresh Prabhu visited Japan from 12-19 November 2006.

Two-way trade between India and Japan increased from
US$ 4.37 billion in 2003-04 to US$ 5.36 billion in 200405 and US$ 6.01 billion in 2005-06. In 2005-06, India’s
exports to Japan increased by 15.5 percent to US$ 2.46
billion, while its imports from Japan increased by 9.8% to
US$ 3.55 billion. Japan opened up its market for six
varieties of mango exports from five states of India in June
2006. Japan is the third largest investor in India with a
total investment estimated at about US$ 2.12 billion
between 1991 and March 2006. EXIM Bank of India
successfully floated Samurai bonds in Japan for
institutional investors in February 2006 and raised
Japanese Yen 23 billion (US$ 196 million). In OctoberNovember 2006, EXIM Bank raised a further Yen 26
billion (in US$ 222 million). SBI arranged a US$ 70
million export line of credit with Japan Bank for
International Cooperation (JBIC) for assisting Japanese
companies while ICICI Bank arranged an untied loan of
up to US$ 200 million equivalent in yen without any
government guarantee to promote trade between the two
countries. TATA Asset Management raised funds to the
tune of Yen 60 billion (US$ 500 million).

From the Japanese side, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Japan Taro Aso paid an official visit to India on 3-4
January 2006. During the visit, the two sides agreed to
launch a Joint Secretary/Director General-level Annual
Dialogue on Disarmament and Non-proliferation, with
the objective of promoting commonalities and enlarging
areas of convergence for mutual cooperation. Yasuhisa
Shiozaki, then Senior Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs
and presently Chief Cabinet Secretary visited India on
25-28 July 2006 and had extensive discussions with the
Indian side. Japanese Minister of Land, Infrastructure and
Transport Kazuo Kitagawa visited India from 25-27 July
2006. He called on the Prime Minister and had meetings
with Tourism Minister, Urban Development Minister,

During Prime Minister’s visit to Japan, the two sides agreed
to launch Special Economic Partnership Initiative (SEPI).
The main elements include Delhi-Mumbai Industrial
Corridor, setting up of multi product Special Economic
Zones/Clusters, Free Trade and Warehousing Zones at
select locations; encourage investment by Japanese
companies in India, including through assistance in
development of infrastructure relating to SEZs and
Industrial Estates in India; support by JETRO for the rural
business and industrialization initiatives of GOI under its
“One Village One Product” programme; announcement
on MoUs on some major projects; assistance by JETRO
to small and medium enterprises to set up operations in
India; enhanced cooperation in Financial Sector, including
31

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

Japanese participation in Indian capital market, such as
business cooperation agreement between the JBIC and
the ICICI Bank; involvement of Japanese private sector
in training and quality control; collaboration towards
Indian Institute of Technology for Design and
Manufacturing(ITDM) and IIT, promotion of Japanese
investment in the power sector, etc. India-Japan Business
Leaders Forum would be set up to develop a roadmap for
enhanced partnership and cooperation at the business
level. An India-Japan Energy Dialogue would be set up
to enhance the level and scope of cooperation in the
energy sector.
A Memorandum of Understanding on Delhi-Mumbai
Industrial Corridor was signed during Prime Minister’s visit
to Japan. The industrial corridor, to be developed along
the Delhi-Mumbai Dedicated Freight Corridor, will have
several supporting infrastructure projects such as power
facilities, rail connectivity to ports en-route and would
also cover development of ports on the west coast of India.
Cooperation Agreement between the Government of
India and Japan Bank for International Cooperation
(JBIC) was signed during Prime Minister’s visit to Japan.
The Agreement provides for undertaking investment
promotion activities in India in a sustained and
coordinated manner by strengthening collaboration
between Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of
Finance and JBIC.

An India-Japan Working Group on Urban Development
at Secretary/Vice-Minister level was agreed to be set up
during the visit of Japanese Minister of Land,
Infrastructure and Transport Kazuo Kitagawa in July 2006.
The areas of focus would be water environment, urban
development and urban transportation.
A 30-member delegation led by President, Japan Finance
Corporation for Small and Medium Enterprise (JASME)
visited India from 30 April-7 May 2006. A 50-member
Japanese business delegation led by Chairman of Japan
Chamber of Commerce and Industry visited India on 3031 October 2006.
An MoU between Department of Science & Technology
and the Japan Science & Technology Agency in scientific
cooperation programme and another MoU between
Department of Science & Technology and RIKEN
(Institute of Physical and Chemical Research) on
cooperation in science & technology was signed during
Prime Minister’s visit.
The Centre for Advanced Technology (CAT), Indore was
designated Core University from the Indian side for the
collaboration on accelerator science with High Energy
Acceleratory Research Organisation (KEK), which will
be the Core University from the Japanese side.

An MoU was also signed to upgrade Japan-India Policy
Dialogue (JIPD) from the existing JIPD to the level of
Ministers. The JIPD will be co-chaired by Minister of
Commerce and Industry from India and Minister of
Economy, Trade and Industry from Japan.

An MoU on Cooperation in Science and Technology
between India and Japan was signed by Minister of Science
and Technology and Earth Sciences of India Kapil Sibal
and Iwao Matsuda, Minister of State for Science &
Technology Policy of Japan, on the sidelines of the 4th
ASEAN Informal Ministerial Meeting on S&T in
Kuantan, Malaysia on 28 August 2006.

The meeting of the India-Japan Joint Study Group on
5-6 June 2006 in Tokyo finalized its report. The JSG has,
inter alia, recommended that India and Japan launch
inter-governmental negotiations to develop an Economic
Partnership Agreement (EPA) or Comprehensive
Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA) within a
reasonable period of time. An announcement regarding
setting up of a Joint Task Force for CEPA negotiations
was made during PM’s visit to Japan to conclude EPA/
CEPA as soon as possible, within two years. EPA/CEPA
would cover the entire spectrum of economic cooperation.
The first meeting of the Joint Task Force was held in New
Delhi from 29 January-2 February 2007.

Under India-Japan Joint Committee of Science and
Technology, the Japan-India Science and Technology
Initiative Meeting was held in Tokyo on 16 -17 October
2006 in cooperation with the Ministry of Education,
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan,
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan, Japan Society of
Science Promotion , and Department of Science and
Technology of India. Along with this S&T Initiative
Meeting, an extended Policy Dialogue was also held with
the participation from policy makers, scientists and
academia from both countries, and had comprehensive
discussions with special emphasis on these three priority
areas. In parallel, a Joint Workshop was also held on the
32

Back to Contents

East Asia

in a Seminar on Nuclear Fuel, hosted by Atomic Energy
Society of Japan from 12-14 July 2006.

same dates in Tokyo on Biotechnology, Nanotechnology
and ICT, which were recognized as priority areas in the
last Joint Committee Meeting. In these three select areas,
a total of 12 themes were prioritized.

As agreed during the visit of Foreign Minister Taro Aso
in January 2006, the first Joint Secretary/Director Generallevel Annual Dialogue was held in New Delhi on 1 May
2006. The talks covered the entire range of disarmament
and non-proliferation related issues.

Reiko Nishikawa Senior Vice-Minister of Economy Trade
& Industry visited India from 15-19 January 2006. The
3rd India-Japan Joint Study Group was held in New Delhi
on 23-25 January 2006. Mitoji Yabunaka, Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs visited India on the occasion as the
leader of the Japanese side. Osamu Watanabe, Chairman
& CEO, JETRO led a business mission to India from 5-12
February 2006.

Ashok Jha, Secretary, DEA, Ministry of Finance visited
Japan to attend the 4th JSG meeting from 5-7 June 2006.
Ratan Tata, Chairman, Investment Commission led a
delegation to Japan from 12-15 July 2006. Yutaka
Kobayashi, Vice Minister, METI led an IT delegation to
India from 3-9 September 2006. Nobuo Yamaguchi,
Chairman, Japan Chamber of Commerce and Industry led
a business delegation to India from 22 September-2
October 2006.

Protocol amending the convention between the two
countries on avoidance of Double Taxation and
Prevention of Fiscal Evasion was signed on 24 February
2006 in Tokyo.

The Indian Cultural Centre at Tokyo became operational
with the commencement of Yoga classes at the Embassy
of India from January, 2006. Bharatnatyam dance classes
commenced from July, 2006. On 29-30 July 2006, an
International Hindi Conference was organized at the
Tokyo University of Foreign Studies. Three dance troupes
visited Japan for performances at various events and
conducted workshops at numerous institutions all over
Japan. Fourteen television teams from Japan visited India
for shooting documentaries.

Fourth Comprehensive Security Dialogue (PoliticoMilitary talks) was held at New Delhi on 22 February 2006.
This was followed by the third Military-to-Military talks
on 23 February 2006. General Tadashi Yoshida, Chief of
Staff, Japan Air Self Defence, visited India from 5-8 April
2006, Air Chief Marshal S.P. Tyagi visited Tokyo on 3031 August 2006 (transit halt).
General J.J. Singh, Chief of Army Staff visited Tokyo on
15-16 November 2006. Admiral Takashi Saito, Chief of
Staff, Japan Maritime Self Defence Force visited India from
15-18 February 2006. General Tsutomu Mori, Chief of
Staff, Japan Ground SDF of Japan visited India from 5-8
March 2006. General Tadashi Yoshida, Chief of Staff,
Japan Air Self Defence Force of Japan visited India from
4-8 April 2006. Lt. Gen. Mandhata Singh, YSM, VSM,
Director General, Defence Intelligence Agency visited
Japan from 24-27 October 2006.

Republic of Korea
India-Republic of Korea (ROK) relations have acquired
positive momentum and have diversified in recent times,
following the high-level visits of President Roh Moo-hyun
to India in October 2004 and President Dr. A.P.J. Abdul
Kalam to the ROK in February 2006. The ‘Long-Term
Cooperative Partnership for Peace and Prosperity’ signed
during President Roh’s visit provided the framework for
consolidation and development of bilateral relations. The
increasing number of Minister level visits, strengthening
business linkages and expanding contacts in the fields of
culture, art and education have provided a new dynamism
to the growth of India-ROK bilateral ties.

The 9th meeting of India-Japan Science Council was held
at Bangalore on 10-11 March 2006. Dr. T. Ramasami,
Secretary, Department of Science and Technology visited
Japan to attend India-Japan S&T Initiative Meeting from
October 15-19 2006. Dr. Anil Kakodkar, Chairman,
Atomic Energy Commission and Secretary, Department
of Atomic Energy visited Tokyo from 31 March-2 April
2006 to attend 6th Preparatory Meeting of International
Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER). Dr. R.
Chidambaram, Principal Scientific Adviser to the
Government of India, visited Japan as a Keynote Speaker

President visited ROK from 6-9 February 2006 at the
invitation of ROK President. This was the first ever visit
of an Indian President to the ROK. Four agreements were
signed during the visit, viz., Agreement concerning
Cooperation and Mutual Assistance in Customs Matters;
33

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

companies, addressed an “Investors’ Forum” and a
“seminar on BRIC economies” with the aim to push for
Korean investment in India.

Agreement on Cooperation in the fields of Science and
Technology; Joint Ministerial Statement on the launching
of a Joint Task Force to develop a Comprehensive
Economic Partnership Agreement; and a Memorandum
of Understanding between Department of Science and
Technology of the Government of India and the Korea
Industrial Technology Foundation.

The Second Meeting of the India-Korea Joint Committee
on S&T was held in New Delhi on 8 November 2006.
Korean Ministry of S&T delegation was led by its Vice
Minister Dr. Young II Park participated in the meeting
from Korean side. He also led the Korean delegation to
the ‘Technology Summit’, where Korea participated as an
‘Observer Country’ on 6-7 November 2006.

India and the ROK entered into an MoU on Cooperation
in the fields of Defence Industry and Logistics in 2005.
To further expand such cooperation Minister of State for
Defence M.M.Pallam Raju led a six-member defence
delegation to the ROK from 30 April-03 May 2006 and
met with ROK Minister of National Defence and held
detailed discussions on the areas in which two countries
can cooperate for mutual benefit. An MoU was signed
between the Indian Coast Guard and the Korean Coast
Guard in March 2006.

Secretary (Power) R.V. Shahi visited Korea on 10-11 April
2006 to attract Korean investment in the Indian power
sector in general and for the Ultra Mega Power Projects
(UMPP) in particular. Secretary, Department of Industrial
Policy and Promotion (DIPP), Dr. Ajay Dua visited Seoul
from 12-15 June 2006 to participate in the 48th meeting
of the Governing Body of the Asian Productivity
Organisation (APO).

The quantum of two-way trade has been going up steadily.
The bilateral trade stood at US$ 6.71 billion in 2005 and
US$ 6.76 billion during the period January-September
2006. As regards investments, ROK is now the 9th largest
investor in India. More and more Korean companies have
announced plans to set up operations in India and many
of the Korean companies already present are expanding
their operations. The Korean steel giant POSCO alone is
investing US$ 12 billion in an integrated steel project in
Orissa.

Major Ha Sung Woo from ROK Army is attending 62nd
DSSC course at Wellington from June 2006-April 2007.
A Korean Coast Guard ship visited Chennai from 3-6 July
2006 to conduct joint exercise with Indian Coast Guards.
The Second India-ROK Foreign Policy and Security
Dialogue (FDSP) was held in Seoul from 19-22 July 2006.
A five-member Indian delegation led by Ashok K. Kantha,
Joint Secretary (East Asia), Ministry of External Affairs,
New Delhi conducted the dialogue. A 17-member Korean
National Defence University team visited India on a study
tour from 17-20 September 2006. An Indian Army
delegation led by Lt. Gen. R.K. Chabbra visited ROK to
attend the “Defence Asia 2006 Exhibition” from 12-22
October 2006 held at Daijon. R.M. Sharma, TM, DIG
from Indian Coast Guard is attending NDC course at
Korean National Defence University from October 2006.

To give a new thrust to wide-ranging economic
cooperation, India and ROK have launched a Joint Task
Force (JTF) to develop a Comprehensive Economic
Partnership Agreement (CEPA). The JTF has already held
five meetings, last one was at Jaipur on 10-12 January
2007, and has made good progress in its work.
Minister for Communications and IT (MOCIT)
Dayanidhi Maran visited the ROK from 19-21 June 2006
and held discussions with the Minister of Information and
Communications of Korea Rho Jun-hyong on the steps
that need to be taken for further expanding and
strengthening Indo-Korean cooperation in the IT and
Telecom Sectors. The ROK IT Cooperation Agency
organized a seminar on the Indian IT sector, which was
addressed by MOCIT as the keynote speaker.

Secretary (Labour & Employment) K.M. Sahni led the
Indian Government delegation to the 14th Asian Regional
Meeting of the ILO, which was held in Busan, Korea, from
29 August – 1 September 2006.
A delegation from the State Government of Gujarat led
by CEO & Managing Director of Gujarat Alkalies and
Chemicals Ltd. P.K. Taneja visited Korea from 10-12
September 2006 to promote Korean participation in the
Global Investors’ Summit 2007 to be held in Ahmedabad.

Finance Minister P. Chidambaram visited ROK in
September 2006 and met CEOs of major Korean

Sudhir Choudhary, DIG, National Human Rights
34

Back to Contents

East Asia

Commission, India, participated in the “National
Institutions Partnership Building Programme” of the
Korean National Human Rights Commission from 9-17
October 2006. B.N. Puri, Advisor (Transport), Planning
Commission, led an Indian delegation to the UN ESCAP
Ministerial Conference on Transport 2006 (MCT-2006),
held in Busan from 6-11 November 2006.
Korean Minister of Commerce, Industry and Energy Sye
kyun Chung visited Mumbai to participate in the “IndiaKorea Forum” from 21-24 November 2006. The 6th IndiaKorea Forum was organized in New Delhi from 10-14
December 2006. Kim Won-wung, Chairman of the
Committee on Unification, Foreign Affairs and Trade of
the National Assembly led the delegation.
A U.P. State delegation led by Minister for Urban
Development, Poverty Alleviation and Parliamentary
Affairs Mohd. Azam Khan visited ROK from 20-27 May
2006. Chief Minister of Uttaranchal N.D. Tiwari visited
ROK in July 2006.
A number of cultural events under “Glimpses of India”
were organized in Seoul and other cities of Korea from
October to December 2006. The “Glimpses of India”
included the following events:
Manipuri Dance Performances: 13-15 October 2006
Indian Folk Dance Performances: 27 October-5
November 2006
Indian Food Festival: 28 October-12 November
2006
Indian Film Festival: 23-26 November 2006
Indian Handicrafts Exhibition: 27 October-3
November 2006
Indian Puppet Exhibition: 2-12 November 2006
India-Korea Contemporary Art Exhibition:
7 November-13 December 2006
Symposium on Buddhism: 31 October 2006
Photographic Exhibition “Path of Compassion”:
31 October onwards
An MoU on the establishment of sisterhood/twinning
relations with Gyeonggi province of ROK and
Maharashtra State for cooperation in economic
(industrial) and cultural areas was signed in August 2006.
The people-to-people contacts are also on steady increase

with visa requests from Koreans touching 45,284 during
the period January-October 2006.

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
(DPRK)
The relations between India and DPRK continued to be
cordial with a focus on humanitarian and human resource
development assistance. India expressed its deep concern
following DPRK’s nuclear tests on 9 October 2006.
A two-member Foreign Ministry delegation led by
Director of 4th Department in the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, Ma Chol Su visited India during 15-18 March
2006 to hold bilateral discussions on issues of mutual
interest. A DPRK information delegation headed by the
Vice-Chairman of the DPRK Information Committee
visited India during 25-29 April 2006. An agreement on
cooperation in the field of information between the two
governments was signed on 26 April 2006.
India continued to provide human resource development
and other forms of assistance to DPRK. DPRK received
2,000 MT of rice as humanitarian assistance in February
2006. India made a token gift of 5 computers, two printers,
one TV and one DVD to the Korea-India Friendship
School. India also agreed to supply of two trucks and two
tractors with spare tyres to the Korea-India Friendship
Farm.
India has been participating in the April Spring Friendship
Art Festival and the Pyongyang International bi-annual
Film Festival on a regular basis. In 2006, India participated
in the 10th Pyongyang International Film Festival held from
13-22 September 2006. India’s only entry to the Festival
“Meenakshi-A Tale Of Three Cities” produced and
directed by M.F. Husain won two prizes (trophies) for the
best cinematography and best production design.
For the current financial year 2006-07, thirteen ITEC slots
were offered to DPRK. Out of thirteen slots, eight slots
have been availed by DPRK in Proficiency in the areas of
English Language and IT Skills, Certificate in Software
Development Techniques and English for Professionals.
Five slots are utilised in English for Professionals and for
Advanced Diploma in Computer Aided Drafting and
Designing. DPRK sent two participants for Professional
Course for Foreign Diplomats (PCFD) course being
organized by Foreign Service Institute.
35

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

A 16-member Korean Gymnastics team participated in
the 13th Asian Senior Artistic & Rythmic Gymnastics
Championship from 29 July-3 August 2006 and two Judo
coaches also visited India at the end of August 2006 to
train Indian players for next Asian Games. Indian players
participated in the Table Tennis Championship in
Pyongyang in August 2006. A 16-member Korean team
won the Asian Football Confederation Under-19 Soccer
Championship held in India on 12 November 2006.

June 2006. It was agreed that the Joint Committee on
Cooperation would meet once in two years. The Indian
side was led by Secretary (East) Rajiv Sikri.
In the field of education, Government of India provides
30 scholarships for Mongolian nationals; 10 under CEP
and 20 under GCSS; for pursuing higher studies in India.
4 students were granted scholarships to study Hindi
language at Kendriya Hindi Sansthan, Agra in 2005-06.
A Memorandum of Understanding for establishing a Chair
on Sanskrit and Buddhists Studies at the National
University of Mongolia was signed in April 2006 by the
Indian Ambassador to Mongolia and the Mongolian
Minister for Education, Culture and Sciences. A Chair
for Sanskrit was established on 14 January 2006 with the
deputation of Dr. Dash to Mongolia. Over 425 books on
Sanskrit, Indian Philosophy and Buddhist philosophy were
handed over to the National Library attached to the Chair.

India and DPRK have continued cooperation at UN
bodies and other international organisations.

Mongolia
India continued to accord priority to relations with
Mongolia, which have traditionally been friendly and
cordial. The relations have steadily improved, following
the decision to elevate it to a “new level of Partnership”
reached during the visit of Prime Minister Enkhbayar in
2004. The first ministerial visit to Mongolia in the filed of
defence and the first meeting of India Mongolia Joint
Committee on Cooperation were held during the year.
India continued to provide technical and economic
cooperation to Mongolia in higher education, agriculture,
Information and Communication Technology and human
resource development.

Mongolia utilized 47 ITEC slots for the year 2005-06 to
train Mongolian citizens in 11 disciplines including English
language course, Hotel Management, Small Scale
Business, Computer Hardware/Software, Management
Development Programme, Oil and Gas Measurement,
Floor Milling Technology, Textile Research,
Standardization, Mass Communication and Applied
Manpower. The Government of India had agreed to do
solar electrification of Dadal Soum in Khentti Aimag. The
project was executed by the Central Electronic Ltd. and
jointly inaugurated on 29 April 2006 by the Mongolian
Foreign Minister, Minister of Fuel and Energy, Minister
for Profession Inspection and the Indian Ambassador.

Minister of State for Defence M.M. Pallam Raju paid an
official visit to Mongolia from 3-6 May 2006. The visit
has identified areas of cooperation in defence and security
spheres and the mechanism for their implementation. The
first meeting on Indian Mongolian Joint Working Group
on Defence Cooperation was held in Ulaanbaatar from
31 March-3 April 2006.

The India-Mongolia Commemorative Postal stamp to
celebrate the 50th Anniversary of Indian-Mongolian
Diplomatic Relations was released on 28 September 2006
jointly by the Mongolian Foreign Minister and the Indian
Ambassador. In the sphere of cultural cooperation,
Technical expert team from ICCR digitalised precious
Buddhist manuscripts in Mongolia. The digitalisation was
completed on 18 October 2006.

Chief Minister of Delhi Sheila Dikshit visited Mongolia
from 10-13 July 2006 on the occasion of Naadam
(Mongolian National Day) at the invitation of the Mayor
of Ulaanbaatar city T.S Batbayar. On 7 March 2006, a
street in Ulaanbaatar was named the Mahatma Gandhi
Street. During her visit to Mongolia, Sheila Dixit unveiled
a statue of Mahatma Gandhi on 11 July 2006.
The first meeting of India Mongolia Joint Committee on
Cooperation, to review bilateral relations was held on 9

36

Back to Contents

Eurasia

The close, extensive and cooperative interaction between

4

visited India from 7-10 December 2006 to lead the
Russian delegation at the IRIGC Meeting;

India and Eurasian countries continued through 200607. High-level bilateral visits were interspersed with the
exchange of official, parliamentary and commercial
delegations and cultural troupes. Cultural festivals,
seminars, conferences and trade exhibitions were
organized regularly; bilateral agreements in various fields
were signed, training courses were offered and assistance
provided to the countries of the region within the
parameters of the ITEC Programme as well as through
other channels. Country-specific developments are as
follows:

The Russian Foreign Minister, Sergei Lavrov, visited
India on 17 November 2006 and met External
Affairs Minister and called on Prime Minister for
wide ranging discussions on issues of bilateral,
regional and international interest;
Murli Deora, Minister of Petroleum and Natural
Gas, visited Moscow from 30 October-1 November
2006 for a bilateral meeting with the Russian
Minister of Energy and Industry and to participate
in the conference “International Energy week”;
National Security Advisor visited Moscow on 6-7
April 2006 and met the Russian Foreign Minister
and Defence Minister. He also visited on 12-13
January 2007 for talks with the Russian side;

Russia
The momentum of bilateral interaction was maintained
at the same high level that has characterised it over the
past 2-3 years. A large number of visits were exchanged,
many of them with a view to promote economic and
commercial cooperation, which is now a priority for both
countries. Defence, energy, space, science and technology
and culture were other important focus areas for the two
sides. High-level bilateral visits included the following:

Russian Trade and Economic Development Minister
German Gref led a business delegation to India on
12-13 February 2007;
Sheila Dikshit, Chief Minister of Delhi, visited
Moscow to participate in the event, “Days of Delhi
in Moscow”, from 28 May-1 June 2006;

President of the Russian Federation, Vladimir Putin
visited India for the India-Russia Annual Summit
on 25-26 January 2007. Apart from bilateral
meetings, he was the Chief Guest at the Republic
Day celebrations;

‘RosAtom’ Director Sergei Kirienko visited India
from 6-9 April 2006. He again visited India from
17-19 January 2007;
On 8-9 December 2006, the Third Meeting of the
Joint Task Force on Settlement of Mutual Financial
Obligations took place in Delhi;

Chairman of the Government of the Russian
Federation [Prime Minister] Mikhail Fradkov, visited
India on 16-17 March 2006;

Commerce Secretary visited Moscow in August
2006 to attend the first meeting of the Joint Study
Group (JSG), which was formed to examine ways
and means of enhancing bilateral trade and assessing
the feasibility of a Comprehensive Economic
Cooperation Agreement. The 2nd meeting of the JSG
took place in Delhi on 23-24 November 2006.

Deputy Prime Minister and Defence Minister of
Russia, Alexander Zhukov, visited Delhi on 28 June
2006 to co-chair an inter-session meeting of the
Indo-Russian Inter-Governmental Commission
[IRIGC] on Trade, Economic, Scientific,
Technological and Cultural Cooperation, along with
Finance Minister P. Chidambaram. Zhukov also

The three Chiefs of Armed Forces, Foreign Secretary,
Defence Secretary, Scientific Advisor to Defence
37

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

India-Armenia International Governmental Commission
on Trade, Economic, Scientific and Technological, and
Cultural and Educational Cooperation met on 19 January
2007 to discuss bilateral cooperation on the whole range
of issues. Secretary (East) and the Armenian Deputy
Foreign Minister chaired the meeting of the Commission.
India-Armenian Foreign Office Consultation was also held
on 19 January 2007.

Minister, Secretary [Steel] and Secretary [Space],
among others, also visited Russia. Anatoly Safonov,
Envoy of the Russian President on Cooperation on
Counter-Terrorism visited India in October for the
meeting of the Indo-Russian Joint Working Group
on countering international terrorism. Sergey Kislak,
Deputy Foreign Minister visited India for the IndiaRussia Strategic Stability Talks on 12 January 2007.
India-Russia JWGs on Energy, Culture, Trade and
Military and Technical Cooperation also held their
meetings during the year.

Azerbaijan
The Azerbaijan Finance Minister Avaz Alakbarov led a
delegation to India from 9-12 January 2006. During the
visit, he met Finance Minister P. Chidambaram, former
MoS for Commerce Elangovan and Representatives of
Exim Bank and other financial institutions. Both the sides
discussed pending bilateral agreements on avoidance of
double taxation and mutual investment protection.

Several other visits also took place during the year in an
essentially multilateral context, but were utilized for
bilateral meetings and interaction. These included the
following:
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh held a bilateral
meeting with President Putin during the visit to St.
Petersburg to participate in the meeting of leaders
of G-8 and the Outreach countries, i.e., India,
China, Brazil and Mexico, on 17 July 2006.

Belarus
The Presidential elections in Belarus were held on 19
March 2006. As expected, the incumbent President A.L.
Lukashenko won the election with an overwhelming vote
share of 82.6% as against a mere 6% of joint opposition
candidate Alexander Milinkevich and two other
candidates. This was Lukashenko’s third successive victory
since 1994. Addressing a huge press conference after his
election, President Lukashenko warned against US
attempts to sabotage the ‘democratic process” in Belarus
and ridiculed West’s claim of isolating Belarus by the
international community. At the same time, he boasted
of Belarus’ friendship with Russia, China and India.

Finance Minister P. Chidambaram visited St.
Petersburg on 9 June 2006, for the meeting among
the Ministers of G8 and 4 Outreach Countries.
Kamal Nath, Minister of Commerce & Industry
visited St. Petersburg to participate in the 10th St.
Petersburg International Economic Forum from 1315 June 2006.
D. Purandareswari, Minister of State for Human
Resource Development, visited Russia in June 2006
to attend the G8 Education Ministers’ meeting in
St. Petersburg.

During the 2005, bilateral trade stood at US$ 243 million
as compared to US$ 118 million in 2004. FICCI hosted
the second meeting of India-Belarus Joint Business
Council on 22 March 2006 in Delhi. On the joint
invitation of Chairman, Rajya Sabha and Speaker, Lok
Sabha, a Belarusian Parliamentrary delegation led by
G.Novitski, Chairman of the Council of Republic [Upper
House]in the National Assembly of Belarus paid a goodwill
visit to India from 25-30 July 2006. Novitski had earlier
visited India in November 2002 as Prime Minister of
Belarus.
During
his visit
to
Delhi, the
Belarusian Speaker called on President, Vice-President
and met Speaker of the Lok Sabha. The delegation also
had a business interaction in ASSOCHAM.

Armenia
Of the 300 tractors gifted to Armenia under the Aid to
Central Asia programme, 240 were delivered this year
(60 tractors were already sent in 2005). The Armenian
government expressed deep appreciation for the gift.
An Armenian Parliamentary delegation, led by the
President of the Armenian National Assembly, visited
India in December 2006, at the joint invitation of
Chairman, Rajya Sabha and Speaker, Lok Sabha. During
its stay, the delegation called on the Vice President,
Speaker and EAM, and attended the proceedings of the
Lok Sabha.

The delegation also visited Agra and Bangalore (with
38

Back to Contents

The Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh and the President of the Russian Federation
Vladimir Putin in New Delhi on 25 January 2007.

The President Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam and the Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh receiving
the President of Tajikistan Emomali Rahmonov at Rashtrapati Bhavan in New Delhi on 7 August 2006.

39

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

2006. The 1st meeting of the Joint Working Group on
Military-Technical Cooperation of the IKIGC took place
in Astana on 4-5 September 2006. The first meeting of
the JWG on Hydrocarbons was held in Astana on 28
September 2006.

which the Belarusian capital of Minsk has been ‘twinned’)
where they met Governor, CM, Speaker of the State
Assembly, and visited HAL, INFOSYS and BIOCON
factories.

Kazakhstan

Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Murli Deora led
the Indian delegation as Special Envoy of Prime Minister
at the 2nd Summit of the CICA held in Almaty on 17
June 2006. A bilateral meeting was held on 17 June 2006
between Murli Deora and President Nazarbayev. The
CICA Secretariat was formally established with the signing
of the Statute of the CICA Secretariat during the Summit.
The Statute was signed by Ambassador of India to
Kazakhstan. India ratified the Statute in August 2006 and
deposited the Instrument of Ratification of the Statute
with the Chair country, Kazakhstan, on 11 September
2006, thus becoming the first CICA member state to ratify
the Statute and deposit the Instrument of Ratification.

Dr Bulat Sultanov, Director of Kazakh Institute of
Strategic Studies (KISS) and Dr. Leila M. Muzaparova,
Deputy Director, Institute of World Economy and Politics
(IWEP) visited India from 14-20 January 2006. Both KISS
and IWEP are important strategic think tanks of
Kazakhstan directly under the President’s control. The
visiting scholars had a series of meetings and discussions
with various Indian think tanks involved with Central
Asia as well as with Deputy National Security Advisor
and Secretary (East). The outcome of the visit is likely to
be institutional linkages between the Kazakh institutes
and Indian think tanks and sensitization of the Kazakh
establishment on India’s capabilities and potential.

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh and President of
Kazakhstan, Nursultan Nazarbayev had a bilateral meeting
on the sidelines of the G-8 Summit in St. Petersburg,
Russia on 17 July 2006. Prime Minister invited President
Nazarbayev to visit India.

The 2nd meeting of the India-Kazakhstan Joint Working
Group on Combating International Terrorism and Other
types of Crime was held in New Delhi on 20-21 March
2006. At the end of the meeting a protocol for joint action
was signed by the two leaders.

India-Kazakhstan cooperation in Information Technology
made significant progress this year. Apart from the
successful meeting of the Joint Working Group on
Information Technology, major Indian IT companies
started operations in Kazakhstan. Tata Consultancy
Services (TCS) won government tenders. NIIT opened a
chain of IT training centres in major cities of Kazakhstan.
Infotech won contracts with major banks of Kazakhstan.
STPI Bangalore, Infotech, TCS and other Indian
companies participated in the opening of IT Park in
Almaty. In his inaugural address, President Nazarbayev
said that he had got the idea of IT Park during his visit to
Bangalore in 2002. The largest number of specialists sent
from Kazakhstan to India under ITEC programme was in
the IT sector.

Kairat Abdrakhmanov, Deputy Foreign Minister of
Kazakhstan visited India on 28 April 2006 as Special
Envoy of President Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan.
Abdrakhmanov carried a letter of invitation for Prime
Minister to attend the 2nd Conference on Interaction and
Confidence Building Measures (CICA) Summit which was
held in Almaty on 17 June 2006. The Deputy Foreign
Minister handed over the letter to Foreign Secretary. He
also met with NSA.
The 6 th meeting of the India-Kazakhstan InterGovernmental Commission (IKIGC) on Trade, Economic,
Scientific, Technological, Industrial and Cultural
Cooperation (IKIGC) was held on 12-13 October 2006
in New Delhi. The IKIGC was co-chaired by Murli Deora,
Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas on the Indian side
and Baktykozha Izmukhambetov, Minister of Energy and
Mineral Resources on the Kazakhstani side. Before the
IKIGC meeting, the Joint Working Groups working under
the Commission met and signed Protocols in respective
areas. The 1st meeting of the Joint Working Group on
Information Technology was held in Almaty on 13-14 July

Three delegations from India representing Hinduism,
Islam and Zoroastrianism religions participated in the
second Congress of World Religions on 12-13 September
2006 in Astana. The leaders of delegation also had
bilateral meetings with President Nazarbayev on the
sidelines of the Congress.
40

Back to Contents

Eurasia

India amounted to Rs 122.96 crores, with around 80%
comprising of readymade garments, apparel etc. In an
effort to promote greater bilateral economic cooperation
the 4th Session of the Joint Business Council was held in
India in March 2006. Technical assistance under the ITEC
program was fully utilized. In the cultural sphere, two
successful Indian film festivals were organized in Issyk –
kul (July) and Tokmok in June 2006.

An India-Kazakhstan Joint Armies Mountaineering
Expedition successfully climbed Mount Nun on 18
September 2006. This was the first event of its kind in
the history of India-Kazakhstan relations and was well
received in Kazakhstan.
Bilateral trade crossed US$100 million mark in 2006
reaching US$117.16 million. Export Promotion Councils
of India participated in exhibitions and buyer-seller meets
in Kazakhstan. Among the bigger delegations, a delegation
from Electronics & Software Export Promotion Council
participated in KITEL-2006 (13 th Central Asian
International Exhibition “Telecommunications and
Computer Technologies) from 30 May-2 June 2006 and a
delegation from the Gems & Jewellery Export Promotion
Council of India visited Kazakhstan on 25-26 August 2006
for trade promotion and participation in a buyer-seller
meet.

Tajikistan
The first meeting of the Joint Working Group-Countering
International Terrorism was held in Dushanbe on 9-10
January 2006. A protocol was signed at the end of the
meeting detailing common positions and action points.
The 2nd Meeting of the JWG on Terrorism was held in
New Delhi on 3-4 August 2006.
A 12-member Tajik Parliamentary delegation headed by
Saidullo Khairulloev, Chairman of the Lower House of
the Tajik Parliament, visited India from 13-20 May 2006
at the invitation of Speaker, Lok Sabha. During the visit,
the delegation called on the President, Vice President,
Minister of State for External Affairs and Chairman,
Parliamentary Committee on External Affairs.

In keeping with the official language policy of Kazakhstan,
our Mission in Almaty brought out tri-lingual KazakhRussian-English edition of famous Indian books and
themes. A Kazakh-English book on life of Mahatma
Gandhi was brought out on 2 October 2006 to celebrate
Gandhi Jayanti and 100 Years of Satyagraha. The papers
presented during an International Seminar “Jawaharlal
Nehru & Asian Cooperation” on 17 June 2005 were
compiled in the form of a tri-lingual book “Jawaharlal
Nehru & Asian Cooperation”. A week-long event on
‘Buddhism in India’ was held in the National Library of
Kazakhstan in Almaty. The event included a photo
exhibition, a film show and presentation of the first Kazakh
edition of ‘Dhammapada’.

The President of Tajikistan, E. Rahmonov was in India
from 6-10 August 2006 on a State Visit at the invitation
of Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh. President
Rahmonov had meetings with the President and Prime
Minister. Vice President, Bhairon Singh Shekhawat and
Minister of Mines, Sisram Ola also called on the Tajik
President. The engagements in Delhi included paying
homage at Rajghat and at the grave of renowned IndoPersian Poet Mirza Abdul Qadir Bedil. He also delivered
a keynote address at India-Tajikistan International
Seminar organized at the Indian Council of World Affairs.
A Joint Declaration signed by the Tajik President and
Prime Minister was issued at the end of the visit.

Kyrgyzstan
India’s relations with Kyrgyzstan continued to be close
and friendly. Under the leadership of President Kurmanbek
Bakiev, bilateral ties were reinforced, particularly with the
signing of the MoU for setting up of the Indo- Kyrgyz
Centre for Information Technology in March 2006. The
centre will be a showpiece of India’s strength in
information technology and is expected to start
functioning in 2007. Foreign Office Consultations held
in August in Delhi provided a useful forum for exchange
of views on bilateral and international issues, thereby
facilitating greater understanding.

The 3 rd Meeting of the India-Tajikistan InterGovernmental Commission on Trade, Economic and
Related Matters was held in New Delhi from 30 July -1
August 2006. The Tajik delegation was led by Minister of
Economy, Hakim Soliev while the Indian side was led by
G.K. Pillai, Special Secretary, Department of Commerce.
At the end of the meeting a Joint Protocol detailing action
for increasing economic cooperation between the two
countries was signed.

Indo - Kyrgyz trade is limited. In 2005-2006, exports from
41

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

Turkmenistan

indignation and shock and recalled the necessity to jointly
fight international terrorism.

E. Ahamed, Minister of State for External Affairs and cochair of the India-Turkmenistan IGC on Trade, Economic,
Scientific and Technological Cooperation led the Indian
delegation for the 1st meeting of the IGC held in Ashgabat
on 2-3 October 2006. Minister was accompanied by a high
level delegation with representatives from Ministries of
External Affairs, Petroleum and Natural Gas, Departments
of Commerce and Science and Technology, State Trading
Corporation and Public Sector Oil and Gas companies,
namely ONGC Videsh and Gail India Limited. Ahamed
had extensive discussions with Meredov, Turkmen Foreign
Minister on all aspects of the bilateral relationship as well
as issues of regional cooperation such as India’s
participation in the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan
(TAP) gas pipeline project. The Turkmen Foreign Minister
conveyed the support of Saparmurat Niyazov, President
of Turkmenistan to greater Indian involvement in various
sectors in Turkmenistan, notably in the hydrocarbon
sector. Meredov informed Ahamed that Turkmenistan
supports India becoming a member of TAP. Ahamed
addressed the plenary session of the IGC wherein he
stressed the need for India to become a development
partner for Turkmenistan. The IGC meeting was
conducted through meetings of various sub-groups
including the 1st meeting of the India-Turkmenistan Joint
Working Group (JWG) on Hydrocarbons, which discussed
possible areas of bilateral cooperation such as India’s
interest in participation in prospecting and eventual
exploration and production in the offshore Caspian blocks
of Turkmenistan.

Because of Ukraine’s preoccupation with its Parliamentary
election in March 2006 and with the formation of a
government thereafter, there were no ministerial visits and
only a few high-level visits between India and Ukraine:
Air Chief Marshal S.P.Tyagi, as the head of a three-member
Air Force delegation and Dr.Mano Ranjan, Secretary
(Steel), accompanied by a team of officials from SAIL
and Rourkela Steel Plant, visited Ukraine in June 2006.
A four-member delegation led by K.D.Singh, Additional
Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice, visited Ukraine in
May. The draft text of a Treaty on Mutual Legal Assistance
in Civil and Commercial Matters between India and
Ukraine, was finalized and initialed during the visit.
A 13 member Group of Experts from Ukraine visited India
from 13-15 February 2006 for discussions with their Indian
counterparts on the India-Ukraine Joint Action Plan
(JAP) 2006-07. During the visit of President to Ukraine
in May 2005, the two Presidents had decided that their
countries would jointly formulate a JAP to promote
bilateral cooperation in various sectors. During the visit
of the Ukrainian experts, the draft JAP was finalized to a
large extent, with a view to signing it at the meeting of
the India-Ukraine IGC later in the year.
The Mission organized, in collaboration with the
Ukrainian Chambers of Commerce and Industry, buyerseller meets and meetings with Ukrainian companies/
businessmen for several business and commercial
delegations from India in different sectors: gem and
jewellery (visit of Gem and Jewellery Export Promotion
Council); agrifood business (FICCI); wool and woollens
(Wool and Woollens Export Promotion Council); and
herbals sector of PHARMEXCIL. Indian companies/
business groups participated in several trade fairs in Kyiv:
Tea Board, India, in the exhibition ‘World Food Ukraine
2006’ (October ’06); Lohia group of industries, in the
exhibition ‘PlastUkraine 2006’ (October ’06); an India
Pavilion, with the participation of 9 companies, was set up
by the Gem and Jewellery Export Promotion Council in
the jewellery exhibition Jeweller Expo (November ’06).
Bilateral trade turnover during January-August 2006 was
US$7.75 million.

Saparmurat Niyazov, President of Turkmenistan passed
away on 21 December 2006. The Indian delegation to
the state funeral held in Ashgabat on 24 December 2006
was led by Prof. Saifuddin Soz, Minister of Water
Resources.

Ukraine
Relations between India and Ukraine remain close and
friendly. India, as the world’s largest democracy, remains
supportive of Ukraine’s efforts to establish democratic
institutions. On its part, Ukraine has been sensitive to
our concerns. Ukraine strongly condemned terrorist
attacks in India. The Ukrainian President, Speaker of
Parliament and Foreign Minister, condemned the bomb
blasts on Mumbai trains in July, expressing deep

Indo-Ukrainian cultural associations organized several
cultural events in Ukraine during the year. Four of these
42

Back to Contents

Eurasia

were major events involving artists and cultural
personalities from abroad, including India.

Kirloskar Brothers Limited donated two Pump sets to
Government of Uzbekistan to be installed at Samarkand.
During his visit, MOS held meetings with Uzbek
dignitaries including Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Economic Relations.

Uzbekistan
The 6 th meeting of the India-Uzbekistan Inter
Governmental Commission (IUIGC) was held in New
Delhi on 7 March 2006. The 13 member Uzbek delegation
was led by A Shaykov, Minister of External Economic
Relations of Uzbekistan. Jairam Ramesh, Minister of State
for Commerce and Industry, was the Indian Co-Chair. A
protocol detailing the programme of cooperation in
between the two sides was signed at the end of the IGC.
The Uzbek Minister called on Kamal Nath, Minister of
Commerce and Industry, Praful Patel, Minister of Civil
Aviation and E Ahamed, Minister of State for External
Affairs.

The First Joint Working Group on Cooperation in Mining
and Mineral Resources was held from 8-10 June 2006 in
Tashkent. A Working Group Meeting on Cooperation in
Hydrocarbon sector was held from 27-29 September 2006
in Tashkent. Air Chief Marshal S.P. Tyagi visited Tashkent
on 7-8 June 2006. A delegation led by Chairman
(Minister-rank) of Uzbek Light Industry, Rakhmatulla R.
Ruzikulov, visited India from 13-17 November 2006. A
Center of Indology named after Mahatma Gandhi was
established at The Tashkent State Institute of Oriental
Studies with a grant from the Ministry.

Prime Minister paid an official visit to Uzbekistan on 2526 April 2006. The two sides had detailed exchange of
views on the issues of further development of bilateral
relations in political, trade and economic, scientific and
technical, cultural and humanitarian and other spheres
of cooperation, as well as on regional and international
issues of mutual interest. Six MoUs and one Work Plan
were signed during the visit for cooperation in different
fields. Uzbekistan also accepted the Indian offers to set
up satellite based tele-education and tele-medicine
connectivity between India and Uzbekistan and financial
support to establish Uzbekistan-India Entrepreneurship
Development Centre in Tashkent. Uzbekistan reiterated
its support to the permanent membership of India in an
expanded UN Security Council. Prime Minister
inaugurated the “Jawaharlal Nehru Center of Information
Technology”, established with a grant of Rs.3 crores from
the Ministry. The Uzbek President accepted invitation
from Prime Minister to visit India.

Defence cooperation with Uzbekistan expanded with
training of Uzbek officers in India and training of a
contingent of Uzbek Special Forces in India.
Regular dance, music, yoga, language and Indian studies
classes were organized by the Lal Bahadur Shastri Centre
for Indian Culture, Tashkent. Eighteen scholarships were
awarded to Uzbek students under the General Cultural
Scholarship Scheme for higher studies in Indian
Universities.

India-Russia-China
A Summit-level meeting of India, Russia and China was
held on 17 July 2006 in St. Petersburg which discussed
international issues and trilateral cooperation among the
three countries. A Foreign Minister level trilateral meeting
also took place on 14 February 2007 in New Delhi.

6th Shanghai Cooperation Organization
Summit

Five scholars from Jawaharlal Nehru University, New
Delhi, took part in the Conference “Development of a
Social Market Economy in India: Experience & Problems”
held from 23-25 May 2006 at the University of World
Economy & Diplomacy, Tashkent. The Conference was
partly supported by the Eurasia Division.

The 6th SCO Summit held in Shanghai on 15 June 2006
was attended by Presidents of the Member states i.e.
Russia, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan and
host China. The Observer states were led by President
Musharraf of Pakistan, Ahmedinejad of Iran and
Nambaryn Enkhbayar of Mongolia. Murli Deora, Minister
of Petroleum and Natural Gas was India’s representative.
Afghan President Hamid Karzai was a special guest. Deora
spoke at the plenary meeting which was preceded by a
meeting restricted to Member states.

E.V.K.S. Elangovan, Minister of State for Textiles,
inaugurated the 3rd India Trade Exhibition in Tashkent
on 6 October, 2006. The Exhibition features a wide range
of products, goods and services. At the Exhibition, M/s
43

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

meeting was attended by Prime Ministers of Russia, China,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan. Uzbekistan was
represented by its Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign
Minister. Amongst the observer countries, Pakistan was
represented by Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz, Iran by its
first Vice President Parviz Davoudi and Mongolia by its
Deputy Prime Minister. Special guest Afghanistan was
represented by its Vice President. Other participants
included Zhang Deguang, SCO Secretary General,
Secretary General of Eurasian Economic Community and
Chairmen of the SCO Interbank Association and Business
Council. In his address at the plenary session of the
meeting, MOS reiterated India’s position on greater
involvement in SCO activities as Observer with particular
reference to trade, financial relations, energy and cultural
cooperation.

The Shanghai Declaration, which was finalized at the
restricted Member only meeting, while applauding the
achievements of the SCO in ushering in what was called
the Shanghai Spirit of cooperation and good neighbourly
relations amongst member states, inter alia called upon
the need to “discard double standards in international
discourse and allow coexistence of diverse civilizational
and development models.” While reiterating the
importance of the UN it said that “no time limit should
be set for reform nor should a vote be forced on any
proposal on which there are major differences.” The
Declaration mentions that the next Secretary General
should be from Asia. The Declaration reflected the
interventions of SCO leaders at the plenary session who
spoke of the need to combat three threats to peace and
stability posed by extremism, terrorism and separatism.

2nd CICA Summit

The intervention of Deora focused on the principle SCO
objectives and sought greater involvement within SCO
as Observer. Deora expressed India’s interest in
participating in SCO’s activities that promote economic
and energy cooperation and cultural inter-exchanges and
those directed against terrorism and illegal drug trafficking.

Murli Deora attended as Special Envoy of Prime Minister,
the 2nd Summit of the Conference on Interactions and
Confidence Building in Asia (CICA) held in Almaty on
17 June, 2006. India is one of the founding members of
CICA which has 17 members including Russia, China,
Pakistan, Israel, Egypt and Iran. CICA is an initiative of
the President of Kazakhstan, Nursultan Nazarbayev.
(Former Prime Minister, Atal Behari Vajpayee had
attended the 1st CICA Summit held in June 2002.)

Prithviraj Chavan, Minister of State (PMO), represented
India at the SCO Heads of Government (HOG) meeting
held in Dushanbe on 15 September 2006. SCO HOG

44

Back to Contents

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

The Gulf

5

King Hamad and handed over a letter of invitation from
the President of India. He also called on the Prime
Minister Shaikh Khalifa bin Salman Al Khalifa and the
Foreign Minister Shaikh Khalid bin Ahmed al Khalifa and
discussed regional and international developments and
issues of mutual interest.

The year witnessed further consolidation of the warm
and friendly ties that characterize the multifaceted
relationship between India and the countries of the gulf
region. There is considerable goodwill for India and
expatriate Indians at all levels. Active steps were taken
in cooperation with the countries of the region to promote
the welfare of the Indian community especially expatriate
workers. Bilateral interactions intensified further. On the
economic front bilateral trade expanded further and
relations were further consolidated and special emphasis
was laid on promoting investment cooperation. Joint
Commission Meetings were held with Oman, Saudi
Arabia, and Kuwait. The year was marked by the State
visit of the Amir of Kuwait to India in June 2006.
Agreements on the Avoidance of Double Taxation and
Prevention of Illicit Trafficking in Narcotic Drugs and a
Programme for Cultural and Information Exchanges
(2006-08) was signed with Kuwait. An MoU on manpower
was signed with UAE, a draft Labour Agreement was
finalized with Kuwait as well as a protocol to the Labour
Agreement with Qatar. An MoU on Scientific and
Education Cooperation and another on Health
Cooperation were signed with Saudi Arabia. The year was
also marked by a number of exchanges in the field of
defence. The second India-GCC Industrial Conference
was held in Muscat on 25-26 March 2006 and the launch
of GCC-India FTA plus negotiations helped to provide
further impetus to bilateral relations. The situation in Iraq
remained volatile. India welcomed the installation of the
democratically elected Government in Iraq and hoped
that it would achieve success in bringing peace, prosperity
and stability to Iraq. India remains willing to continue its
assistance in the reconstruction of Iraq and to cooperate
with it in areas of mutual interest.

Vayalar Ravi, Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs visited
Bahrain on 3 May 2006 during which he had meetings
with the Crown Prince and Commander-in-Chief of the
Defence Forces, Shaikh Salman bin Hamad Al Khalifa
and Minister for Labour Dr. Majeed bin Mohsin Al Alawi.
Somnath Chatterjee, Speaker, Lok Sabha, alongwith a
fourteen member Parliamentary delegation transited
through Bahrain on 24 September and then on 28 -29
September 2006. He met the Chairman of Bahraini
Parliament, Khalifa bin Ahmed Al Dhahrani and
prominent MPs and exchanged views on the parliamentary
system and electoral process.
Two training ships of the Indian Navy, “INS Tir” and “INS
Krishna” paid a goodwill visit to Bahrain from 10-13 April
2006.
M.K.Narayanan visited Bahrain in December 2006 to
participate in the Gulf Security Conference during which
he held discussions with the Crown Prince and the Foreign
Minister.

Iran
India-Iran relations are underlined by historical,
civilisational and multifaceted ties. The bilateral
cooperation has acquired a strategic dimension flourishing
in the fields of energy, trade and commerce, information
technology and transit. There is a regular mechanism of
high level exchanges through the Joint Commission,
Strategic Dialogue and Consultations of the National
Security Councils of the two countries.

Bahrain
E. Ahamed, Minister of State for External Affairs visited
Bahrain on 22-23 April 2006 during which he called on

High-level bilateral exchanges
Dr. Mehdi Safari, Deputy Foreign Minister for Asia,
45

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

pulses, non-ferrous metals, organic and inorganic
chemicals, metal scrap, iron, steel, and leather.

Oceania and Commonwealth of Iran visited India on 29
August 2006. The discussions covered bilateral and
regional issues and focussed in particular on the nuclear
issue and cooperation in the energy sector.

Cooperation in the energy sector
An MoU of cooperation in the hydrocarbons sector signed
in 2003 underlines energy security as an important area
in our bilateral relations. India is committed to ensure a
cost effective, long term and secure mode of transfer of
Iranian gas to India.

Manouchehr Mottaki, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Iran
visited India on 16-17 November 2006. The Foreign
Minister called on the Prime Minister of India and had
meetings with External Affairs Minister, Minister of
Petroleum and Natural Gas and the National Security
Advisor. The discussions covered a wide range of bilateral
and regional issues.

Iran-Pakistan-India Gas Pipeline project
In February 2005, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
was authorized by the Cabinet to conduct negotiations
for an overland pipeline from Iran through Pakistan taking
into account security concerns, cost effectiveness and
assured supplies. We expect that the pipeline would lead
to a widening of trade and economic relationship with
both Iran and Pakistan. In pursuance of its mandate,
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has been
negotiating with both Iran and Pakistan in order to realise
a “safe and secure world class project”.

Joint Commission meeting
The 15th Session of India-Iran Joint Commission to be
co-chaired by the Foreign Ministers of the two countries
was scheduled to be held in March 2006 but had to be
postponed as there was no External Affairs Minister at
that time. The Joint Commission was set up in July 1984
and presently has seven sub-committees dealing with
Petroleum and Natural Gas, Trade, Transport and
Communications, Industry, Agriculture and Rural
Development, Culture, Science & Technology,
Information Technology, and Consular Matters.

Three Secretary level trilateral meetings were held in
February, May and August 2006 at Tehran, Islamabad and
New Delhi respectively. Iran has been seeking a
declaration of intent to be signed by the three countries
affirming political commitment to the project. However,
in the meetings differences have emerged over the pricing
formula, project structure and framework agreement. At
the last trilateral meeting it was decided to appoint an
international consultant who would examine all relevant
data and suggest a reasonable formulation on the price
issue. The consultant Gaffney, Cline & Associates
appointed by the Iran side worked out a price based on
certain parameters given by the latter. The price was not
found acceptable by India and Pakistan, and the
consultant has been given revised parameters to work it
out afresh.

The External Affairs Minister, Pranab Mukherjee, visited
Iran on 6-7 February 2007. Views were exchanged on
regional and bilateral issues between the two countries.
Bilateral trade
India-Iran commercial relations are dominated by Indian
import of Iranian crude oil (US$ 4.12 billion in 2005-06).
The total volume of annual bilateral trade was US$ 5.98
billion in 2005-06 registering 43.7% growth over the
previous year (US$ 4.13billion- 2004-05). India’s exports
to Iran have increased steadily in the last five years from
US$ 253 million in 2001 to US$ 1177 million in 2005-06.
Non-oil trade is in India’s favour and reached US$ 803
million, from US$ 587 million in 2004-05; Iranian nonoil exports were about US$ 686 million in 2005-06. During
2005-2006, total Indian exports to Iran were close to US$
1.17 billion, which included about US$ 374 million of
petroleum products.

LNG Deal
Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Mani Shankar
Aiyar visited Iran from 10-14 June 2005 and held
discussions with his counterpart, Bijan Namdar Zanganeh.
A Sale and Purchase agreement was signed between the
National Iranian Gas Export Company and three Indian
firms, Indian Oil Company (IOC), Gail (India) Limited
and Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited according to
which India will purchase five million tonnes of LNG per

Important Indian goods being exported to Iran are primary
and semi-finished iron and steel, manufactures of metals,
machinery and instruments, drugs/pharmaceuticals,
processed minerals, inorganic/agro chemicals, yarn fabric,
etc. India’s imports from Iran include crude oil, fruits, nuts,
46

Back to Contents

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

in New Delhi. During the visit Agreements on the
Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of
Fiscal Evasion; Drug Demand Reduction and Prevention
of Illicit Trafficking in Narcotic Drugs, Psychotropic
Substances and Precursor Chemicals and Related Matters;
and an Executive Programme for the Cultural and
Information Exchanges for the years 2006-2008 were
signed. The Amir met the President, Prime Minister, UPA
Chairperson, Leader of the Opposition and the Defence
Minister. The two sides reviewed the existing bilateral
relations and discussed regional and global issues of mutual
concerns. The Joint Statement issued during the visit
provides the future vision of our relations with Kuwait.

annum for 25 years from the second half of 2009. The
Iran side has yet to ratify this agreement despite
assurances. Iran has informed that it would like the price
to be re-negotiated. We maintain that the agreement is
legally binding and that Iran should honour its
commitment.
Transit
India and Iran are cooperating in the development of an
alternative access route to the sea for Afghanistan through
the Chabahar port of Iran connecting to Afghanistan
through the Melak-Zaranj-Delaram road stretch. The road
construction project is in progress for which Iran has been
providing material and logistic support by visa facilitation
to personnel involved, sourcing raw materials from Iran,
port and transit facilities.

Earlier E. Ahamed, Minister of State for External Affairs
had visited Kuwait on 16-17 April 2006 as Special Envoy
and handed over a letter of invitation from the President
of India to the Amir and also met the Prime Minister and
Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Kuwait

Iraq
Prime Minister sent a letter of congratulations to Prime
Minister Nouri Al- Malliki, consequent on the formation
of a new Government in May 2006 following the general
elections held in December 2005. He expressed the hope
that the new Government would be successful in bringing
peace, prosperity and stability in Iraq. He reiterated India’s
willingness to continue its assistance in the reconstruction
of Iraq and to cooperate with Iraq in all areas of mutual
interest. On bilateral front India remains committed to
assist Iraq in its efforts for economic reconstruction and
humanitarian needs. The official Spokesman had
expressed the hope that the sentence of the former
President Saddam Hussain will not be carried out and
expressed disappointment after execution was carried out.
He further expressed the hope that this event would not
affect the process of reconciliation, restoration of peace
and normalcy in Iraq.

Dr. Ismail Khader Al-Shatti, Minister of Communications
of Kuwait visited India on 28 June 2006 and met Praful
Patel, Minister of Civil Aviation to discuss civil aviation
issues. T.K.A. Nair, Principal Secretary to the Prime
Minister led an investment delegation to Kuwait on 2829 October 2006 comprising senior officials representing
various Ministries of the Government of India and the
Public Sector Undertakings.
E. Ahamed, Minister of State for External Affairs visited
Kuwait on 26-27 November 2006 to co-chair the first
meeting of the Kuwait-India Joint Ministerial Commission
for Trade and Economic Cooperation. The Kuwaiti side
was co-chaired by Finance Minister Bader Meshari AlHomeidhi. He called on the Amir, the Crown Prince, the
Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister and the
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the State of Kuwait. An
agreed draft of the Memorandum of Understanding on
Labour, Employment and Manpower Development was
initialled. It was decided to rename the Joint Ministerial
Commission as the Kuwait-India Joint Ministerial
Commission for Trade, Economic, Scientific and
Technological Cooperation and to hold its second annual
session in New Delhi in the last quarter of 2007.

Kuwait
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Amir of the
State of Kuwait paid a successful visit to India from 14-19
June 2006. The delegation included Deputy Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister Sheikh Dr. Mohammad
Sabah Al-Salem Al-Sabah, Minister of Energy Sheikh
Ahmad Fahd Al-Ahmad Al-Sabah, Minister of Finance
Bader Mishari Al-Homeidhi together with a high powered
business delegation led by the First Vice Chairman of the
Kuwait Chamber of Commerce and Industry Hilal Mishari
Al-Mutairi. The Amir addressed the business community

Special Kuwait Cell
The main work in the Special Kuwait Cell from 1 April
2006 has been related to locating some 8000 claimants
whose money had to be returned earlier to United Nations
47

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

Compensation Commission as these persons did not
respond to the letters sent by Special Kuwait Cell and
designated Banks within the time allowed by UNCC for
distribution of funds. The list of untraced claimants
received from UNCC was publicized through
advertisements in the national and regional press, press
briefings by the official spokesperson and Joint Secretary
(SKC) advising these persons to provide their latest
address to the Special Kuwait Cell so that communications
could be sent to them again. The list was placed on the
MEA website and also sent to the State Governments for
contacting these untraced claimants using the state
administration district by district. The last date for sending
the list of traced claimants to UNCC initially ended on
30 September 2006, however, UNCC accepted the lists
sent to them till October 2006.

Force 54 INS Brahmaputra and INS Betwa, made a small
port halt at Salalah while on duty to evacuate Indians
from Lebanon.

Qatar
C.R. Gharekhan, Prime Minister Special Envoy for West
Asia attended the 6 th Doha Forum on Democracy,
Development and Free Trade from 11-13 April 2006. He
visited Doha again from 21-23 August 2006 and met the
Heir Apparent Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad al Thani and
the Qatar’s Assistant Foreign Minister, Saif Muqaddam
al Bouinan.
The First Deputy Premier and Foreign Minister of the
State of Qatar, Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabor al
Thani visited India on 18-19 April 2006 during which he
called on the Prime Minister and met the Minister for
Commerce and Industry. Discussions were held on
strengthening bilateral economic ties.

As a result of the massive effort, Ministry succeeded in
locating approximately 6000 claimants and forwarded
their names to the UNCC for sending their compensation
money which had been earlier returned to UNCC.

Minister for Petroleum and Natural Gas Murli Deora
attended the 10th World Petroleum Conference in Doha
from 21 – 25 April 2006. He met the Qatari First Deputy
Premier and Foreign Minister, Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim
bin Jabor al Thani and Second Deputy Premier and
Minister of Energy and Industry Abdullah bin Hamad al
Attiyah and discussed bilateral cooperation in the energy
sector. He also met his Qatari counterpart in Vienna in
early September, 2006 and discussed energy cooperation.

Oman
Minister of Commerce and Industry Maqbool Bin Ali
Sultan led the Omani delegation to the 5th session of the
India-Oman Joint Commission Meeting, held in New
Delhi on 5 September 2006. The Indian side was headed
by Minister of Commerce and Industry Kamal Nath.
Omani Minister also met E. Ahamed, Minister of State
for External Affairs, Prithviraj Chavan Minister of State
in Prime Minister’s Office, and Minister of
Communications and Information Technology (C&IT)
Dayanidhi Maran.

Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister T.K.A. Nair
visited Qatar on 6 May 2006 during which he met the
First Deputy Premier and Foreign Minister of Qatar,
Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabor al Thani to review
the bilateral relations.

An eight-member Ministry of Home Affairs’s delegation
visited Oman from 10 -12 June 2006 to discuss the
Extradition Treaty, Agreements on Mutual Legal
Assistance in criminal as well as civil matters and
Memorandum of Understanding on exemption of visa
requirements in certain categories of passports.

E. Ahamed, Minister of State for External Affairs led a
four member delegation to the 5th Ministerial Meeting of
Asia Cooperation Dialogue held in Doha on 23-24 May
2006. Ahamed also led a 4-member Indian delegation to
the 6th International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies held in Doha from 29 October – 1 November
2006 and had met the Qatari Minister of State for Foreign
Affairs. Deputy Speaker of the Lok Sabha Charanjit Singh
Atwal led the Parliamentary delegation to the Conference
during which he held discussions with the Speaker of the
Qatari Advisory Council.

A delegation headed by Secretary, Ministry of Civil
Aviation, Ajay Prasad visited Oman on 15-16 November
2006 to discuss bilateral civil aviation issues with his
counterpart.
Three Indian naval training ships, INS Tir, INS Krishna
and INS Tarangini visited Salalah from 20-23 April 2006.
On 9 August 2006, two vessels of the Indian Navy Task

Chief of Staff of Qatari Armed Forces visited India on
48

Back to Contents

The Union Minister of External Affairs Pranab Mukherjee with the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Islamic Republic of Iran Manouchehr Mottakki in New Delhi on 16 November 2006.

The Minister of State for External Affairs E. Ahamed calls on the Amir of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahamad Al-Jaber
Al-Sabah during the Indo-Kuwait Joint Ministerial meeting in Kuwait on 26 November 2006.

49

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

23-24 August 2006 and discussed matters relating to
defence cooperation between the two countries.

discussed ways and means of further enhancing
cooperation in the field of education. He also met the
Minister of Higher Education, Minister of Education,
Rectors of King Saudi University, King Abdul Aziz
University and Imam Muhammad University.

India and Qatar initialed a draft protocol to the Labour
Agreement in New Delhi in September, 2006 during the
visit of the Director of Asian and African Affairs at the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, State of Qatar Abdul Rahman
M Al-Khulaifi to India.

Vayalar Ravi, Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs visited
the Kingdom on 8-9 May 2006 during which he met the
representatives of a number of Indian Associations and
discussed issues related to the welfare of the Indian
Diaspora in the Kingdom in general and the working class
in particular besides meeting with M/s Saudi National
Recruiting Company (SANARCOM).

The Qatari Minister of Finance and Acting Minister of
Economy and Trade visited India on 5 October 2006
during which he had fruitful discussions with Indian
authorities on bilateral economic cooperation including
investment cooperation.

E. Ahamed, Minister of State for External Affairs visited
Dammam in the Eastern Province of the Kingdom on 1516 October 2006 during which he met with the
representatives of various Indian community organizations
in the Eastern Province of the Kingdom.

M/s Petronet LNG and M/s Rasgas, Qatar reached an
agreement in September 2006 on the supply of 2.5 mmtpa
of LNG to India, starting in June 2009. This deal would
complete arrangements for the supply of 7.5 mmtpa of
LNG, the contracted quantity, between Petronet LNG
and Ras Gas, Qatar

The Saudi Cabinet on 11 September 2006 approved the
Agreement on Double Taxation Avoidance with India
which was signed during the visit of King Abdullah to
India in January 2006.

Qatari Second Deputy Premier and Minister of Energy
and Industry Al Attiyah visited India on 23-24 November
2006 during which he called on the Prime Minister,
Minister for External Affairs and Minister for Petroleum
and Natural Gas.

The Saudi Minister for Higher Education Dr. Khalid bin
Mohammed Al-Angari led a high level delegation to India
from 5-10 November 2006. Dr. Al -Angari and HRD
Minister Arjun Singh signed a Memorandum of
Understanding on Scientific and Educational Cooperation
between the two countries on 6 November 2006. Dr. AlAngari also met separately with Chairman of University
Grant Commission, Director of Indian Institute of
Technology, Delhi and Vice Chancellors of Jamia Millia
Islamia and Jawaharlal Nehru University. Dr. Al -Angari
visited Bangalore on 8 November 2006, where he visited
Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore, Indian
Institute of Management, Bangalore and WIPRO. Dr. Al
-Angari was in Hyderabad on a two day visit, where he
visited International Institute of Information Technology,
Indian School of Business, Hyderabad University and
Satyam Computer.

Saudi Arabia
M.K. Narayanan, National Security Advisor (NSA)
accompanied by Secretary (East) visited Saudi Arabia on
8-9 April 2006 during which he called on King Abdullah
bin Abdul Aziz and delivered a letter from Prime Minister
Dr. Manmohan Singh to him. They also met the Saudi
Foreign Minister Prince Saud Al Faisal and discussed issues
of mutual interest.
A Saudi delegation headed by the Justice Minister
Abdullah bin Mohammed al-Sheikh visited New Delhi
to participate in the 45th session of legal advisory
organization of Afro-Asian states, held in New Delhi from
3-6 April 2006.
Arjun Singh, Human Resource Development (HRD)
Minister led a delegation to the Kingdom from 29 May-3
June 2006. The delegation comprised Chairman,
University Grant Commission, Vice Chancellors of
Hyderabad and Jamia Milia Islamia Universities apart from
other members. HRD Minister called on the King and
delivered a letter from the Prime Minister. The two leaders

The Saudi Minister of Health, Dr.Hamad bin Abdullah
Al-Manea, accompanied by a 5-member delegation,
visited India from 20-24 November 2006 at the invitation
of the Minister of Health and Family Welfare. An
Executive Programme in the field of Healthcare was signed
during the visit.
50

Back to Contents

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

The 7 th Session of the India-Saudi Arabia Joint
Commission was held on 18-19 January 2007 in New
Delhi. Dr. Hashim Bin Abdullah Yamani, Minister of
Commerce and Industry of Saudi Arabia led the 28member official Saudi delegation which included the
Deputy Minister for Foreign Trade and a 43-member
business delegation and a 15-member ICT delegation. The
Indian delegation was led by the Finance Minister P.
Chidambaram.

Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs, Suresh
Pachouri visited UAE from 14--16 June 2006 and was the
Chief Guest in the FICCI-IIFA Global Business Forum
2006 in Dubai. India International Film Academy Awards
took place in June 2006 in Dubai.
E. Ahmed, Minister of State for External Affairs visited
UAE on 18 October 2006 during which he met
Mohammed Hussein Al Shaali, UAE Minister of State
for Foreign Affairs and discussed bilateral and regional
matters.

Haj
The Haj Committee pilgrim quota was raised from 100,000
to 110,000 for Haj 2006-II. Another 47,000
pilgrims(appx.) performed Haj through the private tour
operators, taking the total number of Indian pilgrims
performing Haj 2006-II to 157,000, the highest ever Haj
pilgrim quota for India. E.Ahamed, MOS(EA) led a 27member Haj goodwill delegation that visited Saudi Arabia
from 25 December 2006. Earlier he had visited the
Kingdom on 20-21 June 2006 at the invitation of the Saudi
Ministry of Haj during which he discussed Haj related
matters and signed the Annual Haj Agreement. Haj
Committee of India (HCoI) delegation visited the
Kingdom from 17-25 June 2006 and interacted with
various Saudi agencies related to Haj affairs and signed
the subsidiary Haj Agreement. E. Ahamed, MOS(EA)
inaugurated the All India Annual Haj Conference in New
Delhi on 20 May 2006. The system of registration of
Private Tour Operators, which had commenced from Haj
2003 has been continued for Haj 2006-II as well.

A two-member delegation from the Ministry of Finance
visited UAE from 7-13 June 2006 to discuss the
amendments to the existing India-UAE Double Taxation
Agreement. The protocol amending the DTAA has since
been initialled by the two sides in October, 2006.
An 8-member defence delegation from UAE visited India
on 19-20 April 2006 for the First India-UAE Joint Defence
Co-operation Committee meeting envisaged under the
India-UAE Joint Defence Co-operation Agreement. Maj
Gen Ali M Subaih AI-Ka’abi Chief of Staff of the UAE
Land Forces visited India from 19-24 November 2006.
A UAE delegation led by Dr. Hamid Nasr, Mohammed,
Economic Expert, Investments Department, Ministry of
Finance and Industry visited India on 5-6 July 2006 and
discussed amendments in the existing BIPPA between
India and UAE.
Mohammed Hussein Al Shaali, UAE Minister of State
for Foreign Affairs visited India to take part in the Second
Regional Economic Cooperation Conference (RECC) on
Afghanistan on 18-19 November 2006.

United Arab Emirates
Minister for Overseas Indian Affairs, Vayalar Ravi, visited
UAE from 4-6 May 2006 and discussed labour related
issues with Dr. Ali Bin Abdullah Al Kaabi, Minister of
Labour.

UAE Labour Minister Dr.Abdulla Al-Kaabi led a high level
delegation to india from 12-16 December 2006. During
the visit an MoU on manpower was signed.

T.K.A. Nair, Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister
visited UAE on 5-6 May 2006 for investment promotional
purpose and reviewed the ongoing investment initiatives
between the two countries.

Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)
India- GCC relations continued to strengthen. The second
India- GCC Industrial Conference took place in Muscat,
Oman on 24-26 March 2006 in which GCC industry and
trade ministers besides a large industrial delegation from
each state participated. Minister of Commerce and
Industry, Kamal Nath led Indian delegation to the
Conference. CIM during his visit to Oman called on
Sayyid Fahad bin Mahmoud bin Al Said, Deputy Prime
Minister and Maqbool bin Ali Sultan, Oman’s Minister

Minister for Human Resource Development Arjun Singh
visited U.A.E. from 3-6 June 2006 during which he held
detailed discussions with Sheikh Nahyan bin Mubarak
Al Nahyan, Minister of Higher Education and Scientific
Research, and Dr. Hanif Hassan Ali, Minister of Education
on bilateral cooperation in the field of education.
51

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

of Commerce and Industry to discuss trade ties existing
between the two countries. A large Indian business
delegation also participated. A joint declaration was
issued. The 3rd Industrial Conference is scheduled to take
place in 2007 in India with a back to back Investment
Summit. The first round of negotiations on India-GCC
Free Trade Agreement also took place in Riyadh in March
2006. Ministry of Commerce and Industry also undertook
consultations with the leading business organizations in
May 2006 on the proposed Agreement. The next round
of negotiations will take place in India.

Minister for Agriculture Sharad Pawar, led a delegation
for participation in the “Agritech Exhibition” in Israel from
9-11 May 2006. Minister of State for Industry Dr. Ashwini
Kumar visited Morocco from 7-9 December 2006 in
connection with India being selected as “Guest of Honour”
for the International Conference “Fundamental of
Investments”. Also Foreign Office Consultations were
held at Algiers(June) and Cairo(November) 2006.
Bilateral trade with WANA countries has significantly
improved. India has also invested in a major way in the
Hydrocarbon, Fertilizers and Power sectors in WANA
countries.

West Asia and North Africa
The highlight of the year for WANA countries was the
crisis in West Asia. India condemned the incident of
Karem Shalom(25 June) wherein an Israeli soldier was
kidnapped, and called for the immediate release of the
soldier. India also expressed concern at the massive
retaliation by Israel and expressed concern that this could
escalate into a large scale military conflict. India also
condemned the kidnapping by Hezbollah of the two Israeli
soldiers on 13 July 2006 and had strongly condemned the
use of disproportionate use of force by Israel. India had
condemned the use of excessive force against civilians
and civilian infrastructure.

Algeria
India-Algeria relations date back to the days of the
Algerian liberation struggle (1954-62) when India
advocated the cause of Algerian independence at the
United Nations and other international fora. Political
relations between the two countries have been exemplary
and Algeria and India have consistently supported each
other on all vital issues of their national concerns.
Government of India had committed an assistance of US
$ 1 million as humanitarian assistance for victims of the
earthquake of May 2003. Medicine worth half a million
US dollars were handed over in April 2004 and the
balance in the form of construction steel for the
construction of houses for the victims was handed over
in October 2006.

India had donated an emergency humanitarian assistance
of Rs.10 crores each to Palestine and Lebanon. In the
wake of the crisis in Lebanon, India evacuated about 1800
Indian nationals from Lebanon alongwith nationals of Sri
Lanka, Nepal and Bangladesh.

Secretary (East) led an Indian delegation to Algeria from
8-10 July 2006 for bilateral consultations with Algerian
Foreign Ministry. Delegation level talks were held with
the Algerian side. The two sides had detailed exchange
of views on several bilateral, regional and multilateral
issues.

Among important visits were the visit of King of Jordan
alongwith Queen Rania to India from 30 November-2
December 2006 and the holding of the 5th round of Joint
Commission Meeting with Egypt in New Delhi on 16
December 2006 co-chaired by EAM and Egyptian Foreign
Minister Ahmed Aboul Gheit. The Moroccan Foreign
Minister, Mohammed Benaissa visited India from 25-27
June 2006 and the Moroccan Parliamentary delegation –
India-Morocco Parliamentary Friendship Group – visit led
by Speaker of the Lower House from 27 November-1
December 2006. The Indo-Israeli Parliamentary
Friendship Group also met for the first time in New Delhi
during the visit of Prof. Slomo Breznitz on 3 November
2006. The Minister of Trade, Industry, and Labour of
Israel, Eliyahu Ben Yishai visited India on 3-8 December
2006.

Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Murli Deora had
a meeting on 13 September 2006 with the Algerian
Minister of Energy and Mines Chakib Khelil in the sideline
of 3rd OPEC Meeting held in Geneva. The Indian side
proposed for joint collaboration between Sonatrach,
Algerian National Oil Company and ONGC for joint
bidding in Algeria as well as third countries, which was
welcomed by the Algerian side which also promised to
extend full support to the joint participation. Algerian
side also agreed to favourably consider India’s request for
LNG.
52

Back to Contents

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

Under ITEC programme, five slots were allotted to
Algeria. Four candidates have so far come to India for
training.

As a result of proactive discussions between Gas Authority
of India Ltd (GAIL) and Sonatrach, GAIL succeeded in
purchasing LNG from Sonatrach on spot purchase basis.
This LNG cargo (the first shipment of LNG from Algeria)
amounted to approximately US$30 million. Essar Oil
imported one million barrels of Saharan blend sweet crude
from Algeria for its refinery at Vadinar in Gujarat.

Under Cultural Exchange Programme, a 5-member
Bharatnatyam dance troupe led by Sonal Mansingh visited
Algeria from 8-12 November 2006. The troupe gave two
performances on 9-10 November 2006.

Indian companies are now looking at Algeria as
prospective trade partner. Indian automobile companies
have entered the Algerian market. TATA, Maruti,
Hyundai, Bajaj, Hero Puch, Kinetic already have their
distributors in the Algerian automobile market. Some
Indian pharmaceutical companies have shown interest in
the Algerian pharmaceuticals market by registering their
medicines in this country. Products of Ranbaxy, Dr Reddy’s
Laboratory, Cipla, Serum Institute, Unique and Famycare
are available in the Algerian market. Around 50 Indian
medicines have been registered in Algeria.

Djibouti
India’s economic engagement with Djibouti has become
closer in the last one year with trade figures increasing by
26 percent. Djibouti has signed an Agreement with TCIL
for implementation of the Pan African e-Network Project
on Tele-Medicine and Tele-Education.
The work of the Indian financed Ali Sabiyah Cement
Plant is in progress and it is expected to be completed
soon.
Ambassador of India participated in the 11th COMESA
Summit in Djibouti in November 2006 and the entire
Summit was appreciative of India’s efforts in building
closer ties with African nations.

An Indian pharmaceutical company Hetero Labs Limited
of Hyderabad (a Dr Reddy group of companies) and the
largest pharmaceutical company in Algeria, SAIDAL
Group, signed an agreement under which the Indian
company will provide the Oseltamivir (Tamiflu, an antiviral drug for bird flu) Active Ingredient in pure or premix
form to Saidal and also transfer the technology or
technical information to enable manufacturing of this
product by the SAIDALl Group under their own brand.
This is the first such agreement between an Indian and
an Algerian pharmaceutical company for production of a
pharmaceutical product under transfer of technology. The
project is under implementation.

Egypt
Minister of State for Industrial Policy and Promotion, Dr.
Ashwini Kumar represented India at the WEF summit in
Sharm El Sheikh from 20-22 May 2006. In the margins of
the conference, Dr. Kumar had bilateral meetings with
Egyptian Minister of Investment, Mahmoud Mohi El Din,
Minister of Finance, Yossuf Boutros Ghali, and Minister
of Foreign Trade and Industry, Rasheed Mohamed
Rasheed.

In addition to these, many companies from India, viz.
TCIL, Engineers India Limited, Kalpataru Power
Transmission Ltd, WELLSPUN – Gujarat, etc. are carrying
out important projects in the power transmission lines,
oil refineries, oil pipe line sectors.

During their visit to Egypt from 11-13 May 2006, Minister
of Agriculture and Water Conservation, Government of
Maharashtra, Balasaheb Thorat and Minister of
Agriculture, Government of Orissa, Surendranath Naik
called on the Egyptian Minister of Agriculture and Land
Reclamation, Amin Abaza and visited the Cotton
Research Institute in Cairo.

Bilateral trade grew from US$ 55 million in 2001 to US$
428.68 million in 2005.The trade figures for the JanuarySeptember 2006 was US$ 351 million.

INS Betwa and INS Shakti paid a Port Call at Alexandria
from 27-30 June 2006.

Fourteen Indian companies participated in the 39th Algiers
International Trade Fair held in Algiers from 1-8 June
2006. The last such participation was in 2004. The Indian
companies transacted a business worth more than Rs 17
crore.

The first meeting of the Representatives of Defence
Ministries (Joint Defence Committee) was held in Cairo
on 21-22 August 2006. The Indian side was led by A.K.
Jain, Additional Secretary, Ministry of Defence and the
53

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

Egyptian delegation by the Chief of the Operations in the
Egyptian Defence Ministry.

the Minister of Communication and Information
Technology of Egypt, visited Bangalore and Hyderabad
from 23-29 July 2006. Delegations from CHEMEXCIL
(Mumbai Chapter) and the Tea Board of India visited
Egypt from 3-5 September and on 12-13 September 2006,
respectively. The National Research Development
Corporation and the Social Fund for Development of
Egypt signed an MoU on 10 September 2006 for setting
up technology demonstration centres in Egypt. Over a
hundred Indian companies were represented at the EEPC
pavilion, “INDEE 2006” at the MACTECH Fair, held in
Cairo from 23-26 November 2006.

The sixth session of the Foreign Office Consultations, held
in Cairo on 19-20 November 2006 at the level of Secretary
(East) and the Assistant Foreign Minister for Asian Affairs
in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Egypt, enabled a
detailed review of the bilateral India-Egypt agenda,
including preparation for the 5th session of the India-Egypt
Joint Commission, and an exchange of views on regional
and international issues of mutual interest. Secretary
(East) also called on the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Egypt, Ahmed Aboul Gheit and the Presidential
Spokesperson, Soliman Awad. While in Cairo, Secretary
(East) was also received by the Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States, Amre Moussa.

Bilateral trade between the two countries for the first time
crossed the US$ 1 billion in 2005 valued at US$ 1065
million from US$ 628 million in 2004.

Bilateral civil aviation talks were held in Cairo on 12-13
November 2006. The Indian delegation to the talks was
led by Secretary (Civil Aviation) and the Egyptian
delegation by the Chairman of the Civil Aviation
Authority. Secretary (Civil Aviation) also called upon the
Minister of Civil Aviation of Egypt, Ahmed Mohammad
Shafik. It was agreed to schedule the next round of talks
in New Delhi to resolve pending issues.

Israel
Bilateral relations with Israel continued to widen in a
multifaceted manner including in the fields of science and
technology, commerce, agriculture, cultural exchange, and
people to people interaction. The continued exchanges
in various fields helped consolidate the relationship that
entered into its fifteenth year in 2006.
Sharad Pawar, Minister of Agriculture, Food and Civil
Supplies, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution, led
a delegation consisting of the Chief Ministers of the States
of Gujarat, Nagaland, and Rajasthan, along with eight
other State Ministers, officials, and businesspersons, for
participation in the “Agritech Exhibition” in Israel from
9-11 May 2006. He met with his Israeli counterpart, and
an inter-Governmental Action Plan for cooperation in
Agriculture was signed between the two sides. He also
met with Vice Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of
Israel, Tzipi Livni.

The Egyptian Minister of State for Administrative Reforms
Dr. Ahmed Darwish visited India from 19-23 November
2006 and the Minister for Communications and IT Dr.
Tarek Kamel visited India from 27 November-1 December
2006 during which an MoU on cooperation in the field of
IT was signed.
The Fifth round of India-Egypt Joint Commission was held
in New Delhi on 16 December 2006. The Joint
Commission was co-chaired by External Affairs Minister
on the Indian side and by the Egyptian Foreign Minister
from the Egyptian side. During the Joint Commission
meeting the following agreements were signed :- (i)
Agreed Minutes of the Fifth JCM, (ii) Partnership
Agreement (iii) Executive Programme of Cultural,
Educational and Scientific Cooperation for 2007-2009,
(iv) Executive Programme of Scientific and Technological
Cooperation for 2007-2009, (v) Work Plan between ICAR
and Agricultural Research Centre, Cairo for 2007-2008,
(vi) MoU for Cooperation in the field of Civil Aviation.

Other official level exchanges included the fifth round of
the talks on Joint Working group on counter terrorism,
and the second round of dialogue on non-proliferation in
March 2006 in Israel; visit of the former National Security
Advisor Brajesh Mishra at the invitation of the Tel Aviv
University in June 2006; goodwill visit of the two Indian
Naval Ships INS Mumbai , and INS Brahamputra, to Israel
in June 2006; the visit of the Chief of the Indian Air Force,
and Vice Chief of Naval Staff in September 2006; and
the meeting of the Joint Working Group on Defence in

A delegation comprising senior executives of Egyptian IT
companies, led by Dr. Khalid Ismail, Senior Advisor to
54

Back to Contents

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

Professional Course for Foreign Diplomats organized by
the Foreign Service Institute held from 4 October-10
November 2006 in New Delhi. Separately, during the
current year, within the framework of India-Israel Cultural
Exchange Programme, ICCR has sponsored five students
from Israel for pursuing year long study courses in the
fields of Indian dance, Language (Hindi), Philosophy and
Yoga in India.

November 2006 in which the Indian delegation was led
by Defence Secretary Shekhar Dutt.
From Israel, former Foreign Minister, Shlomo Ben Ami,
visited India in August 2006, and the Chairperson of the
Parliamentary Friendship League between India and Israel
in the Knesset, Prof. Shlomo Breznitz, visited India in
November 2006. The National Security Adviser of Israel,
Ilan Mizrahi visited India from 27-30 November 2006,
and the Minister of Trade, Industry, and Labour of the
State of Israel, Eliyahu Ben Yishai visited India from 3-8
December 2006.

The exchanges in the field of culture included the
performances given by Pandit Hariprasad Chaurasia, and
Priyadarshini Govind at the “Israel Festival” held in May
2006, and later the participation of Aparna Sen in the
International Women’s Film Festival held in Israel in
September 2006, in which three of her movies were also
shown. An Israeli dance troupe “Kamea Company”
participated in the ‘Navratri Mahotsav 2006’ held in
Gujarat in September - October 2006. Malayalam poet
Tachomm Poyil Rajeevan participated in ‘Sha’ar
International Poetry Festival’ organized in Jaffa (Israel)
in November 2006. A delegation from the Archaeological
Survey of India, led by Director General C. Babu Rajeev,
visited Israel in November 2006, and held discussions with
the Antiquities Department of the State of Israel with a
view to explore opportunities for cooperation.

A bilateral agreement on Cooperation in the field of health
and medicine that was signed in September 2003 entered
into force on 20 June 2006.
According to the Central Bureau of Statistics of Israel,
the bilateral trade figures that stood at US$ 2500.50
million at the end of year 2005, reached US$ 1956.20
million during the period January-September 2006, an
overall increase of 0.86% as compared to the
corresponding period last year. As part of the Joint
Working Group established at the recommendation of the
Joint Study Group for enhancing bilateral trade and
economic relations between the two countries, Grisha
Deitch, Commissioner of Standardisation, Ministry of
Industry, Trade, and Labour of the State of Israel visited
India from 31 October-1 November 2006 to discuss
standardisation and related issues. The year witnessed an
increasing number of visits by business delegations from
India and Israel, including agriculture, and industrial
delegations from the States of Rajasthan and Gujarat to
Israel. The State Bank of India that was granted the
License by the Government of Israel to open its branch
in Tel Aviv has initiated the process of setting up its offices,
and is expected to be operational by the beginning of year
2007.

Jordan
King Abdullah II Bin Al Hussein and Queen Rania Al
Abdullah paid a state visit to India from 30 November-2
December 2006, accompanied by Prince Talal Bin
Mohammed, Advisor to the King, Minister of Industry
and Trade Salem Khazaaleh and Minister of Information
and Communication Technology Bassem Roussan. The
King held discussions with President, Dr. A.P.J. Abdul
Kalam and Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh on the
bilateral relations and the regional situations. Chairperson
of UPA, Sonia Gandhi, External Affairs Minister Pranab
Mukherjee and Leader of Opposition in Lok Sabha, Lal
Krishna Advani called on the King. King Abdullah II
delivered a lecture at the Indian Council of World Affairs
on “Jordan and India: Prospects for Cooperation” and
addressed a business meeting jointly organized by CII,
FICCI and ASSOCHAM on business opportunities for
Indian corporate sector in Jordan particularly in IT,
telecommunications and alternative energy and mining
sectors as also investment in Special Economic Zones of
Jordan. During the visit, four agreements were signed at

Significant exchange at the level of the people is evident
from the fact that about 30,000 tourists from Israel visit
India every year for an extended stay of six months to
one year. The demand for visas to visit India has been
increasing steadily, and the Embassy in Tel Aviv has issued
25,409 visas during the period January – October 2006.
Four Israeli youth of Indian origin participated in the
“Know India Programme” organized by the Ministry of
Overseas Indian Affairs in May-June 2006. An official
from the Israeli Foreign Office participated in the 41st
55

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

on 23 August 2006 and discussed the situation in the
Palestinian territories and means of assisting the
Palestinians to overcome their current difficulties. The
Special Envoy also met Jordanian Foreign Minister Abdul
Ilah Al-Khatib on 24 August 2006 and discussed the
bilateral relations as well as the situation in the region.

Ministers’ level on (i) Cooperation in Agriculture (ii)
Bilateral Investment Promotion and Protection (iii)
Cooperation in Tourism and (iv) Cultural Exchange
Programme. From the Indian side, the agreements were
signed respectively by Sharad Pawar, Minister of
Agriculture, P. Chidambaram, Minister of Finance and
Ambika Soni, Minister of Culture and Tourism.

India trains 15 nominees from the Jordanian Government
under the ITEC programme.

A significant development during the year was holding of
the 8th session of Indo-Jordan Joint Trade and Economic
Committee, in New Delhi from 21-23 August 2006. It
was co-chaired by Secretary General, Jordanian Ministry
of Industry and Trade, Muntaser Al Uqla and S.N. Menon,
Secretary (Commerce). Key issues in trade and economic
matters were discussed during the joint session including
promoting Indian Investment in Jordanian potash and
phosphate industry, establishment of a car assembling
plant in Jordan, modernizing the aviation services,
cooperation in shipping, agriculture, pharmaceuticals,
information technology, tourism, customs and railways.
An MoU was signed between India Trade Promotion
Organisation (ITPO) and Jordan Enterprise Development
Corporation (JEDCO) for joint efforts to step up trade
between the two countries.

India’s exports to Jordan increased by 25 percent over
the previous year. Jordan’s export to India increased by
14 percent in the same period.

Lebanon
Lebanon was caught in a devastating war with Israel
following the capture of two Israeli soldiers by Hizbullah
on 12 July 2006. The ensuing 34 days of hostilities saw
over a thousand civilians killed and most of Lebanon’s
infrastructure – houses, roads, bridges, factories destroyed. The war was brought to an end with the passing
of UN Security Council Resolution 1701 calling for an
end to hostilities effective from 8 am of 14 August 2006.
The Resolution mandated the deployment of the Lebanese
army in the erstwhile Hizbullah stronghold of South
Lebanon for the first time. UNIFIL, beefed up from 2000
to 15,000, has been charged to support the Lebanese army
in keeping the peace. The 672-strong Indian battalion
under UNIFIL performed valiant service during the
conflict by risking their own safety to rescue and relocate
the Lebanese civilian population caught in the conflict.

Another important bilateral development was the visit of
an eight member official delegation led by Madhukar
Gupta, Secretary (Fertilizer) to Jordan from 21–23 June
2006 and the delegation’s meetings with Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister of Finance, Minister of Industry
and Trade, First Deputy Speaker of Parliament, Chairman
of the Privatization Commission, President of Jordan
Phosphate Mining Company, Secretary General in the
Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation and
the Chairman, Jordanian Businessmen Association.
Following the discussions, the delegation identified several
potential areas for joint ventures between the two
countries based on economic complementarities and
synergy.

The Government of India strongly condemned the
irresponsible and indiscriminate bombing of Lebanon by
the Israeli military killing innocent civilians and called
for immediate and unconditional ceasefire. Parliament also
passed a resolution unanimously on 1 August 2006
condemning the Israeli aggression and calling for
immediate and unconditional ceasefire. In his suo moto
statement on Lebanon in Parliament, Prime Minister Dr.
Manmohan Singh announced US$10 million for
humanitarian aid and reconstruction.

On the Mumbai blasts, King Abdullah II sent a message
to President Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam on 2 July 2006,
strongly condemning the “heinous criminal acts which
claimed lives of innocent civilians” and expressing
condolences to the President and families of the victims.

The Government of India launched a major operation to
evacuate Indian nationals in Lebanon, pressing into
service four Indian navy ships that were in the vicinity, as
also Air India. The Embassy in Beirut arranged and
coordinated the evacuation of 2341 persons including
1836 Indians, 433 Sri Lankan and 65 Nepalese were

C. R. Gharekhan, Special Envoy for West Asia and the
Peace Process visited Jordan on 23-24 August, 2006 and
met the Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas in Amman
56

Back to Contents

The Union Minister of External Affairs Pranab Mukherjee calls on the King of Jordan
Abdullah II Bin Al-Hussein in New Delhi on 1 December 2006.

The Minister of State for External Affairs E. Ahamed addressing the annual conference
for Haj-2006 in New Delhi on 20 May 2006.

57

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

Bilateral Trade and Commerce
Indian companies especially in Hydrocarbon, Power, and
IT sector have several ongoing projects in Libya. The
presence of Indian companies in Libya has risen
significantly in the last three years(total of 17). Among
the new companies are major PSUs like IOC, Oil India,
OVL and EIL and private companies Punj Lloyd, DS
Constructions, Dastur, Global Infrastructure holdings
(ISPAT) and Dodsal.

evacuated by ships to Larnaca in Cyprus and from there
by Air India chartered flights to India. One flight carrying
Sri Lankan nationals landed at Colombo itself. About a
hundred Indian nationals were also evacuated by road
via Damascus. An Indian Air Force plane carrying relief
material such as tents, blankets and sheets also landed in
Beirut. C.R. Gharekhan, Special Envoy for West Asia and
Middle East Peace Process visited Lebanon from 24-26
August 2006 to express India’s support for and solidarity
with Lebanon. He met President Emile Lahoud, Prime
Minister Fouad Siniora, Speaker Nabih Berri, Water and
Energy Minister Mohammed Fneich, Foreign Minister
Fawzi Salloukh and Leader of Free Patriotic Movement
Gen. Michel Aoun.

ONGC Videsh Limited (OVL) and Oil India- IOC
consortium are currently participating in the third round
of exploration and production sharing agreement (EPSA).
Both OVL and Oil India-IOC have exploration blocks in
Libya. Punj Lloyd has recently bagged US$ 300 million
pipeline construction project with Sirte Oil Company.

Libya
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL) is finishing its
prestigious 600 MW Gas Turbine Power Project with
General Electricity Company (GECOL). BHEL has also
submitted proposals for other power projects with
GECOL. Electrical Construction Company (ECCO), a
joint venture between Government of India and GECOL,
is executing power projects worth of US$ 124 Million.
KEC is active in transmission sector in Libya. KEC and
Kalpataru are jointly bidding for a 2000 km transmission
line project. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)
participated in 2nd Arab-African Aviation Exhibition in
December 2006.

With the removal of Libya by the US from the list of
countries sponsoring terrorism on 29 June 2006 and
announcement of restoration of full diplomatic relations
by the US in May, 2006, the country has improved its
relations with the West considerably. Bilateral relations
between India and Libya has improved tremendously. The
Libyan Minister for Higher Education, Dr. Ibrahim AlZarruq Al-Sharif visited India from 18-22 September 2006.
Bilateral Investment Promotion and Protection
Agreement
The text of Bilateral Investment Promotion and
Protection Agreement (BIPPA) has been finalized, and
will be signed during next high level visit.

I-flex Solutions is implementing a project on core banking
solutions with Central Bank of Libya and other five banks.
Also over the past three decades, Indian companies have
executed projects worth more than US $ 2.5 billion. These
included building hospitals, houses, schools, roads, power
plants, airports, dams, transmission lines, etc.

MoU on Political Consultations
Both sides have finalised an MoU on Political
Consultations, which is expected to be signed during high
level visit.

As per latest statistics for the year 2005-06 the bilateral
trade stood at US $ 115.23 Million. The bilateral trade
began showing significant upward trend since 2004-05 US $ 187.14 Million as compared to US $ 29.12 Million
for the year 2003-04. The main items in India’s export
basket during the year 2005-06 are turbines, electrical
components, metals, machinery and instruments, glass,
ceramics, refractors, manmade yarns, fabrics, tea, coffee
and tobacco.

Ministerial Visits
Minister for Higher Education of Libya Dr Ibrahim AlZarruq Al-Sharif, accompanied by a 5-member delegation,
visited India from 18-22 September 2006.
Visit of Indian Navy Ships
INS Betwa and INS Shakti visited Tripoli from 3-6 July
2006 on a three-day goodwill mission. Capt. Murthy of
INS Betwa called on the Libyan Chief of Naval Staff
Admiral Hamdi Sweiheli on 3 July 2006 and Mohammed
al-Burrani, Minister for Asian Affairs on 4 July 2006.

Morocco
The multi-faceted ties between India and Morocco
58

Back to Contents

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

continued to remain cordial and friendly, reinforcing
strategic partnership in key areas. Mohammed Benaissa,
Moroccan Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
visited India from 25-27 June 2006 and held wide ranging
discussions with MOS(EA) E. Ahamed on bilateral,
regional and international issues of mutual interest. He
had separate meetings with Agriculture Minister Sharad
Pawar and Tourism Minister Ambika Soni and explored
bilateral cooperation in the fields of agriculture and
tourism respectively. When he called on the Prime
Minister, he highlighted the potential for improvement
of bilateral relations in various spheres including the
economic sector. On UN reforms, the Moroccan Foreign
Minister said that his country firmly held the view that
‘India should be a permanent member of the UN Security
Council without any reservation’.

discussions during the visit. Radi also called on the
President.
The Moroccan Secretary General of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation visited India and held
bilateral discussions with Secretary(East) and Dean (FSI)
on 28 December 2006. During the meeting, means to
invigorate bilateral interactions, both in the political as
well as economic areas, were discussed.
An 8-member traditional folk dance troupe of Brij Lok
Kala Manch, led by Vishnu Dutt Sharma participated in
the 41st National Popular Arts Festival at Marrakech in
July 2006 and held performances. Morocco continued to
benefit from specialised training offered in India under
ITEC Scheme, fully utilising the training slots.

Palestine

The bilateral trade and economic relations made steady
progress during the year, the two-way trade exceeding US$
615 million in the year 2005. India was selected as ‘Guest
of Honour’ for the Annual International Conference on
‘Fundamental of Investments’ held in Rabat from 7-9
December 2006. This was recognition of India’s growing
influence in Morocco and a reflection of Morocco’s
goodwill towards India. In connection with the
preparation of the Conference, Moroccan Delegate
Minister in charge of Economic and General Affairs, Talbi
Alami visited India from 1-3 November, 2006 and had
meetings with Minister of Industry & Commerce Kamal
Nath and Minister of Heavy Industries Santosh Mohan
Dev as well as captains of Indian industry and commerce.
MOS (Industry), Ashwini Kumar led a business delegation
to Morocco from 7-9 December 2006 and delivered a keynote address at the Conference, highlighting India’s
success story of economic growth. During the visit, he
called on Prime Minister Driss Jettou and had one-toone meeting with Delegate Minister for Foreign Affairs
& Cooperation, Tayeb Fassi Fihri, reiterating India’s
commitment to strengthen bilateral ties with Morocco.

India announced humanitarian assistance of Rs.10 crores
(US$ 2.3 million) on 13 May 2006 to Palestine, to alleviate
the suffering of Palestinian people following the freezing
of aid by US, EU countries and non-transfer of taxes
amounting to over US$50 million a month by Israel which
it collects on behalf of Palestine, consequent on the
formation of Government by Hamas after elections to
Palestine Legislative Council in January 2006. As a part
of the humanitarian assistance India sent life saving drugs
identified by the Palestinian authorities. The first batch
of medicines weighing 2500 kgs were handed over to the
Palestinian authorities on 10 August 2006. The second
batch of medicines weighing 8,500 kgs were handed over
to the Palestinian authority on 28 September 2006. The
third batch of medicines weighing 10,500 kgs. were
handed over to the Palestinian authorities on 14
November 2006. The fourth batch of medicines was
handed over to the Palestinian Authority on 17 December
2006.

Sudan
Sudan celebrated fifty years of independence on 1 January
2006. President Omar Al-Bashir, First Vice President Salva
Kiir Mayardit and Vice President Ali Osman Mohamed
Taha led the nation-wide celebrations.

Moroccan Parliamentary delegation led by Abdelwahad
Radi, President of the House of Representatives (Lower
House of Moroccan Parliament) visited India from 27
November-1 December 2006. The Moroccan
delegation met Speaker of Lok Sabha, Somnath
Chatterjee and other Indian leaders. Bilateral cooperation
between the legislative bodies of both countries, besides
other issues of mutual concern were the focus of

After several months of on-off negotiations, the Darfur
Peace Agreement (DPA) was signed in Abuja on 9 May
2006 between the Government of Sudan and one faction
of the rebel Sudan Liberation Movement/Army (SLM/
59

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

A) led by Mini Arkoi Minawi. The other SLM faction
and the second major insurgency (Justice and Equality
Movement) refused to sign. Mini Minawi was appointed
Senior Assistant to the President to head the Darfur
Transitional Authority.

US$ 26.44 million suppliers credit for a 2000 TPD dry
process cement plant to be set up by Thyssen Krupp
Industries India. In November 2006, Exim Bank approved
a US$ 150 million soft loan 203 KM US$ 252 million
Port Sudan-Haiya railway link (to be done by IRCON)

India-Sudan bilateral trade have improved significantly
during the year. India’s exports apart from traditional items
included Tata buses, Bajaj rickshaws, and (since mid-2006)
Maruti cars. The first batch of 1150 Maruti vehicles (Zen
and 800 CC) rolled on the road in August 2006.

In 2005-2006, Sudan’s ITEC quota was increased from
60 to 100, and to 130 in 2006-07. This programme is one
of the most active elements in our bilateral relationship.
Two ITEC experts from India, in food processing
technology and Small Scale Industry, visited Sudan from
13 April-7 June 2006 to advise the Sudanese Government
in their respective fields.

At US$ 491 million, India’s exports from January September 2006 were up 106 percent, making India the
second largest exporter to Sudan after China.

Syria
Of India’s US$ 100 million concessional Line of Credit
announced at the April 2005 Oslo Donors Conference,
US$ 48 million will be disbursed in 2006-07. Projects
under the US$ 10 million grant are being worked out.

The dominant concerns in Syria’s foreign policy were to
fight isolation and pressure on account of its perceived or
alleged role in the Middle East, especially Lebanon, and
its efforts to ensure that its vital concerns, such as the
return of the Occupied Golan Heights, could be brought
back to the international agenda as part of a just and
comprehensive peace process in the Middle East.

The first-ever exclusive Indian exhibition “Enterprise
India Advantage Sudan” was held in Sudan in August
2006 in which 78 Indian small and medium companies
participated. Business worth US $ 150 million was
reported.

The major developments that provided the setting for
Syria’s external relations were: (i) the continuing UN
investigation into the assassination of former Lebanese
Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri in February 2005 and moves
to constitute a predominantly international tribunal to
try those responsible for it; (ii) the continuing deadlock
over Israeli and international funding for the Palestinian
Authority as a result of January 2006 parliamentary
elections that brought a Hamas-led Government to power,
and efforts to form a National Unity government bringing
together Hamas and Fatah; (iii) the June 2006 Israeli
offensive in the Gaza strip after the capture of an Israeli
soldier by Palestinian militants; (iv) the 34-day IsraelLebanon war in July-August 2006 and UN Security
Council Resolution 1701 that brought it to an end; (v)
the deteriorating security situation in Iraq raising fears of
a full-fledged civil war and a possible de facto partition of
Iraq; (vi) its impact on the November 2006 US
Congressional elections which resulted in a loss of
Republican majority in the Congress and the Senate and
a growing clamour for fresh approaches to Iraq crystallized
in the bipartisan Congressional report of the Iraq Study
Group signalling of changes in US policy to the region, as
well as calls in US and Europe for a new initiative for

Several Indian companies are now active in Sudan
including TCIL, RITES, IRCON, Progressive
Construction Ltd, Mohan Exports, Jaguar Industries,
Angelique International and L&T. Others like Reliance
Industries and Mahindra & Mahindra have expressed
interest.
In early 2006, Central Electronics Limited (CEL), New
Delhi commissioned a solar photovoltaic (SPV) module
manufacturing plant near Khartoum for Sudan’s Ministry
of Science & Technology. India also gifted a solar electric
system (inaugurated in April 2006) to a remote village
called Khadarab (that has never had electricity) two hours
north of Khartoum.
On 1 September 2006, BHEL signed a Letter of Intent
with the National Electricity Corporation of Sudan for
the US$ 457 million 125 x 4 MW Kosti Power Project
(partly funded by a US$ 350 million Exim Bank
concessional loan), the largest single electricity project
in Sudan. Exim Bank also approved a US$ 41.9 million
soft loan for the 200 KM Sinja-Gedaref 220 KV double
circuit transmission line. In April 2006, Exim Bank agreed
60

Back to Contents

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

period April-December 2006, already significantly higher
than previous years. The supply of equipment as part of a
US$ 1 million grant for the Syrian General Commission
on Biotechnology announced during former Prime
Minister A.B. Vajpayee’s visit to Syria in November 2003,
was completed. A 10-member Gondwanaland multidisciplinary scientific-cum-adventure road expedition
traversed through Syria en route to South Africa on 9-10
April 2006 and handed over a message from Prime
Minister to President Bashar Assad to the Syrian Prime
Minister Mohammed Naji Otri. A 3-member delegation
from the Educational Consultants India Ltd. (EdCIL)
participated in the education fair, ‘Academia Syria’ in
Damascus from 11-16 April 2006. Eight Syrian students
were admitted to colleges and universities in India as part
of the scholarships offered by the Indian Council of
Cultural Relations (ICCR) in the sphere of higher
education in India under the Cultural and Education
Exchange Programmes. A handful of Indian students are
also studying Arabic literature or Islamic studies at
Damascus University.

peace in the Middle East and engaging Syria (and Iran)
in finding solutions to the Iraq crisis; and (vii) the Iran
nuclear issue before the International Atomic Energy
Association (IAEA) and the United Nations Security
Council (UNSC).
India-Syria bilateral relations have a strong, sentimental
and political basis rooted in history and post-colonial
challenges. In the political sphere, the highlights in the
development of bilateral relations during the year were
Foreign Office Consultations (FOC) presided over by
Secretary (East) Rajiv Sikri and Deputy Foreign Minister
Farouk Taha, in India on 20-22 April 2006, the first such
consultations in three years, and the first in India. Special
Envoy for West Asia, Chinmay Gharekhan, held
consultations on the situation in the region in the
aftermath of the 34-day war in Lebanon in July-August
2006 with Vice President Farouk Sharaa, Foreign Minister
Walid Muallem, Vice Foreign Minister Feysal Mekdad and
Deputy Foreign Minister Ahmed Arnous during a visit to
Damascus as part of regional tour which included Doha,
Amman and Beirut.

An exhibition of contemporary Indian art featuring 25
Indian artists was also hosted in Damascus on 17-24 July
2006 under the Cultural Exchange Programme. Mission
also organized art exhibitions and film screenings in Homs,
Latakia and Tartous as part of its information and cultural
promotion in Syria. A 4-member Indian writers delegation
from the Sahitya Akademi exchanged literary ideas with
the Syrian Arab Writers Union during the course of a 10day visit to Syria in December 2006 as part of an MoU on
cooperation between the Sahitya Akademi and Arab
Writers Union. D.M. Mulay, Minister and Sadhna Shankar
Mulay published a book on their experiences in Syria that
was officially released by the Tourism Minister of Syria
and was well received.

In the area of trade, there were signs of increase in
momentum. Trade is expected to exceed US$ 300 million
in 2006-07, up from US$ 276 million in 2005-06. A major
delegation from the Federation of Chambers of Commerce
of Syria undertook an 8-day visit to India in December
2006 in the course of which they signed an MoU on
cooperation with the Federation of Indian Chambers of
Commerce & Industry (FICCI). The Oil & Natural Gas
Corporation (Videsh) (OVL) stationed a representative
as part of the ONGC-CNPC joint investment in Al Furat
Oil Company in Syria on January 2006, ONGC’s second
investment in the hydrocarbon sector in Syria. A
delegation from the CHEMEXIL held buyer-seller meets
in Aleppo, Homs and Damascus in December 2006.
Representatives of ONGC, Claris Pharmaceuticals, TCIL,
APTECH, Mahindra & Mahindra, PEC, Issar, Apollo
International, RITES and a few other private trading
companies also visited Syria in the course of the year in
pursuit of business interests. Claris Pharmaceuticals also
opened a representative office in Damascus.

People-to-people relations in the form of Shia pilgrims
visiting Shia pilgrimage centres, notably the shrine of
Sayeda Zeinab in Damascus continued. Some 10,000
pilgrims, mainly from Western India, visited Syria. A
handful of Shia students are also pursuing theological
studies in Damascus. Customary links between the Syrian
Orthodox Church of Syria and Kerala also continued.
With the cooperation of the Syrian authorities, Mission
also assisted over 100 Indian nationals affected by the
war in Lebanon transiting through Syria en route to India.

In the area of economic, technical, scientific and
education cooperation and cultural exchanges, Syria
availed of 43 slots under the ITEC programme during the
61

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

Tunisia

this joint venture, the Tunisian partners are (i) Groupe
Chimique Tunisian (GCT), and (ii) Compagnie des
Prosphates de Gafsa (CPG). Indian partners are (i) the
Coromandal Fertilizer Ltd. (CFL) and (ii) the Gujarat State
Fertilizers & Chemicals (GSFC). Tunisian companies will
hold 35% of equity capital cash and the Indian companies
will hold 15% each. The joint venture will produce about
360,000 tons of phosphoric acid per annum, out of which
1.8 lakh tons will be earmarked for import by CFL and
another 1.8 lakh tons per annum by GSFC. The project is
planned to be completed by December, 2008 and is
scheduled to be commissioned by March, 2009.

Minister for Science & Technology & Ocean
Development, Kapil Sibal, visited Tunisia from 26-29 April
2006. A Programme of Cooperation (POC) in the field of
Science and Technology for the period 2006-07 was
signed. During his visit to Tunisia, besides discussing
bilateral matters with his Tunisian counterpart, Dr. Taieh
Hadhri, Minister of Scientific Research, Technology and
Competency Development, Minister also called on the
Prime Minister and had talks with Dr. Montassar Ouaili,
Minister of Communication Technology and Dr. Ridha
Kechrid, Minister of Public Health. A programme of
Cooperation in Bio-technology was also signed.

1 Railway Board visited Tunisia from
J.P. Batra, Chairman,
16-19 November 2006 for attending a Seminar on EuroMaghreb Freight Corridor being organized by the Tunisian
National Railways.

A five-member survey delegation of Indian Drugs and
Pharmaceuticals visited Tunisia from 9-15 April 2006.
Three Tunisia Pharma officials visited India from 8-21
April 2006 and inspected a number of Indian drugs and
pharmaceuticals laboratories to allow import of their
products into Tunisia.

India participated in the Tunisian International Fair held
at Tunis from 10-18 November 2006.
India’s bilateral trade with Tunisia was to the tune of US$
213.2 million from January-November, 2006 as compared
to US$ 183.52 million in the previous year, registering a
growth of 16.17%.

A US$ 200 million India-Tunisia joint venture company,
“Tunisian Indian Fertilizer SA (TIFERT S.A.) was
launched. It is the first Indian investment in Tunisia. In

62

Back to Contents

Africa (South of Sahara)

East and Southern Africa

6

Other important visits to India in the year 2006 included:

Several initiatives were taken to upgrade relations with

Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development
of South Africa (April)

our traditional partners of Eastern and Southern African
region, at the bilateral, regional and Pan-African levels.

Housing Minister of South Africa (April)
There was a growing recognition in the region that India
can be an ideal partner in economic development and a
reliable source of affordable products, services and
technologies in sectors as diverse as agriculture and small
industries on one hand, and IT and space technology on
the other. Countries of the region overwhelmingly
supported India’s candidature to various international
fora, including Human Rights Council.

Minister for Science and Technology of Zimbabwe
(April)
International Trade Minister of Zimbabwe (April)
Deputy Prime Minister (who is also the Minister for
Agriculture and Rural Development) of Ethiopia
(May)
Foreign Minister of Comoros (May)

India hosted several high level visits from the region:

Foreign Minister of Malawi led a delegation of 4
Ministers (May)

Festus G. Mogae, President of Botswana’s State visit
to India from 7-13 December 2006;

Minister for Education and the Minister for
Agriculture of the State of Eritrea (June)

Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Deputy President of
South Africa’s official visit to India in September
2006;

Minister of Education of Rwanda (July)

Abdoul Raouf Bundhun, Vice -President of
Mauritius’s visit to India from 7-16 May 2006; and

Minister of Science and Technology of Mozambique
(July)

Marine Barampama, the 2 nd Vice President of
Burundi’s official visit to India from 6-11 October
2006.

Minister in the Prime Minister’s office of Ethiopia
(July)
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance and
Economic Development of Republic of
Mauritius (August)

The Foreign Ministers of Comoros, Namibia, Uganda, and
Tanzania visited India during the period June – December
2006. A multi-ministerial delegation from Malawi led by
Foreign Minister, Davies Katsonga visited India in May,
2006.

Minister of Energy and Mineral Development of
Uganda (August)

From the Indian side, President visited Mauritius in March
2006 as the Chief Guest for its National Day celebrations.
Prime Minister visited South Africa in SeptemberOctober, 2006, in connection with the Centenary
celebrations of the launch of Satyagraha Movement by
Mahatma Gandhi.

Minister for Roads and Public Welfare, Kenya
(September)
State Minister of Agriculture and Rural
Development of Ethiopia (October)
Minister of Trade and Industry of Ethiopia,
(October)

India hosted Parliamentary delegations from Ethiopia,
Tanzania, Kenya, Namibia, Lesotho and South Africa.

Agriculture Minister of Mozambique, (November)
63

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

From India

program including training, deputation of experts and
project assistance continued to be extended to the
countries of the region. A separate training programme
on “Industrial Development” was organized by the
Ministry along with CII. Over 1000 officials from the
region received training in India under the ITEC
programme.

Union Minister for Shipping visited South Africa in
March, 2006 to sign the Bilateral Agreement on
Maritimes and Merchant Shipping
Minister of State for Human Resource Development
visited Ethiopia (May) to attend the First PanAfrican Conference on Information and
Communication Technology

The Ministry also provided direct assistance to a number
of countries in response to humanitarian emergencies or
in the context of longer term development projects. The
Ministry’s ‘Aid to Africa’ programme provides the
resources for these projects.

Minister for Health and Family Welfare, visited
Johannesburg, South Africa (June) to participate in
the African Traditional Medicine Workshop
MOS for Personnel, Public Grievances and Pension,
visited South Africa (June) for signing of a bilateral
MoU on Governance, Administration and other
related areas

In the area of human resource development, India
continued to contribute to the region. Over 10,000
African students studied in India and several Indian
engineers, doctors, accountants, teachers went on
secondment to several African countries.

Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs visited Uganda
and Kenya (August)
Minister of Small Scale Industries paid an official
visit to Rwanda and Uganda (August-September)

India continued to be one of the largest contributors to
peacekeeping in Africa. We currently have 3000 troops
in Sudan, 3,500 in Democratic Republic of Congo and
over 1,000 on Ethiopia-Eritrea border.

MOS for Agriculture visited Ethiopia and Namibia
(November)
MOS(AS) Anand Sharma visited the Republic of
South Africa on 24-25 March 2006. MOS also
visited Rio de Janeiro to attend the 3 rd IBSA
Trilateral Commission Ministerial Meeting from 2830 March 2006. He also visited South Africa and
Namibia in April, 2006, the latter for the launch of
the India- Southern African Development
Community (SADC) Forum.

India continued to support the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development (NEPAD) objectives. Lines of
Credit of US$ 7.08 m to Senegal, US$ 20.62 m to Mali,
US$ 33.5 m to DR Congo, US$ 6.7 m to Gambia, US$
17.0 m to Niger and US$ 20 m to Mozambique were
extended/approved during the year 2006 mainly for
infrastructure development. Several Agreements/MoUs
were signed in the fields of Defence, Agriculture, Small
Scale Industries, Science and Technology, Mines and
Minerals, Shipping and Transport, Health and Medicine,
etc., with a number of countries.

MOS for Education visited South Africa.
India upgraded its relations with regional organizations:
India - Southern Africa Development Community
(SADC) Forum was launched in Namibia in April
2006.

The Ministry led the Indian industry in the promotion of
public and private sector project partnerships with the
countries of the region. Two regional conclaves on IndiaAfrica Project Partnership were organized in April taking
Lusaka as the hub for Southern Africa (23-25 April) and
Addis Ababa as the hub for Eastern Africa (28 April).
These were followed by a Pan-African Conclave in New
Delhi from 9-11 October 2006. 326 delegates (including
30 Ministers) representing 32 countries, 4 regional
organizations and 6 banking and financial organizations
participated in the event. 386 Indian industry members

The first India - Common Market for East and
Southern Africa (COMESA) Ministerial meeting
was organized in New Delhi in October 2006 in
which five ministers from member countries of
COMESA participated.
India-EAC (Eastern African Community)
Ministerial meet planned for first quarter, 2007.
Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC)
64

Back to Contents

Africa (South of Sahara)

Burundi

participated at the Conclave discussing projects in a
variety of sectors. CII signed an MoU on Cooperation
with COMESA. EXIM Bank signed Line of Credit (US$
10 million) agreement with PTA Bank of COMESA. Over
300 projects worth US$ 17 billion were discussed in over
a thousand one-to- one meetings. A number of
Memorandum of Understanding and Letters of Intent
were inked. The special focus on SMEs helped promote
the SMEs from India and gave them an opportunity to
look at Africa as a destination where they can play a
substantial role in its developmental process.

The 2nd Vice President of the Republic of Burundi, Marine
Barampama paid an official visit to India from 6-11
October 2006. She attended the COMESA-India
Ministerial Meeting held in New Delhi and was also the
Chief Guest at the India-Africa Partnership Conclave
organized by CII at New Delhi from 9 – 11 October 2006.
During the visit she had meeting with the Minister of
State for Agriculture, Kantilal Bhuria and discussed
bilateral cooperation in the agriculture area. She also
visited National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) to
explore possibility of cooperation in the small scale
industry area.

Botswana
President of the Republic of Botswana, Festus G. Mogae,
paid a State visit to India from 7-13 December 2006. He
called on the President and met the Prime Minister for
detailed discussions. EAM called on him. He also
addressed a Business Luncheon Meeting organized by CII/
FICCI/ASSOCHAM. Agreements/MoUs on Double
Taxation Avoidance, Bilateral Cooperation, Cultural
Exchange Programme for the period 2007-2010, and
Country Agreement for the Pan-African e-Network were
signed during the visit. Prime Minister announced offer
of US $ 11million spread over 5 years as grant assistance
in education and health sections and Government to
Government Line of Credit of US$ 20 million for
infrastructure development projects. Prime Minister also
offered to raise ITEC slots from 25 to 50. Assistance in
Defence Training, Science and Technology and Education
was offered.

Comoros
Presidential elections were held in the Union of Comoros
in May, 2006. Ahmed Abdallah Mohamed Sambi assumed
Presidentship of Union of Comoros on 14 May 2006 and
appointed other Ministers in his cabinet.
Ahmed Ben Said Jaffar, Foreign Minister of Comoros
visited India from 25-27 July 2006. He called on MOS,
Anand Sharma, and requested for India’s assistance in
some of the urgently required sectors of Comorean
economy. MOS responded positively and suggested
identification of specific areas of cooperation requiring
special emphasis. In this context, he suggested training,
setting up of an International Conference Centre and a
Vocational Training Centre in Comoros. This was the first
foreign visit by him after formation of the new
Government.
An expert, Prof. V. Padmanand from Entrepreneurship
Development Institute of India, Ahmedabad visited
Madagascar in July 2006 to carry out a feasibility study
for a GOI financed project for establishing a Vocational
Training Institute in Comoros.

The President formally opened the resident Botswana
Mission in New Delhi. He also announced that Botswana
Development and Investment Agency (BEDIA) will open
an office in India to promote trade and investments. He
attended a presentation by TCIL on Pan-African eNetwork Project. He visited Chennai and Mumbai. At
Chennai he visited Central Leather Research Institute
(CLRI) and had a meeting with the Council for Leather
Exports. An MoU on co-operation in the Leather sector
was signed between Council for Leather Exports and
Botswana Export Development and Investment Authority
(BEDIA). In Mumbai, he met the Governor of
Maharashtra and had meetings with the Indian Merchants
Chamber, Pharmaxcil and Gems and Jewellery Export
Promotion Council.

Eritrea
India-Eritrea relations received impetus during the year
with the visits of Eritrean Minister of Education Osman
Saleh and Minister of Agriculture, Arefaine Berhe G.
Medhin from 13-16 June 2006, to hold talks with their
Indian counterparts for bilateral cooperation. The
Ministers discussed possibilities of co-operation in the
fields of education and agriculture during these meetings.
The Education Minister discussed Indian assistance for
development of school curriculum in Eritrea, extension
65

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

of Pan-African e-network Project to Eritrea, recruitment
of Indian teachers for Eritrea and linkage of Eritrean
educational institutions with Indian institutions. Both the
Ministers also had a joint meeting with MOS for External
Affairs, Anand Sharma.

attend the First Pan–African Conference on Information
and Communication Technology. Kanti Lal Bhuria MOS
(Agriculture) visited Ethiopia from 6-8 November 2006.
Director General Military Operations also visited Ethiopia
during the year 2006.

An Indian Naval team visited Eritrea to discuss bilateral
naval cooperation.

India contributed the largest number of troops (about
1500) to the UN peace keeping force (UNMEE) stationed
at Ethiopia-Eritrea border.

Ethiopia
School books worth Rs. 25 lakhs were also donated to
Ethiopia.

The year 2006-07 was a turning point in Indo-Ethiopian
relations. Ethiopia looked at India as a model for
democratic development and appreciated the partnership
with India. During the year, several ministers from
Ethiopia, including two Deputy Prime Ministers, visited
India. An 8-member Ethiopian Parliamentary delegation,
including opposition parties, visited India in August, 2006.
The visit was followed by adoption of several practices
into their own system of parliamentary governance and
parliamentary procedures.

Kenya
On 27 April 2006, India and Kenya agreed on a revised
Air Services Agreement. Seat restrictions on routes
between the two countries have been removed. Two
airlines from each country can now operate on the KenyaIndia sector, instead of one each at present. Indian carriers
may also operate to one more city in Kenya, besides
Nairobi.

India’s relationship with Ethiopia acquired greater
economic movement with the grant of a line of credit of
US$65 million for rural electrification during the year.
Nearly US$80 million of private Indian investment flowed
into Ethiopia, mainly in floriculture taking total Indian
investment into Ethiopia to nearly US$ 400 million. A
similar amount of contracts were earned by Indian
companies under internationally funded infrastructure
projects.

A number of visits were exchanged by both sides. Simeon
Nyachae, Minister for Roads and Public Works paid an
official visit to India from 3-8 September 2006. Petkay
Miriti, Assistant Minister for Industry, led a 4-member
Kenyan delegation to the India-Africa Project Partnership
Conclave in New Delhi from 8-11 October 2006. A
Kenyan delegation participated in the India-Africa Project
Partnership Mini-Conclave organized by CII, EXIM Bank
of India and the Government of India for the East African
region in Addis Ababa on 28 April 2006. A delegation
from the Kenyan Public Service Commission, led by its
Chairman, visited India in August, 2006 and held
discussions with the Department of Administrative
Reforms and Public Grievances.

The first ever regional Conclave for Eastern Africa was
held in Addis Ababa in April 2006 with the participation
of Indian companies and the support of CII and Exim
Bank. The conference was addressed by the Prime
Minister of Ethiopia Meles Zenawi and was attended by
300 delegates and added impetus to the development of
the Indo-Ethiopian economic partnership.

Indian Coast Guard Ship ‘Sarang’ paid a goodwill visit to
Mombasa from 2-6 June 2006 and held joint exercises
with Kenyan Coast Guard vessels. Indian Naval Ship ‘INS
Mumbai’ paid a goodwill visit to Mombasa from 8-12
October 2006. A 14-member delegation from the Tea
Board of India visited Kenya from 11-20 October 2006 to
interact with their counterparts and study the local
situation regarding small tea growers. The Guru Nanak
Dev University, Amritsar, and 13 of its affiliated Colleges
held an Education Fair in Nairobi on 11 April 2006.

The first phase of the Pilot Project in Ethiopia, in respect
of the Pan African e-Network Project for tele-education
and tele-medicine, was successfully tested in October 2006
when the links established in Addis Ababa University and
Black Lion Hospital became operational for the two way
audio visual communication with the participating Indian
institutions.
From India, M.A.A.Fatmi, MOS (Human Resources
Development) visited Ethiopia from 24-26 May 2006 to

With 26 companies, India was the biggest exhibitor at
66

Back to Contents

Africa (South of Sahara)

A four member official delegation, led by Henry Roger
Ranaivoson, Chief of Staff, Office of the President of
Madagascar paid a successful visit to India from 20-28
February 2006. During this visit the delegation visited
Kirloskar facilities at Pune and Kirloskarvadi, Mazagon
Docks Ltd in Mumbai, Bharat Earth Movers Ltd. and
Infosys Campus in Bangalore. The delegation also visited
Delhi and had discussions with WAPCOS, Ministries of
Agriculture and Food Processing, Director General, ICAR
and Ed.Cil on issues of mutual interest.

PlastPack Africa 2006, held in Nairobi from 5-8 July 2006.
CHEMEXCIL organised a Buyer-Seller Meet in Nairobi
on 3 September 2006.
Indian companies won three tenders floated by the Kenya
Power and Lighting Co., one tender from Telkom Kenya,
and an order for geospatial mapping from the Ministry of
Natural Resources. State Bank of India received regulatory
approval for its acquisition of Kenya’s Giro Bank. A leading
Indian company, M/s Plethico Pharmaceuticals,
commenced construction of a US$ 96 million factory in
Nairobi, due to be completed soon. Mahindra & Mahindra
launched its Scorpio range in Kenya. Tata Sons opened
an office in Nairobi.

On the request of Government of Madagascar,
Government of India sent Alka Panda, and Gaurav Gupta
as Election Observers for the Malagasy Presidential
elections held on 3 December 2006. The gesture of the
Government of India was duly acknowledged and highly
appreciated.

Some Indian cultural troupes also visited Kenya during
the year. A 5-member Kathak dance group led by Sonal
Mansingh performed in Nairobi on 28-29 October 2006.
The visit was sponsored by ICCR. Renowned director
Shyam Benegal visited Kenya in July, 2006 and gave talks
on filmmaking.

Malawi
A Malawi Ministerial delegation led by the Foreign
Minister Davies Katsonga and including the Ministers of
Finance, Transport and Public Works and Local
Government and Rural Development visited India from
8-12 May 2006. Bilateral discussions at the official levels
and Ministerial levels were held and several areas of
cooperation were identified. ITEC slots for Malawi have
been increased from 5 to 10. Malawi sought US$ 30
million Government-to-Government Line of Credit for
rural development projects.

Lesotho
India’s relations with Lesotho continued apace aided by
the presence of the Indian Army Training Team (IATT)
whose contribution to the development of the Lesotho
Defence Forces was warmly acknowledged by the Lesotho
leadership. Maj. Gen. R.P.S. Malhan, Additional Director
General Staff Duties, Integrated Headquarters of Ministry
of Defence (Army), visited Lesotho from 4-6 September
2006. He paid courtesy calls on the Prime Minister, the
Foreign Minister, the Principal Secretary of National
Security and Defence and the Commander LDF.

Mauritius
The President of India, Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, visited
Mauritius from 11-13 March 2006 as the Chief Guest for
the National Day celebrations for marking the
Independence of Mauritius. His visit evoked tremendous
interest among the Mauritian general public and
intelligentsia. Apart from participating in the National
Day celebrations, the President also had meetings with
the political leadership of Mauritius, including the
President, Sir Anerood Jugnauth; the Prime Minister, Dr.
Navinchandra Ramgoolam; the Deputy Prime Minister,
Dr. Rashid Beebeejaun; the Leader of Opposition, Paul
Berenger; the Speaker of the National Assembly and the
Chief Justice. He addressed a prestigious gathering of
Mauritian Members of Parliament and intellectuals within
the premises of the National Assembly of Mauritius. He
also interacted with university and school students, with

A 2-member delegation from the National Assembly of
Lesotho, led by Deputy Speaker, S.E. Motanyane, paid a
study visit to India from 11-14 December 2006.
It was decided to set up an IT Training Centre in Lesotho
at Government of India’s cost.

Madagascar
INS Mumbai paid a goodwill port call to Toamasina
harbour of Madagascar from 9-12 September 2006. The
Malagasy Minister of National Defence, General Petera
Behajaina was the guest of honour at the well-attended
cocktail reception hosted on-board the ship on 9
September 2006.
67

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

CEOs of Information Technology enterprises working in
Mauritius, and with members of the local fishing
community. During the visit, two important bilateral
agreements were signed - the Country Agreement for PanAfrican e-Network project and a Memorandum of
Understanding on Exploration and Exploitation of
Petroleum Resources in the Exclusive Economic Zone of
Mauritius.

Mauritius on 21-23 November 2006. During his stay in
Mauritius, he also inaugurated a Conference on PIO
languages, organised by the Global Organisation of People
of Indian Origins.
Prime Minister of Mauritius participated in the
International Conference on “Peace Non-Violence and
Empowerment : Gandhian Philosophy in the 21st Century”
held on 29-30 January 2007 in New Delhi.

The Vice President of Mauritius, Abdool Raouf Bundhun,
visited India on the invitation of his counterpart from 716 May 2006. Apart from meeting Vice President, he also
had meetings with the President, Prime Minister, and with
Minister of State for External Affairs. He visited Ajmer
Sharief, Shimla, Mumbai and Kochi. In Shimla, the
Mauritian VP visited the Institute of Advanced Studies,
and in Kochi he visited the University of Kochi.

Mozambique
Several initiatives were taken to give greater content to
bilateral relations in diverse fields
The Defence Minister of Mozambique Joaquim Dai visited
India from 5-11 March 2006 and signed a Bilateral
Agreement on Defence Cooperation. This was followed
by the first meeting of the India-Mozambique Joint
Working Group at Maputo from 10-13 July 2006 to identify
areas of cooperation and assistance in the field of defence.

The year saw continuation of the long- standing
cooperation between the two countries in matters of
defence and security. After its extensive refit and repairs
in Mumbai dockyard, the Mauritian Coast Guard Ship
‘CGS Guardian’ was delivered back to the Mauritian
authorities in April 2006 by the Indian Naval Ship, INS
Suvarna, which tugged the Mauritian vessel from Mumbai
to Port Louis. Later, the Indian Coast Guard vessel ‘Sarang’
paid a goodwill visit to Mauritius from 14-18 June 2006,
and carried out joint training exercises with the Mauritius
National Coast Guard.

A Programme of Cooperation was concluded during the
visit to India of Mozambican Minister of Science and
Technology, Prof. Dr. Eng. Venancio Simao Massingue in
July 2006.
Minister of Agriculture, Tomas Frederico Mandlate visited
India in November 2006 to finalise an Action Plan in the
field of Agriculture.
The Minister of Mineral Resources, Esperanca Laurinda
Bias visited India to attend the CII Conclave on IndiaAfrica Project Partnership 2006 in October 2006.

Five rounds of meetings of the high-powered negotiating
teams from both sides for finalizing a Comprehensive
Economic Cooperation and Partnership Agreement
(CECPA) between India and Mauritius were held. It also
includes a Preferential Trade Agreement.

1
A working group from the Ministry of Health visited
Mozambique in November 2006 for bilateral interaction
and cooperation.

Four meetings of India-Mauritius Joint Working Group
to stop misuse of Double Taxation Avoidance Convention
(DTAC) were held during the year.

A Memorandum of Understanding in the field of coal was
signed on 26 May 2006. Another MoU for co-operation
in the field of mineral resources has also been negotiated
and will be signed soon. A cashew processing plant was
gifted by Government of India, which has been shipped
by HMT (I) Ltd. in November 2006.

The State Trading Corporation of Mauritius and the
Indian PSU, Mangalore Refinery and Petrochemicals Ltd
signed an agreement on 14 June 2006 for the supply of
Petroleum Products to Mauritius for the year 2006-2007.
It was estimated by the Government of Mauritius that
this agreement would allow Mauritius to realise savings
for the country to the tune of around 350 million
Mauritian Rupees.

Namibia
Bilateral relations between India and Namibia continued
to be warm and friendly characterized by mutual
appreciation of a strong tradition of cooperation before
and after Namibian independence in 1990. High-level

Minister for Overseas Indian Affairs, Vayalar Ravi, visited
68

Back to Contents

Africa (South of Sahara)

External Affairs and MOS (AS). The delegation also
visited Mumbai.

interactions were maintained during the year. MOS (AS)
visited to Namibia on 26-27 April 2006 in connection
with the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) Consultative Committee meeting and first IndiaSADC Forum meeting . During the visit he called on the
President of Namibia and also held discussions with the
Namibian Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Education,
Defence, Work, Transport and Communications and
Mines and Energy.

A feasibility study was done for setting up of the Faculty
of Engineering, Mining Technology at University of
Namibia, at Government of India cost. A draft MoU for
setting up two Hole-in-the-Wall projects in Windhoek at
GOI cost, was also conveyed to the Namibian side for
approval.

Rwanda

Assistant Chief of Air Staff, Air Vice Marshall
V.K.Yajurvedi visited Namibia from 3-5 April 2006 and
held discussions with the Namibian authorities for
exploring and further strengthening defence cooperation
between India and Namibia including training of
Namibian Defence personnel in India.

A delegation led by Mahavir Prasad, Minister of Small
Scale Industries paid an official visit to Rwanda from 30 –
31 August 2006. An MoU on Cooperation in the
Development of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
in Rwanda was signed on 30 August 2006.

K.L. Bhuria, Minister of State for Agriculture, visited
Namibia from 8-11 November 2006. A comprehensive
revised Work Plan for cooperation in Agriculture for the
years 2007-09 was signed during the visit.

Rwandan Minister of Education, Jeanne d’Arc
Mujawamariya, visited India from 22-28 July 2006. An
Educational Exchange Programme (EEP) was signed
between the two countries.

Marco Hausiku, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Namibia
visited India from 26-30 October 2006 for review of overall
bilateral cooperation.

Rwandan Minister for Industry, Commerce, Investment
Promotion, Tourism and Cooperatives, Mitali Kabanda
Protais visited India from 4-11 October 2006 as leader of
the COMESA delegation and sought India’s technical and
financial assistance for power generation projects, setting
up of Vocational Training Centres and Rural Development
Projects in Rwanda. The Government of India responded
positively to the requests. He also participated in the CII
Conclave on India-Africa Project Partnership 2006.

A seven member delegation of the office of the Election
Commission of Namibia visited India from 21-30 July
2006. The delegation also visited Bharat Electronics
Ltd.(BEL), Bangalore and expressed interest in electronic
voting machines for use in Namibia.
T.C.Venkatsubramanian, Chairman and MD of EXIM
Bank of India led a delegation to Namibia from 6-8
September 2006 to deliver lecture at the Afrexim Bank
Conference held at Windhoek. He also held meetings
regarding possibility of use of US$ 200 million credit
facility under NEPAD Project.

Seychelles
President James Alix Michel completed two years in office
on 14 April 2006 and won the presidential election 2006
(53.73 % by SPPF), against SNP (Wavel Ramakalawan)–
DP (new leader Paul Chow) alliance (45.71 %) and
became the President of the Republic of Seychelles on 1
August 2006.

A two member team visited Namibia from 11-19
September 2006 for repair of SPV systems and biogas
plants and for providing training to Namibian technicians
under ITEC programme.

INS Sarvekshak conducted free hydrographic survey of
Seychelles waters on the approaches to Mahe and Coetivy
island for 35 days in March - April 2006.

A 9-member Parliamentary delegation from the Republic
of Namibia visited India from 11-15 December 2006. It
was led by Dr. Theo-Ben Gurirab, Speaker of the National
Assembly. They had meetings with the Vice-President;
Speaker of Lok Sabha; Minister for Parliamentary Affairs,
Information and Broadcasting; Standing Committee on

The Goan Troupe “ Kepemchim Kirnnam” participated
in the 30th Anniversary celebrations of Seychelles.
A four member delegation from Forensic Lab and
Narcotics Control Bureau conducted feasibility studies
to set up a Forensic lab in Seychelles.
69

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

Following Prime Minister’s visit, the number of ITEC slots
allocated to South Africa was increased from 55 to 100,
with 50 of these slots earmarked specifically for the JIPSA.
Two bilateral agreements on cooperation in the fields of
railways and education were signed during the visit. Prime
Minister also addressed the third meeting of the IndiaSouth Africa CEO’s Forum, chaired by Ratan Tata from
the Indian side, which met on 2 October 2006. He
inaugurated a permanent exhibition on Mahatma Gandhi
in the Old Fort prison in Johannesburg where Gandhiji
was incarcerated at one time. He also had a meeting with
former President Nelson Mandela.

Government of India has written off US$ 5 million
Government to Government loan and is in the process of
providing US$ 8 million Exim Bank LoC for purchase of
goods from India.
India accepted Seychelles’ offer of two satellite slots to
India.

South Africa
There was a steady consolidation of our close, friendly
and strategic ties with South Africa, both bilaterally and
through the trilateral IBSA Dialogue Forum.
Political interaction between India and South Africa,
marked by a high degree of understanding, mutual trust
and confidence, gained content and momentum through
continued high level visits and close consultation on major
global issues, especially those relating to the reform of
the United Nations and the World Trade Organization.
The two countries maintained their active co-operation
at multilateral forums such as NAM, Commonwealth,
IOR-ARC, G-77, G-20 and the New Asian-African
Strategic Partnership (NAASP) with a view to jointly
addressing global challenges.

To lend more substance to bilateral relations, it was
decided to hold the Ministerial Joint Commission Meeting
early. The last JCM was held in New Delhi in December,
2005.
The South African Deputy President, Phumzile MlamboNgcuka visited India from 10-13 September 2006 at the
invitation of Vice President Bhairon Singh Shekhawat.
The visit of the Deputy President helped identify further
avenues through which India could contribute to ASGISA
and JIPSA. She also delivered the Fifth Alfred Nzo
Memorial Lecture on Satyagraha at the Indian Council
for World Affairs (ICWA) on 11 September 2006.

Dialogue at the highest political levels was sustained
through bilateral interactions between Prime Minister Dr.
Manmohan Singh and President Mbeki. They met in
Brasilia at the historic IBSA Summit on 13 September
2006 and in South Africa during Prime Minister’s visit
from 30 September-3 October 2006. The first leg of the
visit was in Durban for the joint celebration of the
centenary of Satyagraha, which Mahatma Gandhi had
launched, in Johannesburg on 11 September 1906. A
Tshwane Declaration was signed on reaffirming and
deepening the strategic partnership between India and
South Africa and laying down benchmarks in numerous
areas of cooperation including heath, science &
technology, trade & investment, defence, culture,
education, atomic energy etc. Lauding the efforts of the
South African Government for promoting broad-based
economic and social development through the
Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative of South Africa
(ASGISA) and the Joint Priority Skills Acquisition
Initiative (JIPSA), PM reaffirmed that the Indian
Government was ready to be a partner in these initiatives
and to provide assistance in building up scarce and critical
skills identified by the South African Government.

The President of India, Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam was
selected to be the recipient of the 2nd Phillip Tobias Award
instituted by the South African Government for
outstanding contributions to science and technology. At
the request of President Thabo Mbeki, President Kalam
delivered the Phillip Tobias Lecture on 27 September 2006
through a video link from Rashtrapati Bhavan, as part of
the Award Ceremony. In his address, President Kalam
called for greater co-operation between scientists of South
Africa and India in meeting the challenges of
development, including in partnership in the Pan African
e-Network and the World Knowledge Platform.
Other important visits to South Africa included those by
MOS, Anand Sharma in March-April 2006, Union
Minister for Shipping and Transport, T.R. Balu for signing
Bilateral Agreement on Maritime and Merchant Shipping
(March-April 2006) and Minister of State for Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions, Suresh Pachouri from 912 June 2006 during which he signed an Agreement on
Cooperation in Governance, Administration and Related
Matters. Several important delegations also visited South
70

Back to Contents

The Vice President Bhairon Singh Shekhawat with Vice-President of Mauritius
Abdool Raouf Bundhun in New Delhi on 8 May 2006.

The Minister of State for External Affairs Anand Sharma with the President of Botswana Festus Mogae
at the Samadhi of Mahatma Gandhi at Rajghat in Delhi on 8 December 2006.

71

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

Economic Co-operation Agreement (CECA) between
India and the South African Customs Union (SACU).

Africa in 2006-07. These included five State Public
Service Commission Chairpersons from Jammu &
Kashmir, Gujarat, Mizoram, Meghalaya and Arunachal
Pradesh from 2-9 April 2006, Secretary, Science &
Technology, Dr. T. Ramasamy in September, 2006, Vice
Admiral S.S. Byce, FOC-in-C, Western Naval Command
from 21-27 September 2006 and Revenue Secretary KM
Chandrasekhar in November, 2006 for the first meeting
of the IBSA Heads of Revenue Administrations. From
South Africa, there were visits by the Housing Minister,
Lindiwe Sisulu in May 2006 during which an MoU on
Cooperation on Human Settlements was signed, and by
the Premiers of Limpopo and Western Cape in October
and November 2006 respectively, to study different aspects
of cooperation. Three important Parliamentary Portfolio
Committees also visited India.

Under the Cultural Exchange Programme, the first major
exhibition of Indian contemporary art “Visual Trajectories”
travelled to South Africa from April-September 2006 and
was a great success. ICCR sponsored artists such as Odissi
dancer Reela Hota, Bharatnatyam danseuse Urmila
Satyanarayanan and a Qawwali troupe led by Mohd. Idris
performed throughout South Africa. Ustad Amjad Ali
Khan visited Durban to perform at the Satyagraha
celebrations in Kingsmead Stadium on 1 October 2006.
An Indian Film Festival was organized in Durban,
Johannesburg, Pretoria and Cape Town from 20 October14 November 2006. In addition major theme expositions
on various facets of Indian culture through the Indian
Experience programmes were organized in South Africa
in November, 2006.

An Indian Naval ship, INS Mumbai, visited Cape Town
from 19-25 September 2006 in conjunction with the
Africa Aerospace and Defence Exhibition (AAD) 2006.

Swaziland
Indian delegations interacted with Swaziland in the
framework of cooperation with SADC (Southern African
Development Community) and SACU (Southern African
Customs Union) of which Swaziland is a member.

Bilateral trade which has now crossed US$ 2 billion
(excluding India’s imports of gold which are routed
through the international gold bourse), grew by nearly
75% in 2005 and showed an impressive increase in the
first half of 2006-07. Interaction visits of businessmen,
both ways, and trade promotion measures including
participation in trade fairs, etc. continued to be intensive.
India was a partner country at the South Africa Industry
and Trade Exhibition (SAITEX) held in Johannesburg
from 10-13 October 2006. The Third Conclave on IndiaAfrica Project Partnership organized by CII in New Delhi
in October 2006 saw good representation from South
Africa, including the Premier of Limpopo and the Mayor
of Durban. In a significant development, the International
Marketing Council (IMC) of South Africa opened an
office in Mumbai, only its third office abroad, after
Washington and London.

Tanzania
The friendly bilateral relations between Tanzania and
India were maintained with useful functional exchanges
and pursuit of agreed items of co-operation.
A 16-member delegation from the National Defence
College of India was on a 7-day study tour to Tanzania
from 15 May 2006. The delegation called on the Deputy
Minister of Defence and National Service Omar Yussuf
Mzee, Chief Minister of Zanzibar Shamsi Vuai Nahoda
and Chief of Defence Forces Gen. George Waitara.
At a simple, but symbolic ceremony on 7 June, the Chief
Minister of Zanzibar Shamsi Vuai Nahoda and the
Zanzibar Minister for Education and Vocational Training
Haroun Ali Suleiman, accepted a gift of 75 computers
from the Government of India.

Indian investments in South Africa grew in quantity as
well as diversity. Investors include the UB Group of India
(beer manufacture, hotels) Tatas (vehicles, IT, new
investment in a ferrochrome plant), Mahindras (utility
vehicles) and a number of pharmaceutical companies,
including Ranbaxy, CIPLA etc. An important initiative
under negotiation between the two countries is the
Preferential Trade Agreement (PTA), eventually leading
to a Free Trade Agreement (FTA)/Comprehensive

Dr. Asha-Rose Migiro, Tanzanian Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation paid a working visit
to Delhi from 20-25 November 2006. She inaugurated
the new Chancery building of the Tanzanian High
Commission in New Delhi. Dr. Migiro had meetings with
72

Back to Contents

Africa (South of Sahara)

the EAM and Minister of State for External Affairs and
Minister of State for Commerce.

2006 and a 10-member Gujarati folk dance troupe “Rang
Bahar” from 29 October – 2 November 2006.

India-Tanzania official talks on air services took place in
Dar es Salaam on 24-25 April 2006.

Uganda
India-Uganda relations were energised in a multi-sectoral
manner.

A three-member team of IT experts from the Ministry of
Communications & IT and the Centre for Development
of Advanced Computing (C-DAC) visited Dar es Salaam
from 17-26 July 2006 for conducting the feasibility study
for the setting up an IT Centre in Dar es Salaam at GOI
cost.

Minister for Overseas Indian Affairs, Vayalar Ravi, visited
Uganda from 26-29 August 2006.
The Minister for Small Scale Industries, Agro and Rural
Industries, Mahabir Prasad visited Uganda from 31 August
-2 September 2006.

The Chief General Manager of National Small Industries
Corporation Ltd., visited Dar es Salaam in November 2006
to discuss the operational details of the Small Industry
Information Centre Project which is expected to be
implemented soon at GOI cost.

Foreign Minister of Uganda, Sam Kutesa paid an official
visit to India from 29 October-2 November 2006. He was
accompanied by Hope Mwesigye, Minister of State for
Local Government. During talks with EAM both sides
discussed a broad agenda of bilateral cooperation in areas
like human resource development, energy, Pan-African
e-network, technical training and transport. Kutesa
apprised EAM about the energy shortages in the country
and sought GOI assistance for one such project of 200300 mw for which Government of Uganda has signed an
MoU with BHEL. He sought assistance for training of
young Ugandans in the fields of IT and entrepreneurship
and invited Prime Minister and EAM to visit Uganda for
the next CHOGM Summit to be held in Kampala in
November 2007.

In March 2006, RITES was awarded the concession for
operating the Tanzania Railways Corporation (TRC).
However, the operational details are still being negotiated.
A team of National Mineral Development Corporation
Limited (NMDC) - engaged in gold prospecting in
Bulyang’Ombe and Siga Hills in Igunga and Kahama
districts in north-west Tanzania – visited Tanzania from
13 – 23 August 2006. An agreement of confidentiality/
non- disclosure between NMDC and National
Development Corporation of Tanzania (NDC) was signed
during the visit.

Kutesa also met the Minister of Small Scale Industries
and the Chief Minister of Delhi. In Mumbai and Bangalore
on 30 October 2006 he met with business CEOs during
which he invited them to invest in Uganda in sectors like
hydro-power, textiles and motor-bikes. On 31 October
2006, he met H.D. Kumaraswamy, Chief Minister of
Karnataka, Ugandan students studying in Bangalore and
visited Ashok Leyland plant at Hosur near Bangalore.

In the private sector, Tata Chemicals Limited (TCL)
signed an MoU with the National Development
Corporation (NDC) of Tanzania for development of a US$
30 million soda ash manufacturing plant at Lake Natron
in Arusha region. Preliminary feasibility studies have been
made. A Norwegian firm NorConsult was contracted to
undertake a one-year environmental and social impact
assessment in connection with the project.

Daudi Migereko, Minister of Energy and Minerals
Development of Uganda, visited India on 4 August 2006.

Tanzania continued to be one of the largest beneficiaries
under the ITEC programme (75 slots). Self-financed
Tanzanian students were admitted to Indian institutions
in large numbers to pursue higher education. India
continued to be the major destination for affordable and
effective medical treatment for Tanzanians.

Minister of State for Trade, Nelson G. Gagawala Wambuzi
participated in the India-COMESA Ministerial meeting
in October 2006 and also in the CII Conclave on IndiaAfrica Project Partnership 2006.

Zimbabwe

Two ICCR-sponsored cultural troupes visited Tanzania
and Zanzibar; a seven-member Mohiniattam dance troupe
led by Jayaprabha Menon visited Zanzibar from 13-21 July

Historically Zimbabwe and India have close and friendly
bilateral relations. Zimbabwe through its ‘Look East’ policy,
73

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

Women (IIFF) in Harare in November, 2006 during which
two Indian entries ‘Laaz’ (Assamese) and ‘Hasina’
(Kannada) were screened and well acclaimed. India’s
participation in these film festivals received wide publicity
in print and visual media.

sought closer relations with India for investment and
technology transfer including exploitation of its mineral
resources.
To assist Zimbabwe in its capacity building efforts to
turnaround its economy and in the spirit of enhancing
South South Cooperation, India signed an MoU with
Zimbabwe on 14 June 2006 to provide a grant of US $ 5
million for the development of SME sector. Under this
grant, an ‘Indo-Zimbabwe Technology Centre(IZTC)’ at
the premises of Harare Institute of Technology, and an
‘India Technology Centre’ (ITC) at the premises of
Bulawayo Polytechnic, Bulawayo will be established.

India continued to maintain strong presence in the
pharmaceutical sector with Ranbaxy and Torrent
representations based in Harare. An Indian company,
‘Surface Investments’ has set up a multiple seed edible oil
producing plant near Harare to produce 100,000 bottles
of edible oil with an investment of US$ 10 million.
Another Indian company, ‘Grafax Cotton’ had built a
similar edible oil plant in Zimbabwe. Four Indian
companies have successfully set up cotton ginning
factories in Harare. Apollo Tyres has invested US$ 200
million in Dunlop South Africa, which owns Dunlop
Zimbabwe. Some Indian companies are supplying
transformers and power equipment to Zimbabwe
Electricity Supply Authority(ZESA).

Zimbabwe’s Minister of Science & Technology, Dr. Olivia
Muchena visited India in April, 2006 to study Information
& Communication Technology (ICT) in India to enable
Zimbabwe to finalize its ICT policy.
Obert Mpofu, Minister of Industry & International Trade
of Zimbabwe visited India in April, 2006 and travelled to
the ‘Ispat Industries’ plants. He was also part of the
Ministerial team for the Common Market for Southern
& Eastern Africa (COMESA) meeting on 5-6 October,
2006 in Delhi and called on Anand Sharma, Minister of
State for External Affairs.

India continued to interact and attend the meetings of
the Africa Capacity Building Foundation (ACBF) based
in Harare - a premier African institution for sustainable
development and poverty alleviation in Africa. India
became the first Asian country to be the full member of
ACBF.

Oppah Charm Muchinguri, Minister for Women’s Affairs,
Gender and Employment Creation of Zimbabwe also
visited India in November 2006 at the invitation of Gem
Group of Companies, largest exporter of granite of India.
Some Zimbabwean company’s representatives also
participated in the ‘INDIA SOFT’ Exhibition at the
invitation of the Electronics & Software Exports
Promotion Council of India.

Zambia
Tripartite elections for President, Parliament and Local
Councils were held in late September 2006. The Ruling
MMD was returned to power along with President Levy
Patrick Mwanawasa, who was elected for the second and
last term in office as the President.
Lt. General I.S.A.Chisuzi, the Army Commander of
Zambia visited India from 28 May – 30 June 2006, while
Major General RPS Malhan, Assistant Director General,
Army Headquarters visited Lusaka from 31 August – 2
September 2006 to inspect the functioning of the IMAT
Team in Lusaka.

An Indian scientific and friendship mission,
‘Gondwanaland Expedition’ to Zimbabwe was received
by President Mugabe in June 2006 and flagged off by VicePresident Joice Mujuru.
In the cultural field, India continued to participate in the
annual Harare International Festival of Arts (HIFA). The
10-member Odissi dance group led by Reela Hota
enthralled the audience and received standing ovations
at 3 performances in Harare and one in Bulawayo. India
also continued to participate in the annual Zimbabwe
International Film Festival (ZIFF) in August-September,
2006 and in the International Images Film Festival for

The Zambian electric supply company ZESCO awarded
to Kalpataru Power Company from India the contract for
the construction of a transmission line valued at US$13
million.
President Mwanawasa inaugurated an important project
of the Tatas in Ndola set up to assemble Tata trucks and
74

Back to Contents

Africa (South of Sahara)

and investment, food, agriculture and natural resources,
human resources development, health, water resources
management and information and communication
technology.

buses and bicycles. The Tatas are also in negotiation for a
US$120 million power project.
The CII in collaboration with our Ministry organized a
successful regional conclave for Southern Africa on IndiaAfrica Project Partnership in Lusaka on 24-25 April 2006.
Zambia also participated at the CII conclave in New Delhi
from 9-11 October 2006

ACBF
India joined as a full member of the Harare-based African
Capacity Building Foundation with a contribution of US$1
million towards skill development and poverty alleviation
programmes.

COMESA
India-COMESA relations progressed well with the visit
of a high level COMESA delegation of four Ministers led
by the Rwandan Minister of Trade and Industry as
Chairman of COMESA Council of Ministers along with
Ministers from Zimbabwe, Mauritius and Uganda and the
Secretary General of COMESA from 5-10 October 2006.
Fruitful meetings and discussions took place when the
delegation called on our President and Minister of
Commerce & Industry besides the delegation level
meetings led by our Minister of State Anand Sharma. A
Joint Communiqué was issued at the end of the visit and
several areas of assistance by India to COMESA were
identified. The COMESA delegation also prominently
participated at the CII India-Africa Project Partnership
conclave that took place in Delhi simultaneously.
COMESA Secretariat invited Indian delegation to its
Lusaka Headquarters for detailed discussions for an
agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation.

West Africa
In recent years India has intensified its traditionally warm
and cordial links with the countries of West Africa. This
year witnessed some important visits which have further
deepened our ties with the region at not only the bilateral
level but also at a regional and institutional level. Prof.
Alpha Oumar Konare, Chairperson of the Commission
of the Africa Union visited India in December 2006 which
was the first ever visit of Chairperson of AU Commission
to India. A high powered Delegation from ECOWAS
visited India to secure India’s participation in
infrastructural development of West Africa.
As an important part of our economic diplomacy during
the year, Ministry of External Affairs continued its active
participation in the India- African Project Partnership
Conclaves organized by the Confederation of Indian
Industry. A CII India-Africa Regional Conclave was held
in Accra on 25 May 2006 to give a boost to our economic
and commercial relations with West Africa. Anand
Sharma, Minister of State for External Affairs visited
Ghana as head of a six member delegation for this
conclave. The 2 nd Conclave on India Africa Project
Partnership-2006 was held in October, 2006 in New Delhi
in which besides the various business delegations, more
than a dozen ministerial level delegations from West Africa
participated.

SADC
In a significant development, India upgraded its relations
with the 14-member Southern African Development
Community (SADC) and launched the India-SADC
Forum in April, 2006. MOS for External Affairs Anand
Sharma participated in the SADC Consultative
Conference on 26 – 27 April 2006 in Windhoek. On 28
April 2006, he co-chaired the Inaugural Session of the
SADC and Government of India Forum which discussed
various priority areas proposed for cooperation between
SADC and India and agreed to cooperate in the spirit of
south-south cooperation and on the basis of both India
and SADC’s comparative and competitive advantages.
India emphasized that SADC constitutes one of the most
important regional organizations in Africa and it attaches
great importance to further strengthen its relationship and
ties with it in different sectors. The Forum agreed to focus
on cooperation in the sectors of trade, industry, finance

The TEAM-9 Initiative, a techno-economic cooperation
venture between India and 9 countries of West Africa,
continues to provide an effective impetus to deepen India’s
relations with several important countries of West Africa.
Projects of a value of over US$ 200 million are under
implementation under Lines of Credit (LoC) in the
TEAM-9 countries. A new initiative was undertaken in
2006 when during his visit to Ghana, Anand Sharma,
Minister of State for External Affairs, announced a new
75

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

between the two countries in the fields of Diamonds and
other key minerals.

LoC for US$ 250 million which would result in increased
opportunities for our companies in key sectors of the
economy in West Africa. An agreement to extend a US$
250 million LoC by GOI to the ECOWAS Bank for
Investment and Development was signed. The impact of
these initiatives on our relationship with countries of West
Africa region was evident in the visit of President of Gabon
and Foreign Minister level visits that India received from
countries like Cote d’Ivoire, Nigeria, Benin, Senegal,
Ghana, Angola, Republic of Congo and DR Congo.

Benin
India’s friendly relations with the Republic of Benin
continued to gather momentum. India gifted 60 tractors
to the Government of Benin in Cotonou in March 2006.
Mariam, Aladji Boni Diallo, the newly appointed Foreign
Minister of Benin visited India on 26-27 June 2006 and
had a meeting with MOS(AS) to discuss issues of mutual
interest, including future assistance by India to Benin.

West Africa Division continued the work for
implementation of the Pan-African e-Network project
announced by the President during his address to the Pan
African Parliament in September 2004. In consultation
with African Union, Dakar (Senegal) was chosen as the
site for establishment of the hub for the project. Work for
implementation of this ambitious project has been given
to TCIL, which has already signed separate agreement
with Senegal. MoUs for participation in the project have
already been signed with 20 countries in Africa.

Burkina Faso
Jean de Dieu Somda, Deputy Minister for regional
Cooperation, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Regional
Cooperation was in New Delhi from 11-14 December,
2006. Somda had an interaction with members of the
Business Community and held discussions in MEA on
bilateral economic and political relations, including new
projects for Team-9 financing.

Angola

Cameroon

Bilateral relations between India and Angola have been
close and friendly and they continued to grow this year.
João Miranda, Foreign Minister of Republic of Angola paid
an official visit to India from 10-13 May 2006. He had
meetings with MOS(AS), Minister of Commerce and
Industry, and Minister for Petroleum and Natural Gas.
Official talks were held to exchange views on various
bilateral, regional and international issues of mutual
interest. A Protocol for Consultations between Ministry
of External Affairs of the Republic of India and the
Ministry of External Relations of the Republic of Angola
was signed by the two sides. The two sides also agreed in
principle to sign the agreements for the Promotion and
Protection of Investments and Creation of Bilateral
Commission for Cultural, Technical, Scientific and
Economic Cooperation.

Relations between India and Cameroon are developing.
India gifted 60 tractors to the Government of Cameroon
in April 2006 to assist in developing its agriculture sector.

Dr. Mario Calada, Director general of ENDIAMA led a
delegation that visited India from 2-8 October, 2006.
ENDIAMA, the Angolan government Agency responsible
for handling mining and commercial issues related to the
Diamond sector in Angola, is one of the largest producers
of Diamonds. The delegation had meetings in Delhi,
Mumbai and Surat to explore means of closer cooperation

Ghana

Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC)
Ramazani Baya, Foreign Minister of DRC visited India
from 2-7 May 2006. Official talks covered bilateral,
regional and international issues with specific interest in
cooperation in mining, energy and agriculture. Ramazani
Baya sought Indian assistance in several key areas
including Defence and appreciated the role of Indian
Peace keeping troops in DRC.
India formally handed over a gift of 60 tractors to the
Government of DRC in March 2006 and 250 TATA buses
under US$ 12.5 million LoC extended by GOI in June
2006.

Bilateral ties with Ghana maintained their strong
momentum and received a strong impetus with ministerial
level visits by both sides.
Anand Sharma, Minister of State for External affairs
visited Ghana from 24-26 May 2006. A CII India-Africa
76

Back to Contents

Africa (South of Sahara)

Regional Conclave was held in Accra on 25 May 2006 to
give a boost to India’s economic and commercial relations
with West Africa. A 42 member Business delegation from
India was present and had interactions with their African
counterparts. MOS(AS) had meetings/interactions with
counterparts from Team-9 countries in the region which
attended the Conclave to discuss measures to develop
closer economic and political partnership with this
grouping.

Zens, Minister of Economics Affairs, Republic of Niger
visited India in February 2006. Two Agricultural experts
were deputed by GOI to Niger from June, 2006 to conduct
a feasibility study / project report on co-operation in the
field of Agriculture between India and Niger.

President Kufour laid the foundation stone of the new
Presidential Office Complex in Accra in May 2006, a
project being undertaken under a US$ 30 Million LoC
provided to Ghana under the Team-9 programme.

Nigeria

The Foreign Minister of Niger, Aichatou Mindaoudou
came on a private visit to India in July/August 2006, during
which issues of mutual interest were discussed.

Ivory Coast

Relations with Nigeria continued to be warm and cordial
during the year with continued cooperation in the political
and economic spheres. The Foreign Minister of Nigeria
Oluyemi Adeniji visited New Delhi on 19-20 May 2006.
During a meeting with MOS (AS), FM Adeniji conveyed
President Obasanjo’s desire to establish a strategic
partnership with India. He also informed that Government
of Nigeria had decided to award two important Petroleum
blocks to ONGC-Mittal Energy Ltd.

As part of the efforts at strengthening bilateral cooperation
between Republic of Cote d’Ivoire and India, Youssouf
Bakayoko, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Republic of Cote
d’Ivoire led a 110 member Ivorian delegation to India for
the Second Meeting of the Indo-Ivorian Joint Trade
Commission in August 2006.

Active defence cooperation with Nigeria continued during
the year. Indian Chief of Army Staff’s visit to Nigeria last
year was followed by Nigerian Defence Minister’s visit
this year. Dr Rabiu Kwankwaso, Defence Minister of the
Federal Republic of Nigeria led a delegation to India in
February 2006.

During the visit, Bakayoko held talks with Minister of
State for External Affairs of India, Anand Sharma. The
Ministers exchanged views on how to strengthen bilateral,
political, trade, economic and cultural relations between
the two countries in an institutional manner in future.
The two sides signed a Memorandum of Understanding
for Foreign Office Consultations.

Republic of Congo

Mali

A large gift of Anti malarial medicines was formally
handed over to the Government of ROC in March 2006
under Aid to Africa programme.

The Minister of Foreign Affairs of Ghana, Nana AkufoAddo paid an official visit to India from 9-11 June 2006
and held discussions with Government and Indian
business community.

The Foreign Minister of the Republic of Congo Rodolphe
Adada, was on an official visit to India from 24-29 October
2006. During his official meeting, EAM offered to extend
cooperation to the ROC in capacity building and
specialized training and consider providing assistance in
Agriculture, Railways and Technical areas.

Relations between India and Mali continued to be warm
and friendly. Abdoulaye Koita, Minister of Equipment and
Transport of Mali, was on a working visit to India from
11-17 July 2006 for bilateral cooperation in Railways. The
Mali Minister of Energy visited India in August for
discussions on a Power Transmission Project under
TEAM-9 credit.

Republic of Gabon
The President of Gabon El Hadj Omar Bongo Ondimba
paid a friendly visit to India from 3-7 May 2006. He led a
delegation which included Jean Ping, Senior Minister in
charge of Foreign Affairs, the Senior Minister in charge
of Economy, Finance, Budget and Privatization, the
Minister of Mining, Energy, Oil and Water Resources and
the Minister of Commerce and Industrial development.

Niger
India’s relations with Niger continued to grow with special
emphasis on cooperation in agricultural sector. Ali Laninai
77

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

The ministers had separate meetings with their Indian
counterparts to discuss issues of mutual interest. During
the visit, the Gabonese President conveyed Gabon’s desire
to open a resident mission in New Delhi.

Senegal
India’s relations with Senegal witnessed significant growth
during the year. A delegation headed by Dr. Cheikh
Tidiane Gadio, senior Minister of Foreign Affairs visited
India from 22-25 March, 2006. Bineta Ba Samb Minister
of Industry and Crafts and Ousmane Ndiaye, Director
General of Chemical Industries were members of the
delegation. During its visit, the delegation held Meetings
with Anand Sharma, Minister of State for External affairs
and RamVilas Paswan, Minister of Chemicals and
Fertilizers and discussed issues of bilateral interest as well
as International Affairs.
Mahammed Dionne, Minister and Chief of Staff in the
Senegalese PM’s office and Karim Wade, Special Advisor
to the Senegalese President visited New Delhi from 1315 June 2006.The visit was a sequel to Senegalese Foreign
Minister Dr. Cheikh Tidiane Gadio’s visit in March and
was aimed at discussing the long term restructuring plans
for the revival of the Industries Chimiques du Senegal
(ICS), a phosphoric acid plant in which IFFCO has a
stake. The team held meetings with MEA, Department
of Fertilizers and IFFCO for revival/rehabilitation of ICS.
Habib Sy, Senior minister of Infrastructure, Equipment,
Surface and Local Maritime Transports of Senegal,
accompanied by 9 senior officials related to the Transport
sector undertook an official visit to India from 18-25 June
2006 during which discussions were held with Ministry of
Railways and Indian companies for cooperation in this
sector.

ECOWAS
A high-level delegation from Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) visited India from 4-8
April 2006. The delegation was led by Aichatou
Mindaoudou , Foreign Minister of Niger and included Dr.

Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Executive Secretary of
ECOWAS, Ministers for African Integration and NEPAD
from Nigeria, Ghana and Senegal and the President of
ECOWAS Bank for Investment and Development
(EBID).
The delegation called on to the President and PM, had
meetings with Finance Minister and Minister of
Commerce and Industry, discussions with Railway
Authorities and interactions with CII and FICCI. The
Delegation conveyed strong interest in securing Indian
participation in West Africa Rail Network, West African
Power Pool and other major infrastructure projects in the
region.

The African Union
India has been formally accredited to the African Union
since March 2005. Close interaction with the African
Union on political and developmental issues has been
maintained. This year, however, saw significant progress
in our relations and interactions with AU. India
participated in the Banjul AU Summit in June-July 2006.
A two-member delegation led by Dr. Nagia M. Essayed,
Commissioner for S&T and HRD, African Union (AU)
Commission visited Delhi from 26 November-3 December
2006 on a study visit. The Commissioner had meetings
with a wide cross-section of scientific institutions. During
the visit the status of Science & Technology and HRD in
Africa was discussed and avenues to explore closer
cooperation between the AU and India in these areas
examined.
Prof. Alpha Oumar Konare, Chairperson of the
Commission of the African Union paid an official visit to
India from 19-21 December 2006. This was the first ever
visit by AU Chairperson to India. During the visit, he
called on the President and EAM. The visit laid the
foundations of developing an institutional relationship
with AU and Africa. Prof Konare conveyed the desire of
the AU to expand Africa’s relations with India and
proposed an India-Africa Summit.

78

Back to Contents

Europe

India attaches considerable importance to its relationship

7

shedding communist-era planned economies for market
economies. They also looked towards the US, and sought
to enter NATO and EU. In 2004, an additional 10
members joined the EU. India’s relations with the majority
of the new entrants to the EU in 2004 as well as potential
candidates such as Romania, Bulgaria and the countries
of the former Yugoslavia has had to be redefined in the
context of the new realities confronted by these countries
as well as by India- their moving away from communist
era socialist planned economies to market economies and
India undergoing liberalization. However, the relatively
high rates of economic growth in India as opposed to
Europe, the availability of skilled technologists and
technicians at very competitive costs, the huge Indian
middle class market available, and niche areas of
excellence including IT and Pharmaceuticals, and the
capacity of Indian companies to invest in different sectors
of the economy in their respective countries, taken
together with the prospect of aging and populations and
shrinking academic and labour force, all led to renewed
interest of central and eastern European countries in India.
Trade with most of these countries is increasingly at a fast
pace, moving away from traditional commodities to
engineering goods and value-added items. Investments
from India are also increasing. The 7 million outbound
Indian tourist market is also being viewed by many of these
countries as an area of potential growth, as is the possibility
of Indian films being shot in locales in these countries.
These economic benefits are also attracting the attention
of India’s longstanding trade and investment partners such
as the countries of the Nordic group, Switzerland and
Turkey. The potential for high technology manufacturing
in India, cooperation in petroleum, non-conventional
energy, biotechnology and nanotechnology and
engineering, together with more areas like deep-sea fishing
and food processing are raising new possibilities for
collaboration in trade and investment. Scandinavian

with Europe - the European Union (EU) collectively and
its Member States individually. India’s engagement with
Europe is not only important in the bilateral and IndiaEU contexts but in trying to develop common approaches
to addressing various global challenges. India shares a
strategic partnership with the 27-member1 European
Union, an evolving and expanding entity. India also has a
strategic partnership with France, Germany and the UK.
During the year, India’s engagement with the EU and
individual countries in Europe intensified and diversified
further.
Among the highlights of the engagement with Europe
have been Summit level interactions with the EU, UK,
Germany, Spain and Belgium and a growing exchange of
visits at other Ministerial levels. This is indicative of India’s
steadily growing cooperation with this part of the world
over a wide range of areas from political to trade and
investment, culture, science and technology.
In keeping with the deepening engagement with the EU,
the 7th India-EU Summit held in Helsinki on 13 October
2006 took some far-reaching decisions.
India-EU relations have grown exponentially from what
used to be a purely trade and economic driven relationship
to one covering all areas of interaction. In order to carry
forward their strategic partnership in these areas, India
and the EU adopted a comprehensive Joint Action Plan
in 2005, the first time that India has adopted such an
Action Plan with any of its partners. Trade, investment
and technology links continued to intensify between India
and the countries of Europe and showed excellent growth.
India’s relations with the non-EU European countries of
central and eastern Europe have also seen an upward
movement. With the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the
countries of central and eastern Europe commenced

1 Bulgaria and Romania have joined the EU on January 1, 2007.

79

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

countries are also beginning to view the Indian stock
market and financial instruments as safe and remunerative
investments for their large investable funds, and have
commenced investing in India. The relatively high growth
rates in the former East Europe, coupled with the new
possibilities arising from a dynamic and economically
vibrant India is boosting activity between India and
Europe to mutual benefit.

by Deputy PM and Finance Minister of Belgium and
Minister of Science & Technology.
Finance Minister P. Chidambaram visited Brussels from
11-13 June 2006. He met his Belgian counterparts and
addressed an investors Conference.
The Festival of India [October 2006-January 2007]
organized by ICCR in collaboration with Palais des BeauxArts in Brussels was launched by the Queen at Palais de
Beaux arts (Bozar) in Brussels. This was followed by the
formal inauguration of the nearly four-month long event
by Dr. Karan Singh, President, ICCR and Etienne
D’Avignon, President of Bozar in the presence of the
Queen.

Austria
The fourth round of Foreign Office Consultations between
India and Austria was held in New Delhi on 23 May 2006.
General Elections were held in Austria on 1 October 2006.
No Party has emerged in majority. Talks on the formation
of a coalition Government ran into difficulties. But now
a “grand coalition” consisting of the two major political
parties namely Socialist Party of Austria (SPO), and
People’s Party of Austria (OVP) headed by Dr. Alfreed
Gusenbauer of SPO had formed the new Government on
11 January 2007 in Austria.

Sonia Gandhi, inaugurated the ‘TEJAS’ Exhibition, the
central theme of the Festival of India on 11 November,
2006. She was accompanied by Minister of Tourism and
Culture, Ambika Soni and Dr. Karan Singh, President,
ICCR.

Bosnia & Herzegovina

Belgium

The second session of India-Bosnia Joint Committee on
Trade and Economic Cooperation meeting was held in
New Delhi on 11 September 2006. During the meeting,
both sides held discussions on strengthening bilateral
economic and commercial relations between the two
countries.

Relations between India and Belgium are warm and
cordial. Belgium co-sponsored the G-4 framework
resolution on UNSC.
Belgium is India’s 2nd largest trading partner in EU, with
bilateral trade reaching around Euro 7.6 billion in 2005.
Gems and Jewellery (especially diamonds) constitute
about 75 percent of bilateral trade. Investment from
Belgium into India is low (around US$ 155 million during
August 1991-October 2006). There is growing Indian
investment by Indian companies into Belgium, exceeding
that by Belgian companies into India.

Following the general elections held on 1 October 2006,
newly elected three Members of the Presidency of Bosnia
& Herzegovina (BiH) -Nebojsa Radmanovic [Serb],
Zeljko Komsic [Croat] and Haris Silajdzic [Bosnian], took
oath on 6 November 2006. Nebojsa Radmanovic of the
Party of Independent Social-Democrats took over the
Chairmanship of the BiH Presidency for 8 months from 6
November 2006. The Council of Ministers of BiH is yet
to be formed as the negotiations between the parties are
still going on.

Prime Minister of Belgium, Guy Verhofstadt visited India
from 2-7 November 2006. He was accompanied by Deputy
Prime Minister and Finance Minister, Didier Reynders,
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Karel de Gucht. Belgian PM
also visited Chennai, Bangalore and Mumbai. One of the
objectives of the Belgian Prime Minister’s visit was to
attract investments from India.

Bulgaria
The fourth round of Foreign Office Consultations was held
on 27 April 2006 in New Delhi.

In a significant development, a Social Security Agreement
between Belgium and India was signed during the visit by
Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs and Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Belgium. An Agreement on Cooperation
in the fields of Science and Technology was also signed

On invitation from Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign
Affairs Minister of Bulgaria, MOS (AS) visited Bulgaria
from 15-17 June 2006. He had delegation-level talks with
Bulgarian Foreign Minister. He also called on Bulgarian
80

Back to Contents

Europe

As no party had emerged victorious to form the
government, President Vaclav Klaus met with the leaders
of political parties and held talks in an effort to end the
political stalemate. President Vaclav Klaus appointed the
Civic Democratic Party leader, Mirek Topolanek, as the
next Prime Minister-designate.

PM, Chairman of National Assembly, and Minister of
Economy and Energy.

Croatia
A four-member delegation from Croatia, led by Dr.
Radovan Fuchs, Assistant Minister for International
Cooperation in the Croatian Ministry of Science,
Education and Sports visited India from 19-21 April 2006
to participate in the first meeting of the India-Croatia
Joint Science and Technology Committee and signed the
“Agreed Minutes”. An Educational Exchange Programme
(EEP) was signed during the visit.

The newly appointed Prime Minister of the Czech
Republic Mirek Topolanek and his new Cabinet were
sworn in by President Klaus on 4 September 2006. The
Civic Democratic Government led by Prime Minister
Mirek Toplanek (ODS), appointed by President Klaus on
4 September 2006, failed to win the vote of confidence in
the Parliament on 3 October 2006. In the 200-member
Lower House, 99 members voted against the government
and 96 in favour. President Klaus has said that he would
appoint a new Prime Minister only after the Senate and
local elections in end-October 2006.

The seventh round of Foreign Office Consultations
between India and Croatia was held on 27 June 2006 in
New Delhi.

Cyprus
The President of the Republic Tassos Papadopoulos,
accompanied by the Ministers of Foreign Affairs and
Minister of Commerce, Industry and Tourism as well as a
21-member business delegation paid a four-day state visit
to India from 11-16 April 2006. The President delivered
a lecture at the Indian Council for World Affairs on
“Cyprus as a bridge between India and EU”. He visited
Agra, Bangalore, and Mumbai where he addressed a large
business meeting at the Bombay Stock Exchange. During
the visit a joint stamp was released.

President Vaclav Klaus re-appointed the leader of the
Civic Democratic Party, Mirek Topolanek as the Prime
Minister on 8 November 2006, thus giving the Civic
Democratic leadership a second chance to form a
government. The leader of the Social Democratic Party,
the former PM Jiri Paroubek, said his party is willing to
hold constructive talks, but has given no indication of
how a resolution of the stalemate could be achieved. Thus,
Czech Republic continues to have a caretaker government
for the sixth month since the general elections.

Parliamentary elections in Cyprus were held on 21 May
2006. The 59 members of the House of Representatives
were elected for a five-year term. The ruling DIKO party
headed by President Papadopoulos has emerged as the
biggest winner in the elections by gaining two additional
seats and a gain of impressive 3 percent of the popular
vote. The results of the elections indicated an
endorsement of President Papadopoulos and his Cyprus
policy. The DIKO and AKEL (Democratic Communist
Party and principal coalition partner in the present
government) combination has emerged stronger after the
above elections.

Estonia
Presidential elections in Estonia were held on 23
September 2006, where Toomas Hendrik Ilves, has been
declared elected as next President of Estonia for a period
of five year term. He received 174 votes (one vote more
than the required majority of votes) in the 345 member
electoral college. Ilves was nominated for President by
the Pro Patria, Res Publica Union, Reform Party and the
Social Democratic Party.
The fourth round of Foreign Office Consultations with
Estonia was held in New Delhi on 24 November 2006.

Czech Republic
Finland

Prime Minister Jiri Paroubek was elected leader of the
Social Democratic Party on 13 May 2006 in an internal
party election, with 90 percent of party members voting
for him. The general elections were held in Czech Republic
in June 2006.

A delegation led by Speaker of Lok Sabha visited Finland
from 1-4 June, 2006 to attend the centenary celebration
of Finnish Parliamentary Reforms held in Helsinki. During
the visit, Speaker had call on PM and President of Finland.
81

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

the 14th meeting of the Indo-French Joint Economic
Committee on 31 May 2006. He also addressed a business
and investors meet “Destination India” organised by the
Movement of the French Enterprises (MEDEF). P.
Chidambaram, Finance Minister visited France on 13-16
June 2006.

PM paid an official visit to Finland from 12-14 October
2006. Prime Minister’s bilateral visit coincided with the
7th India-EU Summit held in Helsinki. Prime Minister held
bilateral talks with his counterpart apart from delegation–
level talks. The Prime Minister’s visit highlighted the
increasing engagement and substantive economic and
political content of the bilateral relationship. On the
recommendation of the High Level Trade Group, it was
decided to commence negotiations for the conclusion of
a Trade and Investment Agreement between India and
the EU. An India-EU Business Summit was also held
which provided an opportunity to reinforce the message
of India as a secure and profitable trade and investment
destination.

Minister of Railways, Lalu Prasad Yadav accompanied by
MOS for Railways R. Velu led a six-member delegation to
France from 26-29 June 2006. Both sides agreed to
increase institutional cooperation between the two
Ministries and the French National Railway Company
(SNCF) International. The Minister of State for
Commerce & Industry, Ashwani Kumar visited France
on 11-12 July 2006. An MoU on Cooperation in
Intellectual Property Rights was signed during the visit.

Tarja Halonen, President of Finland visited India from
19-24 January, 2007 in connection with the Delhi
Sustainable Development Summit (DSDS) to be held in
New Delhi on 22 January 2007 organized by The Energy
& Resources Institute (TERI).

The then Defence Minister, Pranab Mukherjee
accompanied by a high level delegation of senior officials
and CEOs of Indian defence companies visited France
from 3-5 September 2006. He had discussions with his
counterpart, French Minister of Defence Michèle AlliotMarie and visited various defence establishments. Minister
for Overseas Indian Affairs Vayalar Ravi visited France
from 5-6 October 2006. He met the French Minister
Delegate for Social Security, Elderly, Disabled & Family,
Philippe Bas.

France
India and France have a strategic partnership since 1998,
spanning cooperation across various important sectors
including civilian nuclear energy, space and defence.
France co-sponsored the G-4 Framework Resolution on
reform of the UNSC.

Minister for Food Processing Industries Subodh Kant
Sahay visited France from 22-27 October 2006. He
attended the Salon International d’Alimentation
(International Food Fair) and met Nicolas Forrisier, French
Interdepartmental Delegate for Agro-Food & Agricultural
Processing Industries.

France is the 5 th largest economy in the world; its
technological strengths make it the leader in sectors such
as aviation, space, food processing, transport, railways and
agricultural research. France is ranked 4th in the list of
India’s trading partners among EU countries (after the
UK, Belgium and Germany). Indo-French bilateral trade
has been growing over the years and stood at Euro 4.4
billion in 2005.

The French Foreign Minister, Philippe Douste-Blazy
visited India from 30 November-1 December 2006. He
met EAM. The French Minister of Foreign Trade,
Christine Lagarde visited India from 1-6 December 2006.
She attended a series of business meetings where a large
number of business persons from France also participated.

The actual inflow of FDI from France is of the order of
US$ 834 million (August 1991-October 2006). France is
the eighth largest foreign investor in India during this
period (2 percent of total FDI inflows).
Following President Chirac’s successful visit to India in
February 2006, there have been several visits at Ministerial
and official levels.

The 16th round of the Strategic Dialogue took place in
New Delhi on 8 September 2006 between NSA and
Maurice Gourdault-Montagne, Diplomatic Counsellor
and Special Representative of the French President.

Minister for Science & Technology, Kapil Sibal visited
France from 30 April – 4 June 2006. Kamal Nath, Minister
for Commerce and Industry led the Indian delegation to

The Indo-French Forum (IFF), set up in 1997, consists of
eminent persons who recommend ideas to promote
engagements in areas like trade and investment,
82

Back to Contents

The President Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam receiving the President of the Republic of Cyprus Tassos Papadopoulos
at Rashtrapati Bhavan in New Delhi on 12 April 2006.

Speaker of the Lok Sabha Somnath Chatterjee with the Prime Minister of Finland
Matti Vanhanen in New Delhi on 14 March 2006.

83

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

education, culture, science & technology. The 11th session
of the IFF was held in Paris on 27 October 2006.
Defence Secretary led a delegation to Paris for 9th High
Level Committee on Defence (HLCD) from 8-10
November 2006.

Germany
Germany will hold the EU Presidency during the first half
of 2007; it will also hold the G-8 Presidency during 2007.
India and Germany have a Strategic Partnership since
2001. Germany is the world’s 3rd largest economy; and
strongest economy within the EU. It is a significant trading
partner and a source of investment and technology
collaboration for India. India and Germany cooperated
closely in the context of the G-4 framework resolution
on expansion of permanent membership of the UNSC.
Germany is India’s 3rd largest trading partner in Europe,
with bilateral trade of • 7.6 billion in 2005. During the
first seven months of 2006, bilateral trade grew further by
36 percent over the corresponding period in 2005. During
the visit of Chancellor Schroeder to India in October
2004, the two heads of Government had set a target to
double trade from • 5 billion to • 10 billion by 2010. As
per present indications, this is likely to be achieved in the
course of 2007. Germany is the 6th largest investor in India
with actual FDI inflow of US$ 1.6 billion during August
1991- October 2006 (4 percent of total FDI inflows).
There was strong focus on India in 2006. India was the
Partner Country at the Hannover International Trade Fair;
Guest of Honour Country at the Frankfurt Book Fair and
the focus country at the Bonn Biennale Art festival.
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh visited Germany
from 22-25 April 2006. He jointly inaugurated with
German Chancellor Dr. Angela Merkel, the prestigious
Hannover Industrial Trade Fair, where India was the
Partner Country for the second time. During their talks
at Hannover, Prime Minister and Chancellor Merkel
discussed a wide range of issues including trade and
economic cooperation, energy security, multilateral and
regional issues. A Joint Statement was issued. PM also
met Chancellor Merkel at the G-8 Summit in St
Petersburg on 17 July 2006.
The then Defence Minister Pranab Mukherjee
accompanied by a high level delegation comprising senior

officials and CEOs of Indian defence companies visited
Germany from 5-8 September 2006. During the visit,
Defence Minister and his German counterpart, Franz Josef
Jung, signed a bilateral Defence Agreement, which could
pave the way for closer defence and security cooperation
between the two countries. Defence Minister also had
bilateral meetings with Jung as well as the Federal Minister
for Economics and Technology, Michael Glos.
The German Federal Minister for Economics and
Technology Michael Glos, accompanied by a high-ranking
business delegation from Germany comprising about 50
companies visited India from 29–31 August 2006. Glos
also attended a ceremony in Mumbai marking the 50th
anniversary of the Indo-German Chamber of Commerce.
Vilas Muttemwar, Minister of Non-Conventional Energy
Sources visited Germany from 15-18 June 2006. He met
Sigmar Gabriel, German Minister of Environment and also
Heidemarie Wieczorek-Zeul, Federal Minister of
Economic Cooperation.
The Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Somnath Chatterjee
visited Germany from 26-30 June 2006 at the invitation
of the President of the Bundestag. Minister of Railways,
Lalu Prasad Yadav, accompanied by Minister of State for
Railways, R. Velu and senior officers of the Railway
Ministry visited Hannover, Goettingen, Frankfurt,
Cologne, Salzgitter and Minden from 4-7 July 2006.
Minister of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
Santosh Mohan Dev led an official and business delegation
to Hannover from 20 – 23 September 2006 to visit the
IAA Automobile Fair for Commercial Vehicles held in
Hannover. Arjun Singh, Minister for Human Resource
Development and Ambika Soni, Minister of Culture
visited Germany in connection with the inauguration
ceremony of the Frankfurt Book Fair from 4-8 October
2006.
Defence Secretary led a delegation to Germany from 6-7
November 2006 for the meeting of India-Germany
Defence Committee. Sushil Kumar Shinde, Minister of
Power led a delegation to Germany from 7-12 November
2006.
Two German Parliamentarians, Erich G. Fritz (CDU/CSU)
and Marina Schuster (FDP) from the German
Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Affairs of the
German Bundestag visited India from 1-10 October 2006.
84

Back to Contents

Europe

Hungary

They had a meeting with the Standing Committee on
External Affairs. Fritz visited India again in January 2007,
accompanied by Andreas Schockenhoff, Vice Chairman,
Foreign Affairs Committee in the Bundestag. They
participated in a seminar organized by the Konrad
Adenauer Foundation and the Institute for Peace &
Conflict Studies (IPCS).

Ambika Soni, Minister of Tourism and Culture attended
the Commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the 1956
Hungarian Revolution held in Budapest from 22-23
October 2006. The Minister for Tourism and Culture and
the Foreign Minister of Hungary, jointly released the book
containing ‘Documents from the Archives of Ministry of
External Affairs of India relating to 1956 Hungarian
Revolution’. During the visit, a bilateral Cultural
Exchange Programme for the period 2007-10 was signed.

Sebastian Edathy, Chairman of the Indo-German
Parliamentary Friendship Group visited India from 13-16
November 2006. He called on E. Ahamed, MOS for
External Affairs and also the Governor of Jammu and
Kashmir during his visit to Jammu.

Following the general elections in Hungary in May 2006,
a new government under the leadership of Prime Minister
Ferenc Gyurcsany took oath of office on 9 June 2006. Dr.
Kinga Goncz was appointed as the Foreign Minister of
Hungary. In September 2006, Hungary witnessed
considerable political turmoil after Prime Minister
Gyurcsany admitted that he had lied about the true state
of the economy during the election campaign.

The Indo-German Consultative Group (IGCG), a group
of eminent persons from India and Germany held its 15th
meeting at Wiesbaden, Germany from 14-17 September
2006. The group has a strong business orientation.
An Indo-German Energy Forum at senior official level
and including the private sector has been set up in April
2006. It addressed strategic energy concerns including
energy security, efficient use of energy, promotion of
renewable energy sources and environmentally friendly
technologies, taking into account the environmental
challenges of sustainable development.
Dr. Christoph Heusgen, German Foreign Policy and
Security Advisor visited India from 31 October-1
November 2006 for discussions with NSA.

The Foreign Minister of Hungary Dr Kinga Goncz paid
an official visit to India from 2-6 November 2006. She
called on the Speaker, Lok Sabha and held talks with EAM
on 3 November 2006. The Hungarian Foreign Minister
also met Minister of Commerce and Industry and Minister
of Petroleum and Natural Gas. She visited Agra and
Khajuraho before leaving for Pakistan on 6 November
2006.

Greece

Iceland

A delegation led by Minister of State in the Ministry of
External Affairs, Anand Sharma, visited Greece from 2729 August 2006 and held discussions with the Greek
Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis on matters of bilateral
interest. India’s candidate for the post of UNSG also came
up for discussion. Sharma also held talks with the Greek
Minister of Tourism Fanny Palli-Petralia, on measures to
boost cooperation in the field of tourism between the two
countries.

There was a political turmoil for nearly two weeks
following the announcement by Prime Minister Halldor
Asgrimsson to resign. This development has led to
formation of a new Cabinet with the former Foreign
Minister Geir H. Haarde being appointed as Prime
Minister of Iceland and Valgerdur Sverrisdottir as new
Foreign Minister.
Vilas Muttemwar, Minister for Non-conventional Energy
Sources visited Iceland on 12-13 June 2006.

A six member Parliamentary delegation led by Speaker of
the Lok Sabha Somnath Chatterjee, paid a visit to Greece
from 24-28 September 2006. The delegation met the
President of the Hellenic Parliament, Prof. Anna BenakiPsarouda, the President of the Republic, Karolos Papoulias,
and had a separate meeting with the Greek Prime Minister
Karamanlis.

The Icelandic Parliamentary Delegation headed by Sólveig
Pétursdóttir, President of Althingi (Parliament) paid an
official visit to India from 18-24 November 2006. She
called on President and Vice President. She also had
meetings with Lok Sabha Speaker and EAM.
The second round of Foreign Office Consultation (FOC)
85

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

with Italian political leaders including Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Culture, Francesco Rutelli,
Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs, Senator Gianni
Vernetti, and Defence Minister, Arturo Parisi. MOS also
met Senator Lamberto Dini, President of the Foreign
Affairs Committee of the Senate and other Senators at
the Senate. MOS also delivered a talk on the theme “India
and Italy on the Global stage” at a Round-Table in the
Chamber of Deputies. Italian Minister of Interior Giuliano
Amato presided.

between Iceland and India was held in Reykiavik on 21
June 2006.
The Icelandic President Dr. Ólafur Ragnar Grimsson, was
in India from 20-25 January, 2007 in connection with the
Delhi Sustainable Development Summit (DSDS).

Ireland
India-Irish relations have received momentum following
the visit of Irish Prime Minister Bertie Ahern in January
2006.

Emma Bonino, Minister for International Trade and
European Affairs visited India from 3-7 January 2007. She
held discussions with Minister for Commerce and Industry.

Common historical experiences, positive interaction over
the years, and a shared appreciation on major issues in
recent times have underpinned the bilateral relationship.

Italian Under Secretary for International Trade, Mauro
Agostini visited India for India Chem 2006, which was
held in Mumbai from 8-10 November 2006. Italy was a
partner country at the event. Under Secretary of State
for Defence, Giovanni Lorenzo visited India from 14-17
November 2006 and met Pallam Raju, MOS for Defence.
He was Guest Speaker at the CII-AIAD (Italian Industries
Association for Aerospace & Defence) Symposium on 15
November. A 16-member of the National Defence
College, Delhi delegation visited Italy from 20-26 May
2006.

Bilateral trade was of the order of Euro 250 million in
2004 and has grown strongly in 2005-06. FDI inflow from
Ireland into India is US $ 34 million (August 1991October 2006).

Italy
India’s relations with Italy during the period have been
marked by a new momentum following the visit of then
Italian President, Carlo Azeglio Ciampi to India in
February 2005. The exchange of high level visits has
continued in the build up to the forthcoming visit of the
Italian Prime Minister Prodi to India in early 2007.

Lalu Prasad Yadav, Minister of Railways visited Rome from
1-4 July 2006. He was accompanied by R. Velu, MOS
(Railways). A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)
between the Ministry of Railways and the Ferrovie Dello
Stato(Italian Railways) was signed on 3 July 2006. It was
decided to set up a Joint Working Group (JWG) on
cooperation in Railways.

Bilateral trade has been growing and reached Euro 3.88
billion in 2005. Italy has the world’s 7th largest economy
and India’s 5th largest trading partner within the EU (after
UK, Germany, Belgium and France). Italy is the 11th largest
investor in India (FDI inflows from Italy is US $ 531
million from August 1991–October 2006; 1.4 percent of
total FDI inflows over this period).

Kamal Nath, Commerce and Industry Minister (CIM)
visited Italy from 5-7 November 2006. The Minister was
accompanied by a large 120-member business delegation.
The 17th session of the Indo-Italian Joint Commission
meeting was held in Rome on 6 November 2006. Both
sides agreed to set up a JWG on Infrastructure. A
Destination India event, organized by FICCI,
Confindustria and the Department of Industrial Policy,
was held in Rome on 6 November 2006.

Senator Gianni Vernetti, Undersecretary for Foreign
Affairs paid a visit to India accompanied by a delegation
on 6-7 July 2006. During the visit, he held meetings with
MOS for External Affairs, Anand Sharma, Minister of
Commerce and Industry, Kamal Nath and Ambika Soni,
Minister for Culture and Tourism. He visited New Delhi
again on 17-18 November 2006 to attend the second
Regional Economic Cooperation Conference (RECC) on
Afghanistan.

Earlier, Minister of Commerce and Industry visited Italy
from 31 August-3 September 2006. During the visit, he
met Emma Bonino, Minister for International Trade and
European Affairs and Letizia Moratti, the Mayor of Milan.

Anand Sharma, MOS visited Rome from 14-16 November
2006. During the visit, he held wide ranging discussions
86

Back to Contents

Europe

withdraw from the coalition government. The Labour
Party’s decision came after President Adamkus said on
30 May 2006 that he had lost faith in the two Ministers
belonging to the Labour Party – Health Minister Zilvinas
Padaiga and Culture Minister Vladimiras Prudnikovas.
Though not entitled constitutionally to do so, Adamkus
suggested a reshuffle in the government followed by a vote
of confidence in the Seimas (Parliament).

Shankersinh Vaghela, Minister of Textiles, visited Italy
from 29 October-1 November 2006. Akhilesh Prasad
Singh, MOS for Food and Public Distribution visited Italy
from 30 October -2 November 2006 to attend the 32nd
Session of World Food Security organized by Food and
Agricultural Organization. Subodh Kant Sahai, MOS for
Food Processing Industries visited Italy from 6-10
November 2006. MOS met Paolo De Castro, the Italian
Minister of Agriculture, Food and Forestry Policies on 9
November 2006. A meeting of the Joint Working Group
in the Food Processing sector was held in Parma on 7
November 2006.

The Lithuanian Defence Minister Gediminas Kirkilas was
voted on 4 July 2006, by the Lithuanian Seimas
(Parliament) as next Prime Minister of Lithuania. Former
PM had submitted his resignation to President on 31 May
2006. The resignation came in the wake of the decision
of the Labour Party to withdraw from the ruling coalition
due to the fact that the authorities alleged that the Labour
party had received funds from foreign companies
controlled by the Russian intelligence agencies.

Minister of Tourism of Uttar Pradesh Kawkab Hameed
visited Italy from 9-11 March 2006. Chief Minister of
Sikkim Pawan K Chamling led a high-level delegation to
Italy from 18-20 March 2006. The Chief Justice of India
Y.K. Sabharwal visited Italy from 20-24 April 2006 at the
invitation of the President of the Constitutional Court of
Italy, to attend the celebrations of the 50th Anniversary
of the Constitutional Court of Italy.

The third round of Foreign Office Consultations (FOC)
with Lithuania was held in New Delhi on 26 October
2006.

A high-level delegation led by Tarun Gogoi, Chief Minister
of Assam and including Sushil Kumar Modi, Deputy Chief
Minister of Bihar and Dr. A.K Walia, Minister of Finance
of the Government of Delhi visited Rome from 8 -11 June
2006 for studying VAT related issues. The Speakers of
the Legislative Assemblies of Mizoram, Rajasthan and
Tamil Nadu visited Rome in September, 2006.

Luxembourg
India’s relations with Luxembourg continued to develop
and diversify during the year. Political and economic
interaction was marked by a mutual desire to consolidate
a dynamic relationship.
Bilateral trade during 2005-06 was at US$ 26.77 million
and Foreign Direct Investment from Luxembourg into
India amounted to US$ 69 million from August 1991October 2006.

A life size statue of Mahatma Gandhi, gifted by ICCR,
was unveiled in the Italian port city of Genoa on 22 June
2006 on the 201st birth anniversary of Giuseppe Mazzini,
a national leader of Italy, by the Ambassador and Genoa
city Mayor Giuseppe Pericu.

Foreign Secretary of Luxembourg, George Santer visited
India on 3-4 April, 2006 and held discussions with the
Foreign Secretary.

Latvia
At the invitation of Minister for Tourism and Culture,
Latvian Culture Minister Helena Demakova and a 7
member delegation visited India from 27 May – 2 June
2006. During the visit a Cultural Exchange Programme
(CEP) for 2006-2008 between Latvia and India was signed.
Visiting Minister and delegation also visited Agra and
Mumbai.

Ram Vilas Paswan, Minister of Steel, Chemicals and
Fertilizers visited Luxembourg from 13-15 September
2006. He called on the Prime Minister and held meetings
with Minister of Economy and Commerce.

Montenegro
Following a successful referendum held in Montenegro
on 21 May 2006, Montenegro, which was earliar a part of
the State Union of Serbia & Montenegro, became a
sovereign independent country on 3rd June, 2006. The
name of the former State Union of Serbia & Montenegro

Lithuania
Prime Minister Algirdas Brazauskas resigned on 31 May
2006 following the decision by the Labour Party to
87

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

The Norwegian Foreign Minister Jonas Gahr Store paid
an official visit to India on 14-15 December 2006 in
connection with the Second Session of the Joint
Commission Meeting (JCM) between India and Norway.
The Foreign Minister of Norway led the delegation from
the Norwegian side and External Affairs Minister Pranab
Mukherjee from the Indian side. Apart from bilateral
meeting with EAM, the visiting Foreign Minister also had
meetings with Minister of Science & Technology and
Minister of Environment and Forests.

changed to ‘Republic of Serbia’ as on 5th June, 2006. The
Republic of Serbia will continue its international
responsibilities including membership of the UN.
The Government of India has recognized the Government
of the Republic of Montenegro. A communication to this
effect was sent in a letter dated 2 August 2006 from Anand
Sharma, MOS, addressed to the Minister of Foreign
Affairs, Miodrag Vlahovic. Following the step, formal
establishment of diplomatic relations has been initiated.
The Indian Ambassador in Belgrade will be concurrently
accredited to the Republic of Montenegro.

During the JCM, an Arrangement between the
Government of India and the Government of the Kingdom
of Norway on Gainful Occupation for Family Members of
a Diplomatic Mission or Consular Posts; and a Terms of
Reference (TOR) for establishing the Indo-Norwegian
Joint Working Group on Environment were signed. Also
Agreed Minutes of the 2nd JCM were signed.

Norway
The second session of the Strategy Advisory Group (SAG)
on Norway-India Partnership Initiative (NIPI) on MDG4
was held in Oslo on 26-28 June 2006. From India,
Secretary Health & Family Welfare and Secretary, BioTechnology participated in the meeting. Prime Minister
Stoltenberg reiterated Norwegian commitment to fund
the NIPI programme worth about US$ 80 million over
next 5 years.

Poland
Kamal Nath, Minister of Commerce & Industry visited
Poland from 19-20 May 2006 along with business
delegation. During the visit, Minister had call on Polish
PM and had meetings with Foreign Minister and Economy
Minister. During the visit, an agreement on Economic
Cooperation between India and Poland was signed on 19
May 2006. In addition, two agreements were also signed
by the Business delegations between Federation of Indian
Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) and Polish
Chamber of Commerce (PCC) and an MoU between
World Trade Centre, Mumbai and World Trade Centre,
Warsaw.

Foreign Secretary visited Norway on 24 August 2006 to
hold discussions on NSG related issues.
A 12 member Norwegian Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Labour and Social Affairs headed by Karin
Andersen, Chairman visited India from 4-7 September
2006.
The Norwegian Crown Prince Haakon and Princess
Mette-Marit accompanied by the Ministers of Petroleum
& Energy, Trade & Industry, and the Deputy Minister in
the Ministry for Foreign Affairs, as well as a 130-strong
business delegation paid an official visit to India from 29
October-4 November, 2006 at the invitation of the Vice
President. He called on President and met the EAM.

Cabinet has approved an Agreement on Cooperation in
the field of Tourism between the Government of the
Republic of India and Government of the Republic of
Poland.
Anand Sharma, Minister of State for External Affairs,
visited Poland from 12-15 June 2006. During the visit, he
had delegation level talks with Anna Fotyga, Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Poland. He also met with Defence
Minister Radoslaw Sikorski, Secretary of State in PM’s
Chancellery Zbigniew Derdziuk, Vice Marshal of the Sejm
Marek Kotlinowski, Vice Marshal of the Senate Marek
Ziolkowski, Undersecretary of State in Foreign Ministry
Witold Wyszczykowski, and Undersecretary of State in
President’s Chancellery Andrzej Krawczyk. Minister also

Kapil Sibal, Minister of Science & Technology visited
Norway from 13-15 November 2006. During the visit, an
Agreement on Science & Technology was signed which
established a Joint Working Group (JWG) to implement
the bilateral programme of action. Minister, Science &
Technology had a meeting with Norwegian Foreign
Minister Jonas Gahr Store apart from his counterpart
Djupedal, and addressed a polar conference in Arctic City
of Tromso.
88

Back to Contents

Europe

visited Krakow. During the visit MOS (AS) had chaired
the meetings of HoMs of the regions on 15 June 2006 in
Warsaw.

a senior official delegation, around 70 senior Spanish
businesspersons and a large media delegation will
accompany the Portuguese President.

On 9 May 2006, Anna Fotyga, Secretary of State in
Foreign Ministry and former Member of European
Parliament, was elevated to the post of Foreign Minister.
With Fotyga’s appointment, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
will come under the full control of the President’s
Chancellery - Fotyga and Kaczynski worked closely during
the Solidarity days.

Portugal will take over the EU Presidency in the 2nd half
of 2007.

With the resignation of former Prime Minister of Poland
Kazimierz Marcinkiewicz on 9 July 2006, Polish President
Lech Kaczynski appointed his twin brother Jaroslaw
Kaczynski as the new Prime Minister of Poland on 10 July
2006. Subsequently, the new Prime Minister Jaroslaw
Kaczynski won the confidence vote of the Sejm (lower
house).
A month long political turmoil in the ruling coalition
parties was ended in October, 2006 with the return of the
dismissed Deputy PM and leader of the Self Defence
Lepper on his reappointment to the same post. The ruling
conservative Law and Justice (PiS) party has returned to
the majority coalition with Self Defence and League of
Polish Families (LPR) parties rejoining as the ruling
coalition partners.
Polish Minister of State in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Rafal Wisniewski visited India from 18-22 November 2006
in connection with the inauguration of Polish cultural
programmes associated with “Days of Poland in India
2006-2007”.

Portugal
In substantive preparation for the visit of the President of
Portugal, Dr. Anibal Cavaco Silva from 11-17 January
2007, the first HOS/HOG level visit from Portugal in
nearly 15 years, the India-Portugal Joint Economic
Commission held its 3 rd session in New Delhi on 12
December 2006.
President Silva was accompanied by four Ministers –
Minister of Culture Isabel Pires de Lima, Minister for
Economy and Innovation Manuel António Gomes de
Pinho, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Joao Cravinho,
and Minister of State for Science, Technology and Higher
Education Prof. Manuel Heitor. Members of Parliament,

Business links presently are short of potential. Bilateral
trade with Portugal is modest at almost US$ 290 million
(2005). Indian exports accounted for most part of the
bilateral trade and stood at US$ 258 million (2005).
Investment from either side is also minimal. Total FDI
inflow from Portugal to India is US$ 1.4 million (August
1991-October 2006).
Foreign Office Consultations were held in New Delhi on
21 November 2006. MOS (AS) led the Indian delegation
while Joao Cravinho, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs,
Portugal led the Portuguese delegation.
Another positive development has been the launching of
a Portugal-India Chamber of Commerce in Lisbon on 17
November 2006. There is also a Joint Business Council
between the two countries.
Carlos Pascoa, a Member of the Portuguese Parliament
representing the Portuguese Diaspora outside Europe,
visited India from 27 October- 3 November 2006. He met
the Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs, Vayalar Ravi in
Delhi besides visiting Goa. A 16-member Parliamentary
Goodwill Delegation led by Minister of Parliamentary
Affairs & Information & Broadcasting, Priya Ranjan
Dasmunsi visited Portugal on 6-7 November 2006 and
met with the President (Speaker) of the Parliament, Dr.
Jaime Gama and the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs of
Portugal, Dr. Augosto dos Santos Silva.

Romania
Iuliu Winkler, Minister for Commerce paid an official visit
to India from 3-9 June 2006. During his visit, he called
on Ministers in charge of Power, Science and Technology,
Commerce and Industry and Secretary, Ministry of NonConventional Energy.
At the invitation of Romanian Foreign Minister, Anand
Sharma, MOS, paid an official visit to Romania from 29
August 2006-1 September 2006 to attend the Annual
Reunion of Romanian Diplomacy. Apart from a one-toone meeting and delegation-level talks with the Romanian
89

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

exchange rate of 239.64 Slovenian Tolar (SLT) against a
Euro has been fixed. Slovenia became the thirteenth
country to have Euro as the legal tender. Twelve countries
had adopted Euro from 1 January 2002; and Slovenia is
the first among the ten new entrants to join the zone.

Foreign Minister, MOS also had meetings with Romanian
President, Vice- President, and Prime Minister.
Romanian President, Traian Basescu, paid a State Visit
to India from 22-24 October 2006. During his visit,
Romanian President had meetings with President, Prime
Minister, Vice-President and Chairperson of UPA, Sonia
Gandhi. The Romanian President was accompanied by a
high-level delegation which included Minister of Foreign
Affairs, Minister of Economy and Commerce, and Minister
of Telecommunications and IT. Four Agreements/MoUs
were signed during the State Visit.

The fourth round of Foreign Office Consultations with
Slovenia was held on 6 October 2006 in New Delhi.

Spain
There is a growing exchange of Ministerial and business
delegations between India and Spain over recent years.
Spain has the 5th largest economy in the EU and the 8th
largest economy in the world with a GDP of around US $
1 trillion. The Spanish economy has registered rates of
growth among the highest in the EU in recent years.
Bilateral trade has grown by 35 percent in 2005 to touch
US$ 2.7 billion. FDI inflow from Spain to India has been
low (US$ 60 million during August 1991-October 2006).

Cabinet approved Protocol for amending the Agreement
between the Government of India and Romania for the
Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments
signed in New Delhi on 17 November 1997.

Slovak Republic
General Elections were held in the Slovak Republic on
17 June, 2006. The opposition SMER party won 50 seats
in the 150-member Parliament. It was followed by the
SDKU party of Prime Minister Mikulas Dzurinda with 31
Parliamentary seats. The Slovak National Party gained
20 seats, followed by SMK(20 seats), HZDS(15 seats),and
Conservative Christian Democratic Movement(14
seats).The elections were necessitated following
withdrawal of support to the Government of Prime
Minister Dzurinda by the Christian Democratic
Movement. Talks are on for the formation of a coalition
Government.

The Spanish Prime Minister Jose Luis Zapatero made an
official visit to India on 3-4 July 2006, the first Head of
Government level visit from either side in 13 years. It
took place on the 50th anniversary of the establishment
of diplomatic relations between the two countries. The
last such visit was that of Spanish Prime Minister Felipe
Gonzalez in 1993.
The Spanish Prime Minister was accompanied by Foreign
Minister Moratinos, Minister for Industry, Tourism and
Trade, Montilla and around 60 Spanish companies.
Zapatero was supposed to have visited Pune (where several
of the Spanish joint ventures in India are based) and
Mumbai, besides Delhi, however, he had to cut short the
visit after the Delhi leg, following news of a subway
accident in Valencia.

The Slovak Minister of Economy, Lubomir Jahnatek, paid
an official visit to India from 13-15 November 2006. The
Minister was accompanied by a large and high level
business delegation. The visit coincided with the Sixth
Session of the Indo-Slovak Joint Economic Committee
which took place in New Delhi on 13 November 2006.

A Joint Statement was issued during the visit, declaring
the intention of both sides to substantially enhance the
existing relationship. The two Governments agreed to
work actively together to realize the full potential of
economic linkages between the rapidly growing indian and
Spanish economies and took special note of the
convergence of views on cooperation in fight against
terrorism.

Slovenia
Priyadarshi Thakur, Secretary, Ministry of Heavy Industry
and Public Enterprises, has been elected for a 4 year term,
with the support of the Slovenian Government, as the
Director General (Executive Director) of the International
Centre for Promotion of Enterprises (ICPE) situated in
Ljubljana in the elections held in ICPE Council on 9 June
2006.

An MoU on Institutionalising the Political Dialogue,
Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty and an MoU on
Technology Transfer and Industrial Research were signed
during the visit.

Slovenia joined the Euro zone on 1 January 2007. An
90

Back to Contents

Europe

Switzerland

In the run up to the Spanish Prime Minister’s visit, Foreign
Office Consultations (Secretary level) were held in May
2006 in Spain.

Minister for Overseas Indian Affairs visited Switzerland
on 10 – 11 September 2006 to interact with the Indian
community to evolve an agenda for future strategy as well
as Publicity for the next Pravasi Bharatiya Divas to be
held in January, 2007 in New Delhi.

MOS (AS) visited Spain from 11-14 November 2006 for
the inauguration ceremony of the Casa de la India (India
House) in Valladolid and discussions with Spanish External
Affairs Minister Miguel Moratinos and MOS for External
Affairs D. Bernardino Leon Groos. He also met Spanish
Minister of Education and Science Dr. Mercedes Cabrera.
He visited Barcelona for discussions with Casa Asia and
also addressed the El Cano Institute on India’s Foreign
Policy and the Instituto de Impresa on business
opportunities opening up in India.

Minister of Commerce & Industry Kamal Nath visited
Zurich on 2 October 2006 at the invitation of Swiss-Indian
Chamber of Commerce (SICC). He addressed the Swiss
business at a function organized by SICC. The other
panelist was the CEO of Holcim, Paul Hugentobler. He
also met the Federal Councillor for Economic Affairs,
Doris Leuthard.

K. Rahman Khan, the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya
Sabha visited Spain in June 2006 and had a meeting with
Javier Rojo, President of the Senate of the Spanish
Parliament, where it was agreed that Parliamentary
exchanges between the two countries should be
encouraged. A Goodwill delegation of Indian
Parliamentarians led by Priya Ranjan Dasmunsi, the
Minister for Parliamentary Affairs and Information &
Broadcasting visited Spain from 8-10 November 2006.

Minister of Commerce and Industry, Kamal Nath visited
Geneva from 30 November-2 December 2006. He
announced the establishment of a Joint Study Group on
the FTA between India and the EFTA.
S. Regupathy, Minister of State for Home (in charge of
Disaster Management), visited Switzerland from 30
October 2006- 3 November 2006. This was a follow-up
to President visit to Switzerland in 2005 as well as to
identify specific areas/programmes/projects of cooperation
between the Government of India and the Swiss
Confederation.

MOS for Food Processing visited Spain from 25-26
October 2006. A Statement of Intent was signed with
the Government of the region of Castilla y Leon.

Kapil Sibal, Minister of Science &Technology paid a visit
to Switzerland from 15-18 November 2006. During the
visit a Programme of Cooperation within the framework
of Science &Technology Agreement of 2003, was signed.

The 2 nd India-Spain Dialogue Forum (civil society
dialogue) was organized by ICWA in New Delhi on 1617 October 2006. The Spanish participants included
prominent writers, journalists, academicians and
representatives from political parties besides the senior
officials. A Joint Declaration was signed by the Forum.
The delegation also called on MOS (AS).

Minister of State for Health and Family Welfare, Panabaka
Lakshmi visited Geneva, Switzerland on 9 November 2006
to attend the Special Session of world Health Assembly.
The protocol amending the Air Services Agreement
(ASA) between India and Switzerland was approved by
Cabinet on 23 November 2006.

The Chief Minister of Haryana, Bhupinder Singh Hooda
visited Spain from 17-19 October. He met the President
of the Madrid region.

The fourth round of Foreign Office Consultations with
Switzerland was held in New Delhi on 6 November 2006.

Sweden
Foreign Secretary visited Sweden on 23 August 2006. He
met Swedish Foreign Minister Jan Eliasson and State
Secretary Hans Dahlgren, and held discussions on NSG
related issues.

The Netherlands
Bilateral relations have strengthened and intensified over
the year. High level ministerial visits from the Netherlands
have imparted further momentum to our relationship.

Minister for Water Resources, Prof. Saif-ud-din Soz visited
Stockholm, Sweden from 23-27 August 2006 to attend
the World Water Week.

Bilateral trade between India and The Netherlands has
been growing to the tune of Euro 2 billion. Cumulative
91

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

Dutch investment into India is of the order of US$ 2.4
billion (August 1991-October 2006; over 6 percent of total
FDI inflows). This makes The Netherlands the 3rd largest
investor in India and the largest from the EU.

an official visit to India from 22-25 November 2006.
During his visit, Second Session of India- Turkey Joint
Committee on Tourism was held in New Delhi.
Prof. Dr. Besir Atalay, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs
in the Turkish Foreign Office led a 6 members delegation
to attend the Second Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference (RECC) on Afghanistan held in New Delhi
on 18-19 November 2006.

Following the visit of the Dutch Prime Minister to India
in January 2006, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the
Netherlands, Dr. Bernard Rudolf Bot visited India on 5-6
November 2006 and held meetings with Minister of
External Affairs and National Security Adviser. Earlier,
the second round of Foreign Office Consultations were
held at The Hague in June 2006.

United Kingdom
India and the UK share a strategic relationship that is
multifaceted and has developed substantially over the past
few years. Close ties with the UK are a priority for India
given our political and civilisational ties, increasing
economic linkages and the large Indian Diaspora in the
UK. The UK, in turn, attaches high priority to developing
close ties with India, as reflected in the frequent highlevel interactions.

Minister of Foreign Trade, Karien van Gennip visited India
from 2-8 September 2006 accompanied by a strong
business delegation. She held discussions with Minister
of Commerce and Industry, Minister of Finance and had
meetings with business and industry houses in Delhi,
Chennai and Hyderabad.

Turkey

The UK, with the 5th largest economy in the world, is
India’s 4th largest global trading partner and the largest in
the EU, with annual two-way trade in goods in 2005 at £
5.6 billion and of services in 2004 of £ 1.827 billion. With
a figure of £ 3.4 billion, the UK continues to be the largest
cumulative investor in India and the 5th largest post 1991,
with US$ 2.14 billion (5.3 percent of total FDI inflows)
(August 1991- November 2006). Since 2004, Indian
investment in the UK has exceeded British investment
into India.

A 5-member Turkish delegation led by Turkish Treasury
Undersecretary Ibrahim Halil Canakci visited India to
attend the 39th Annual Meeting of Asian Development
(ADB) Board of Governors in Hyderabad from 3-6 May
2006.
Turkish Prime Minister Erdogan, on his way to Indonesia
to attend the D-8 Conference in Bali, made a refuelling
technical halt at Indira Gandhi Airport in New Delhi on
12 May 2006. Joint Secretary, Central Europe had received
him and had a brief meeting with the Turkish PM.

Prime Minister visited UK on 9-11 October 2006 for the
3rd India-UK Summit since the comprehensive strategic
partnership between India and the UK was launched in
September 2004. He was accompanied by the Commerce
& Industry Minister, Kamal Nath, Minister of State for
External Affairs, Anand Sharma and NSA. This was the
fifth meeting of the two Prime Ministers since 2004. Prime
Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh had earlier met Prime
Minister Tony Blair at the St. Petersburg G-8 Summit in
July, 2006.

A Turkish Parliamentary delegation visited India from 1317 September 2006. The delegation had meetings with
members of India-Turkey Parliamentary Friendship Group.
They also had meetings with Special Secretary in the
Ministry of Labour and Employment, as well as with the
MOS in the Ministry of Finance.
Ambassador Rafet Akgunay, Special Envoy of the Turkish
Prime Minister visited India from 18-20 October 2006.
The purpose of his visit was to hand over a letter from
Turkish Prime Minister to Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan
Singh seeking India’s support for Turkish candidature for
non-permanent membership of UNSC for the term 20092010 for which elections will be held in UNGA in 2008.

Cooperation in counter-terrorism, clean energy and trade
and investment figured among the key issues during the
visit. Prime Minister was conferred an honorary doctorate
by the Cambridge University on 11 October 2006.

Turkish Minister of Culture and Tourism Atilla Koc, on
invitation from our Minister of Culture and Tourism, paid

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh and Prime Minister
Blair addressed an India-UK Investment Summit on 10
92

Back to Contents

The Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh with the Prime Minister of United Kingdom
Tony Blair in London on 10 October 2006.

The Minister of State for External Affairs Anand Sharma calls on the Prime Minister of Spain
Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero in New Delhi on 3 July 2006.

93

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

Agriculture Show (3-7 July); Santosh Mohan Dev,
Minister for Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (4-8
July); Dayanidhi Maran, Minister for Communications &
IT (14-16 July); Vayalar Ravi, Minister for Overseas Indian
Affairs (2-3 October).

October 2006, organized by the Indo-Business Partnership
Network. The event was also addressed by Commerce &
Industry Minister and Alistair Darling, Secretary of State
for Trade and Industry. Around 100 CEOs attended the
event, which focused on energy, infrastructure,
manufacturing, financial services and venture capital/
innovation.

The India-UK Strategic Dialogue was held in New Delhi
on 2 May 2006.

Margaret Beckett, UK Secretary of State for Foreign
Affairs visited India (2-3 November) three weeks after
PM’s visit to the UK. Earlier, Dr. Kim Howells, MoS for
Foreign Affairs visited India on 28-29 September 2006, a
few days before PM’s visit to UK.

International Conference: Peace, Non-Violence
and Empowerment: Gandhian Philosophy in the
21st Century.
To commemorate the Centenary of the Satyagraha
movement, an international Conference was organised
on “Peace, Non-Violence and Empowerment-Gandhian
Philosophy in the 21st Century”. The conference was
attended by eminent leaders and dignitaries from countries
in Central Europe including Dr. Janez Drnovsek, President
of the Republic of Slovenia, Maud Olofsson, Deputy Prime
Minister of Sweden, George Papandreou, Former Foreign
Minister of Greece, and Former President Lech Walesa of
Poland and Noble Laureate. Delegates from Austria,
Croatia, Cyprus, Norway, Poland, Romania, Serbia, Slovak
Republic, and Switzerland also attended the
Conference.

In 2006, four leading Parliamentary Committees, led by
their Chairmen, visited India: Trade & Industry, Home,
Treasury and Foreign Affairs.
Foreign Office Consultations were held on 3 April 2006
in New Delhi. Foreign Secretary led the Indian delegation.
The India-UK Security Dialogue was held on 4 April 2006
in New Delhi. NSA led the Indian delegation.
The UK Leader of the Opposition David Cameron visited
India on 3-7 September 2006. He was accompanied by
George Osborne, Shadow Chancellor of Exchequer. The
Prince of Wales (26 March-3 April 2006) and a large
number of senior U.K Ministers have visited India. There
have also been visits of several Ministers from our side.
Prince Andrew, the Duke of York, visited India (28
October- 4 November 2006) as the Special Representative
of the UK for Trade & Industry.

European Union (EU)
The highlight of rapidly intensifying India-EU relations
in the period under review was the 7th Summit in Helsinki
on 13 October 2006. During the Summit, both sides
agreed to launch negotiations on a broad-based IndiaEU trade and investment agreement.

Peter Hain, MP and Secretary of State for Northern
Ireland visited India (9-13 April 2006). Other visits from
the UK side have included Home Affairs Committee team
led by Chairman John Denham, MP (April); Treasury
Select Committee led by Chairman John McFall (20-23
June); MOS for Sport, Richard Caborn (15-16
November); MOS Trade, Ian McCartney, MP (23-27
November).

The EU, a strong economic player with a single market
comprising its 27 member states, is India’s largest trading
partner accounting for one-fifth of India’s total external
trade. Bilateral trade has steadily grown between 2001
and 2005 at over 10 percent on average to reach Euro 40
billion in 2005. India and the EU are also important
investment partners. Total FDI inflows from the EU to
India are US$ 8 billion (20 percent of total FDI inflows
August 1991-October 2006). Indian companies have also
begun to invest in the EU in recent years. UK, Belgium,
Germany, France, Italy and The Netherlands are
important trade & investment partners for India.

The visits from the Indian side have included Dr Montek
Singh Ahluwalia, Deputy Chairman, Planning
Commission (26-27 April); Empowered Committee of
State Finance Ministers (1-3 June); Vilas Muttemwar,
Minister for NES (June 14); Lalu Prasad Yadav, Minister
for Railways (23-26 June); Kamal Nath, CIM for India
UK Business Summit (26-28 June); Subodh Kant Sahai,
MoS for Food Processing Industries to attend the Royal

At the 7 th India-EU Summit, Prime Minister Matti
Vanhanen of Finland lead the EU delegation (Finland held
the rotating Presidency of EU during the second half of
94

Back to Contents

Europe

meeting focused on energy, social development and
minorities.

2006) that included Jose Manuel Barroso, President of
the European Commission, Dr. Javier Solana, EU
Secretary General and High Representative for Common
Foreign and Security Policy, Dr. Benita Ferrero Waldner,
EU Commissioner for External Relations and European
Neighbourhood Policy, Errki Tuomioja, Finnish Foreign
Minister and Peter Mandelson, Commissioner for Trade.
Prime Minister led the Indian delegation and was assisted
by Minister of Commerce & Industry, Minister of State
for External Affairs and NSA.

The 16th India-EU Joint Commission Meeting (JCM) was
held on 18 September 2006 in Brussels.
The India-EU Energy Panel, set up in follow up to a
decision taken at the 5th India-EU Summit at The Hague
in November, 2004 to identify areas for greater cooperation
in the critical sector of Energy and Energy security, held
its 2nd meeting in New Delhi on 7 April 2006. The Panel,
after its first meeting in June, 2005, had set up three
Working Groups on Coal and clean coal conversion
technologies, Energy efficiency and renewable energies,
and Fusion energy including India’s participation in the
ITER nuclear fusion project. India has since joined the
ITER project. The Working Groups on Coal and Energy
Efficiency met on 22-23 March 2006 in New Delhi. The
Working Group on Fusion Energy met on 1 February 2006
in Ahmedabad. The 2nd meeting also decided to set up
another Working Group on Petroleum & Natural Gas and
to conduct 5 techno economic studies.

The Summit was preceded by an India-EU Business
Summit and a CEO Round Table on 12 October 2006.
Among the areas of primary focus were the economic
aspects of the India-EU relationship, cooperation in
counter-terrorism, energy, closer security dialogue and
political understanding on issues of mutual interest such
as non-proliferation issues and cooperation in the field of
civil nuclear energy. A Joint Statement and Joint Action
Plan Implementation Report were issued at the Summit,
in a comprehensive overview of the progress achieved in
various sectors for engagement and cooperation identified
in the Joint Action Plan finalised at the 6th Summit a year
ago.

An Energy Business Conference was held in New Delhi a
day earlier on 6 April 2006. This was addressed by the
EU Commissioner for Energy, Piebalgs and the Minister
of Power, Sushil Kumar Shinde.

The highlight of the 7th Summit was the acceptance by
the leadership of both sides of the recommendation of
the bilateral High Level Trade Group (HLTG) to launch
negotiations on a broad based Trade and Investment
Agreement with the maximum coverage possible and to
work towards a quick conclusion of this Agreement within
the next two years. The HLTG, set up under the Joint
Action Plan, was mandated to explore ways and means
to deepen and widen the bilateral trade and investment
relationship. It finalised its Report and recommendations
in less than a year, for presentation to the 7th Summit.

The 11th meeting of the India-EU Joint Working Group
on Consular Issues was held in New Delhi on 8 December
2006. The 10th meeting was held on 14 June 2006. The
1st round of India-EU Dialogue on Migration and Consular
issues was held on 27 June 2006 in Brussels.
The 1st round of India-EU Security Dialogue that was
envisaged under the Joint Action Plan was also held on
22 May 2006, following the 11th Senior Officials Meeting.
An India-EU Dialogue on Human Rights was held in New
Delhi on 12 December 2006.

The India-EU Round Table provides a forum for civil
society cooperation and contributes to the enhancement
of bilateral relations between India and the EU. The 10th
Meeting of the India-EU Round Table (RT) was held in
Vienna on 7-8 June 2006. The two sides were led by the
co-Chairpersons N. N. Vohra and Anne-Marie Sigmund,
President of EESC (European Economic & Social
Committee) respectively. The members of the Round
Table (around 30 from the two sides) are eminent persons
who represent various sections of civil society. The 10th

There was a series of high level exchanges at the level of
parliamentarians during this period. These included visits
by the President of the European Parliament Josep Borrell
(30 September- 6 October 2006) at the invitation of the
Speaker of the Lok Sabha and the Deputy Chairman of
the Rajya Sabha; Chairman of the Foreign Affairs
Committee of the European Parliament, Elmar Brok (4-7
January); and a 5-member delegation of MEPs, led by
Charles Tannock, Head of the Friends of India group in
95

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

Foreign Affairs Committee of the European Parliament
and the Rapporteur of the Own Initiative Report on
Kashmir visited India from 26-30 June 2006.

the European Parliament visited India (28 October–3
November 2006).
Sajjad Karim, Rapporteur of European parliament’s ‘own
initiative report’ on EU’s economic and trade relations
with India, visited India in April, 2006.

The Chief Minister of Jammu & Kashmir Ghulam Nabi
Azad visited Brussels on 19-20 September 2006. He met
the President of the European Parliament, Josep Borell
and Chairperson of the Foreign Affairs Committee, Elmar
Brok and addressed a group of MEPs at the European
Parliament. Sachin Pilot, MP visited Brussels and
Strasbourg from 3-12 September 2006.

Neena Gill, Chairperson of the South Asia Delegation of
the European parliament visited India in July and April
2006.
Baroness Emma Nicholson, MEP, Vice Chairperson of the

96

Back to Contents

The Americas

United States of America

8

key understandings forged during the July 2005 visit of
Prime Minister to Washington DC.

The transformation in the US- India bilateral relationship
was marked by a consolidation of efforts by both sides to
broaden the India-US agenda. Close and frequent contacts
at political as well as at official levels coupled with wideranging dialogue on global, regional and bilateral issues
of mutual interest reflect the changed quality of the
bilateral discourse. The India-U.S. interaction today
encompasses strategic and security issues, defence,
counter-terrorism, science and technology, health, trade,
space, energy, maritime cooperation, and environment.

Prime Minister met President Bush again in St. Petersburg
on 17 July 2006 on the margins of the G-8 Summit. The
two leaders reviewed several aspects of the bilateral
relationship and, amongst other things, discussed crossborder terrorism and the Indo -US civil nuclear
cooperation initiative.
Civil Nuclear Energy
Several steps were taken by both sides to implement the
understanding on resumption of civil nuclear energy cooperation that was reached in July 2005. It represents an
important landmark in the evolving bilateral ties between
the two countries.

President Bush’s Visit
Following the landmark visit of Prime Minister Dr.
Manmohan Singh to USA in July 2005, President George
W. Bush came to India on a state visit from 1-3 March
2006. He was accompanied by First Lady Laura Bush,
Secretary of State Dr. Condoleezza Rice, Chief of Staff
Andrew Card, National Security Advisor Steve Hadley,
and US Trade Representative Rob Portman. President
Bush had a meeting with the Prime Minister and the two
leaders issued a Joint Statement outlining the main
elements of understandings reached during the visit. Both
countries announced joint initiatives in agriculture,
science and technology, space and maritime cooperation.
The visit also saw an agreement on India’s nuclear
separation plan under the bilateral civil nuclear
understanding. The India-US CEO Forum set up during
Prime Minister’s visit in July 2005 submitted its report
which aimed at substantially broad-basing and
accelerating India-U.S. economic and trade relations.
President Bush also called on President Dr. A.P.J. Abdul
Kalam and received UPA Chairperson Sonia Gandhi and
the Leader of Opposition L.K. Advani.

Under this understanding, India finalized its Separation
Plan in March 2006 which was tabled in Parliament by
the Prime Minister on 7 March 2006. The Separation Plan
lays down the schedule for placing India’s nuclear reactors
under safeguards beginning from 2007. It is envisaged that
14 out of the current 22 thermal power reactors would be
placed under IAEA safeguards.
The Hyde Act, that legally enables resumption of full civil
nuclear energy cooperation between India and U.S., was
passed by the U.S. Congress on 8-9 December 2006 and
signed into law by President Bush on 18 December 2006.
Both sides are working on a bilateral civil nuclear
agreement to determine the parameters of such
cooperation. U.S. has initiated discussions with the
Nuclear Supplier’s Group to adjust its guidelines. In
addition, India is engaged directly with various NSG
countries. India will be engaging the IAEA to negotiate
an India-specific IAEA safeguards agreement.

President Bush’s public appearances included an address
at Purana Qila in New Delhi, a visit to the Acharya N.G.
Ranga University and the Indian School of Business in
Hyderabad. The visit took place in the backdrop of the

The U.S. Government has supported India’s inclusion in
several significant international initiatives. In April 2006,
India and United States concluded a Framework Protocol
under which India has joined the Government Steering
97

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

Committee of FutureGen, an international public-private
partnership to develop new, commercially viable
technology for a clean coal near-zero emission power
project. India was also admitted to the International
Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) initiative
as a full member during the meeting of ITER negotiators
on December 6, 2005 held at Jeju, South Korea.

Defence
The India-US Defence Policy Group, which is the apex
institutional dialogue mechanism for defence, held its
eighth meeting in New Delhi on 15-16 November, 2006
during which the entire gamut of bilateral defence
relations including military-to-military contacts, joint
exercises, exchange of visits, issues of procurement and
joint production and research and development were
reviewed. The sub-groups under the DPG also held their
separate meetings. The Defence Procurement and
Production Group met for the second time in New Delhi
on 12-13 November 2006. The Senior Technology
Security Group met in September 2006 in Washington
while the Military Cooperation Group held a meeting in
New Delhi in October 2006.

Trade and Economy
India’s economic partnership with the U.S. is growing
rapidly. U.S. is India’s largest trade partner and leading
foreign investor. The total trade in merchandise and
commodities stood at US$ 26.76 billion in 2005, an
increase of 23.6% over 2004. For the first ten months of
2006 (January-October), bilateral trade stood at US
$26.55 billion. During President Bush’s visit, both sides
set the goal of doubling bilateral trade within three years.
In June 2006, Commerce and Industries Minister Kamal
Nath visited Washington D.C. for a meeting of the IndoU.S. Trade Policy Forum. This was followed by a meeting
in November 2006 in New Delhi led by Commerce
Secretary and US Deputy Trade Representative Karan
Bhatia

Malabar 2006, the annual bilateral naval exercise between
the Indian and the US navies, took place towards the
end of October 2006.
Energy & Environment
The Five Working Groups under the India-US Energy
Dialogue – Oil & Gas, Power & Efficiency, New
Technology and Renewable Energy, Coal and Civil
Nuclear Energy- carried out a series of collaborative
activities and initiatives. The Working Group on Oil and
Gas met in July 2006; the Working Group on Coal met in
April 2006; and the Working Group on New Technology
and Renewable Energy met in May 2006.

The CEO Forum, set up in July 2005 by India and US as
an innovative mechanism to strengthen trade and
economic inter-linkages between two countries, submitted
its recommendations during the visit of President Bush
to India in March 2006. The Forum met on 25 October
2006 in New York to discuss the implementation of the
recommendations. The India-US Economic Dialogue cochaired by Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission, Dr.
Montek Singh Ahluwalia and the Director of the National
Economic Council and Assistant to the US President on
Economic Policy, Allan Hubbard, has been tasked with
following up expeditiously with the CEO Forum on
implementation of the recommendations.

A number of bilateral energy-related agreements were
concluded establishing such as the agreement on
establishing a coal bed methane and coal mine methane
clearing house in India in November 2006, agreement on
exchange of safety standards in the hydrocarbon upstream
sector in July 2006 and on alternative mining technologies
with the USTDA in March 2006. Workshops/
conferences, on energy efficiency in May 2006, on natural
gas in May 2006, on underground coal gasification in
November 2006 and on wind and solar power in
November 2006, were held.

The Knowledge Initiative on Agriculture launched in July
2005 was further advanced during the visit of President
Bush in March 2006 with an announcement for a threeyear financial commitment to link universities, technical
institutions, and businesses to support agriculture
education, joint research, and capacity building projects
including in the area of biotechnology. U.S. Agricultural
Secretary Mike Johanns paid a visit to India from 18-22
November 2006. The 4 th Meeting of the Knowledge
Initiative Board also took place in November 2006.

India and U.S. have been collaborating actively in the
Asia Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and
Climate, which is a multilateral initiative launched in
January 2006. James Connaughton, Chairman of the
Council on Environmental Quality at the White House
with oversight of APP, visited India in August 2006 during
which he interacted with key officials of the APP on our
98

Back to Contents

The President Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam with the President of the USA, George W Bush at
Rashtrapati Bhavan, in New Delhi on 2 March 2006. Laura Bush is also seen.

The Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh with the President of
Cuba Fidel Castro in Havana on 17 September 2006.

99

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

side including Deputy Chairman Planning Commission
and heads of Ministries involved in the APP task forces.
Science & Technology
The Indo-US Science & Technology Forum held its Eighth
Governing Body Meeting on 7 December, 2006 in New
Delhi. Dr. Arden Bement, Director of the National
Science Foundation (NSF), led a high level delegation to
India in October 2006. The delegation met with a wide
cross-section of scientists, academics and students in India
to explore ways to increase bilateral interaction in Science
& Technology.
The 2 nd meeting of the India-US Information &
Communications Technology Working Group was held
on 13 December, 2006.

Canada
General Elections were held in Canada in January 2006,
which brought the Conservative Party led by Stephen
Harper into power. Prime Minister Harper’s Government
have prioritised trade and investment, S&T and
environment technology as specific areas of cooperation
with India. The Canadian Department of Foreign Affairs,
in a document tabled in Canadian Parliament in
September 2006, highlighted the need for Canada to
‘further develop its relations with rising powers such as
India’.
Science & Technology
Pursuant to the bilateral Agreement on Science &
Technology signed in November 2005, both sides have
identified Expert Area Coordinators and decided that
bilateral workshops in the areas of nano-technology and
biotechnology would be organised in Canada and India
respectively. Dr. R A Mashelkar, Director General, Council
of Scientific and Industrial Research, (CSIR) visited
Ottawa in June 2006 and held discussions with Dr. Arthur
Carty, Principal Scientific Adviser to the Prime Minister
of Canada for launching a bilateral industrial research
programme, developing a strategic partnership between
the National Research Council of Canada and CSIR of
India to undertake technology development aimed at
global markets, and launching a programme of networking
young scientists from the two countries.
Foreign Office Consultations
Official level discussions were held in Ottawa in

September 2006 to carry forward the dialogue on nuclear
issues that began the previous year during the then
External Affairs Minister’s visit to Canada in September
2005.
Defence Cooperation
India and Canada agreed to consider resumption of
defence contacts with official level exchanges between
Staff Colleges and exchange of invitations to observe air
exercises in the two countries.
Canadian Participation in the Regional
Conference on Afghanistan in New Delhi
Deepak Obhrai, Parliamentary Secretary to the Canadian
Minister of Foreign Affairs, led the Canadian delegation
to the Regional Conference on Afghanistan held in New
Delhi in November 2006.

Latin America and the Caribbean
The relations with Latin America and Caribbean region
were strengthened and diversified with exchange of visits,
high level visits, Joint Commission meetings and Foreign
Office Consultations. The visit of the Prime Minister to
Brazil and Cuba was the first ever visit to the region after
a gap of 20 years. The trade has continued to increase. A
number of Indian companies have started seriously
pursuing investments and joint ventures in the region.
Most of the countries in the region saw deepening of the
academic, cultural and educational linkages.

Argentina
The visit of Minister of External Relations, International
Trade and Worship of Argentina, Jorge Enrique Taiana to
India from 2-8 July, 2006 was the first ever visit from
Argentina in the last several years. He was accompanied
by a large business delegation besides officials. The Joint
Commission Meeting held on the occasion of the visit,
reviewed the ongoing cooperation and explored new
avenues such as railways and mining.

Brazil
The high point in the relations in 2006 was the visit of
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh to Brazil from 1114 September 2006. During the visit, the two sides agreed
to upgrade the relations to a ‘Strategic Partnership’. Prime
Minister was accompanied by Commerce and Industries
Minister, Kamal Nath, Minister of State for External

100

Back to Contents

The Americas

Affairs, Anand Sharma and senior officials. A 50-member
business delegation also traveled to Brazil on the occasion
and had meaningful interactions with their Brazilian
counterparts. Eight agreements/MoUs - six at government
level and two commercial agreements - were signed during
the visit in areas such as Civil Aviation, Culture,
Agriculture, S&T, Standardization, Human Settlements,
Plant Health Protection, Energy, etc. In order to enhance
the cultural ties, India and Brazil announced that both
countries would shortly be opening Cultural Centres in
Sao Paulo and in New Delhi respectively.
Other visits too indicate a very healthy state of IndiaBrazil relationship. Chief of Army Staff of India, General
J. J. Singh was in Brazil from 11-14 May 2006 and visited
defence establishments in Rio de Janeiro, Brasilia and
Manaus. He also met Defence Minister of Brazil, Waldir
Pires. This was followed by the visit of MOS, Defence
Production, Rao Inderjit Singh, to Brazil from 24-28 June
2006. A National Defence College team went to Brazil
from 14-21 May 2006 and visited Brazilian Army, Navy
and Air Force establishments in Brasilia, Rio de Janeiro
and Manaus. The Brazilian Army Chief paid the return
visit to India from 3-9 December 2006.
Other Ministerial visits were that of Science and
Technology Minister Kapil Sibal from 1-4 September 2006
to Angra dos Reis (Rio de Janeiro) to participate in the
Science and Technology Ministerial Meeting and that of
Minister of State for Food Processing Industries Subodh
Kant Sahai from 17-21 July 2006 to preside over a seminar
organized by Agricultural and Processed Food Products
Export Development Authority.
In the first nine months of 2006, bilateral trade figures
touched US$ 1803 million with US$ 1170 million
accounting for Indian exports and US$ 725 million for
imports from Brazil.

especially in the defence front. General J.J. Singh, Chief
of Indian Army visited Chile from 7-10 May 2006.
Defence Attaches were appointed in India’s Mission in
Santiago and Chilean Embassy in Delhi on a reciprocal
basis in June 2006. This is the first appointment of a
Defence Attache in the Latin American region. Bilateral
trade is on the rise.

Colombia
MOS, Defence Production,, Rao Inderjit Singh, went to
Colombia in June 2006 to boost defence cooperation
between the two countries. In September 2006, OVL
and a Chinese company jointly purchased 50% shares of
Omimex, an oil company of Colombia. OVL’s investment
in Colombia is over US $ 400 million.

Cuba
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh visited Havana to
attend the NAM Summit from 15-17 September 2006.
On the sidelines of the Summit, Prime Minister met
President Fidel Castro and Acting President Raul Castro.
Minster of State for External Affairs Anand Sharma, who
was accompanying the Prime Minister, had a meeting with
Foreign Minister of Cuba, Felipe Perez Roque. The
Ministers also had met in Putrajaya, Malaysia during the
NAM Ministerial Meeting held from 27-30 May 2006.
Foreign Office consultations, an integral part of bilateral
interactions, were held on 20-21 July 2006.
The Government of India has set up an IT training centre
in Havana. It is named as India-Cuba Knowledge Centre.
This was be inaugurated during the NAM Summit. The
cost of the project is about US$ 700,000. Cuba utilized
the entire 40 ITEC slots offered last year and this has
now been increased to 45.

Chile

ONGC Videsh Limited (OVL) signed a Production
Sharing Contract on 10th September, 2006 in Havana
with CUPET, the Cuban State oil company for two
offshore exploration Blocks N-34 and N-35 located in
Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of Cuba. Earlier in May
2006, OVL signed an International Economic Association
Agreement with oil major from Spain, Repsol, for 30%
stake in the company´s deep sea exploration in six blocks
in the Cuban EEZ sector.

The momentum of bilateral relations was maintained

Indian pharmaceutical firms’ interest in Cuba is also on

Indian Companies continued to pursue investment and
joint ventures in Brazil. ONGC Videsh Ltd. (OVL)
acquired an off-shore oil block for over US$ 400 million
from Shell. Indian sugar and oil companies have sought
acquisition of sugar and ethanol plants and sugarcane
estates in Brazil.

101

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

the rise, as a new facility of the Indo-Cuban Joint Venture
“Biocon Pharmaceuticals” for production of antibodies
to be used in cancer treatment was inaugurated in
Bangalore in April 2006.

Dominican Republic
Dominican Republic upgraded its relations with India and
opened their resident Mission in New Delhi in May 2006.
With this the number of resident Missions of Latin
American and the Caribbean countries has gone up to
16.

Ecuador

Peru and Bolivia
MOS, Defence Production, Rao Inderjit Singh visited Peru
in June 2006 to give an impetus to defence cooperation.
The new Presidents of both the countries have shown
interest in expansion of cooperation with India. Bolivia
has signed a Letter of Intent for purchase of two Advanced
Light Helicopters from HAL.
The high point in India’s relations with Bolivia was the
US $2.3 billion Mutan iron ore and steel project won by
Indian company Jindal Steel and Power Ltd. This is the
biggest project ever awarded to an Indian company in
Latin America.

Ecuador’s interest in India, which started with the opening
of their Embassy in New Delhi last year, was again
reinforced with the first-ever visit of the Foreign Minister
from Ecuador, Francisco Carrion, from 17-19 July 2006.
Five Agreements were signed on cultural and educational
cooperation, and an MoU was reached between OVL and
Ecuadorian state owned oil company PetroEcuador.
Ecuadorian side agreed to facilitate the entry of Indian
companies in the oil sector.

Venezuela

Mexico

The presence of large Indian diaspora in the region and
traditionally close relations of most countries with India
has prompted India to extend credit lines and provide
higher education facilities for students from Caribbean
countries through Indian Technical and Economic
Cooperation Programme. At international fora, this region
has shown understanding and support to India’s point of
view on various issues.

India’s relations with Mexico acquired a new momentum
in 2006 with a series of activities and exchange of visit
from both sides. MOS Anand Sharma represented India
in the Swearing ceremony on 1 December 2006 of the
newly elected President Felipe Calderon. Science and
Technology Minister Kapil Sibal paid an official visit from
17-20 June 2006. The visit was reciprocated by his
counterpart from Mexico in October 2006.
A large number of business delegations were exchanged
between the two countries including a delegation led by
the Vice Minister for the Small and Medium Enterprises
of Mexico that visited India from 24-27 September 2006.
During the visit a Memorandum of Understanding on
cooperation between the Mexican National Chamber of
IT and Electronics (CANIETI) and the Electronics and
Computer Software Export Promotion Council (ESC) was
signed.
Given the increasing commercial linkages between the
two countries, the India-Mexico Business Chamber
(IMBC) was formally launched on 27 October 2006 in
Mexico City.

The Vice Foreign Minister of Venezuela, Alcides Rondon
visited India from 21-23 May 2006. Prime Minister Dr.
Manmohan Singh met President Chavez on the sidelines
of NAM Summit in Havana. India imported crude oil
from Venezuela amounting to US$ 535.5 million during
January-October 2006.

CARICOM

Guyana
The relations with Guyana were intensified with the
Foreign Office Consultations on 17-18 July 2006 in
Georgetown where India agreed to help with services of
experts for flood forecasting/disaster management, for
security related training, for training of Guyanese
Diplomats and also for developing an ICT programme for
the Country.
This was followed by the visit of Vice President of India
to Guyana from 6-9 November 2006 to inaugurate the
cricket stadium in Guyana built with India’s financial
assistance of US $ 25 million including a grant component
of US $ 6 million.
In Guyana, four other agreements were also signed during

102

Back to Contents

The Americas

the visit, namely, renewal of Cultural Exchange
Programme, establishment of Rabindranath Tagore
Resource Centre at the University of Guyana,
arrangement for employment of dependents of diplomats/
officials, and Line of Credit of US $ 2.1 million for traffic
signaling system in Georgetown.

The Bahamas
MOS (PMO) Prithviraj Chavan visited The Bahamas to
attend the Commonwealth Youth Ministers’ Conference
from 23-26 May 2006. The Bahamas has sought assistance
in recruiting high level IT consultants from India. They
have also appointed an Honorary Consul in India effective
from 5 October 2006 with jurisdiction in New Delhi.

Trinidad and Tobago
Vice President also visited Trinidad and Tobago from 911 November 2006. He had the opportunity to meet a
large cross-section of people besides the President, Prime
Minister and other senior leaders and share India’s
developmental and Parliamentary experiences. The visit
helped in deepening India’s relations with these Caribbean
countries.

Panama and Guatemala
Government of India set up two IT training centres in
the region costing US$ 5,62,000 each. The first one is
located in the City of Knowledge in Panama City was
inaugurated on 24 August 2006. The other centre, set up
in Guatemala City, became functional on 7 September
2006.

103

Back to Contents

9

United Nations and
International Organizations

India continued to play an important and effective role
on the gamut of issues under consideration in the United
Nations system. These include peace-keeping and
peacebuilding issues, disarmament, economic, social,
environmental, humanitarian, legal affairs and issues
relating to the management and administration of the UN
Secretariat itself. India’s constructive and active
contribution was visible in the implementation of last
year’s World Summit Outcome Document, which
encapsulates the issue of UN reform.
The issue of UN reform is currently the dominant theme
in the activities of the Organization. It includes elements
such as the reform of the Security Council, revitalization
of the General Assembly, reform of ECOSOC, efforts to
conclude and adopt a Comprehensive Convention on
International Terrorism, create new institutions to better
manage post-conflict peace building processes, to provide
effective emergency relief for natural disasters, and to more
equitably manage international human rights issues. Apart
from these elements, the reform process includes an effort
to bring to the UN improved management and budgetary
practices.
However, since agreement on the Outcome Document
was made possible through a broad endorsement of several
substantive proposals without adequate elaboration, the
process of evolving operational and functional details has
been discussed principally in the year under review. India
played an important role in the culmination of several of
these processes, such as:
Establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission
(June 2006),
Launch of the Central Emergency Response Fund
(March 2006)
Establishment of the Human Rights Council. (May
2006)
However, agreement on the more challenging issues, such
as the completion of the planned reform of the UN

Secretariat and the management of the UN, reform of
the Security Council and the adoption of a
Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism
is yet to be achieved.

61st Session of UN General Assembly
The External Affairs Minister Pranab Mukherjee led the
Indian delegation to the General Debate of the 61st Session
of UN General Assembly in New York from 19-27
September 2006, in his capacity as the then Defence
Minister. The main issues covered in his statement at the
General Debate on 27 September 2006, included, inter alia,
the need to address the inequities in the global economic
and financial order and for a lead role by the UN in this
context; call for resumption of international trade
negotiations without deviation from the existing mandate
including the overarching principle of special and
differential treatment for developing countries; MDGs;
target of 0.7% of GDP for ODA by developed countries;
India’s development cooperation initiatives for other
developing countries; comprehensive reform of the United
Nations, particularly the revitalization of the General
Assembly and the reform and expansion of the Security
Council in both permanent and non-permanent categories;
international terrorism and universal disarmament.
Defence Minister had bilateral meetings with President
of Croatia; Prime Minister of Solomon Islands; Deputy
Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Nepal; US
Secretary of State; Minister for European Affairs of France
and the Foreign Ministers of Benin, Belize, China,
Eritrea, Greece, Guatemala, Jordan and Montenegro. He
participated in the 30th Annual Meeting of Foreign
Ministers of G-77; informal luncheon meeting of Foreign
ministers of SAARC countries (hosted by FM of
Bangladesh); Commonwealth Foreign Ministers’ (CFMs’)
Meeting; Asia Cooperation Dialogue (ACD) Ministers’
Meeting; and, the meeting of Foreign Ministers of BRIC
(Brazil, Russia, India and China). He also met the UN
Secretary General, the President of the 61st General

104

Back to Contents

United Nations and International Organizations

Assembly, Secretary General of NATO and
representatives of Jewish Organisations in USA . His
programme also included a lecture at the Harvard
University on the topic “India’s Security Perspective”.
Prior to Defence Minister’s visit, E. Ahamed, Minister of
State for External Affairs, participated at the UN High
Level Dialogue on International Migration (14-15
September 2006). Anand Sharma, Minister of State for
External Affairs, participated in the mid-term
comprehensive global review of the implementation of
the Programme of Action for the LDCs, which was held
in New York from 18-21 September 2006.
Non-official Delegation to UNGA
A seventeen member non-official delegation led by Mufti
Mohammed Sayeed, former Union Home Minister and
former Chief Minister of Jammu & Kashmir, including
Members of Parliament participated in the 61st Session
of the UN General Assembly. The delegation members
articulated India’s vision on important international
political, economic and social issues at the UN.

The Security Council
India made interventions in the Security Council on
specific issues of concern, such as on the Middle East, on
peace consolidation in West Africa, and on the situation
in Afghanistan.
Political, Economic and Social issues in the
Security Council and General Assembly
India made statements in the UNGA plenary on agenda
items relating to the Report of the Secretary General on
the Work of the Organization; the revitalization of the
GA, peacekeeping, migration and development issues,
Mandate reviews, peacekeeping, and social &
humanitarian issues. India also intervened on political
issues such as the Middle East, the Afghanistan, Oceans
and the Law of the Sea and on the reform and expansion
of the Security Council.
Middle East
India has remained engaged in the UN’s consideration of
the Middle East issue in the UN General Assembly (both
in the Fourth Committee and at the Plenary), and where
feasible, at the Security Council. India’s views on the need
for a return to the process of dialogue, and for an early
end to the cycle of violence and counter-violence have
been underlined repeatedly. Several statements were made

by India, including at the resumed 10th Emergency Session
of the General Assembly in November 2006, and at
Plenary sessions under Agenda Item 13: The Question of
Palestine. India also contributes funds annually to the UN
Relief Works Agency for its involvement in Palestine.
Afghanistan
India has been closely involved in consideration of this
issue in the UN, in both the General Assembly and the
Security Council. India participated in negotiating the
annual General Assembly resolution on Afghanistan
(Agenda Item 16) on 28 November 2006, and in a
discussion in the Security Council on 7 December 2006.
Terrorism
Counter-terrorism remains a priority issue for India in the
United Nations. India remains in the forefront of the effort
to secure agreement on a Comprehensive Convention on
International Terrorism (CCIT). In the absence of progress
on this issue, informal consultations began at the GA on
a draft Counter-Terrorism Strategy in May 2006, which
was adopted by the General Assembly in September 2006.
Even though India strongly believed that the CCIT should
be adopted prior to agreeing on a Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, it went along the latter’s adoption. The Strategy
categorizes four operational elements to combat terrorism:
Measures to Address the Conditions Conductive to
the Spread of Terrorism
Measures to Prevent and Combat Terrorism
Measures to Build States’ Capacity to Prevent and
Combat Terrorism
Measures to Ensure Respect for Human Rights of
All and the Rule of law as the fundamental basis of
the fight against terrorism
The text contains a number of elements that could
contribute to countering terrorism, though some of them
could have been further strengthened.
India continues its active engagement with other member
states for an expeditious adoption of CCIT.
Visit of UN Counter-Terrorism Experts to India
A 14-member delegation of UN Counter-Terrorism
experts visited India from 6-13 November, 2006. The
delegation was led by the Executive Director of the
Counter Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) of
UNSC’s Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and

105

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

comprised representatives of CTED, Monitoring Team of
UNSC’s 1267 Committee related to Al Qaeda/Taliban,
INTERPOL, United Nations’ Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNDOC) and World Customs Organisation (WCO).
The main purpose of the visit was to make an assessment
of GoI’s fulfilment of its obligations under various UNSC
resolutions on counter-terrorism, especially 1267 (1999)
and 1373 (2001). The visit was also utilised by both sides
for an extensive exchange of views on a wide range of
issues related to counter-terrorism.
Peacekeeping
India remains the third-highest contributor of troops to
UN peacekeeping missions, with 9246 troops (including
326 policemen) having been sent by India. Indian troops
participated in 10 out of 18 UN Peacekeeping Operations
in areas as diverse as the Democratic Republic of Congo,
Lebanon, the Ethiopia-Eritrea border and had also
contributed the first Female Formed Police Unit in the
UN Mission in Liberia. India had also contributed
personnel for some of the senior most peacekeeping
positions including the Force Commander of the UN
Mission in Sudan, the Deputy Force Commander of the
UN Force in Lebanon, as well as the Military Adviser in
the Department of Peace-keeping Operations at the UN
in New York.
Peacebuilding Commission
As a follow-up of the 2005 World Summit, Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) was set up in December, 2005 as an
inter-governmental advisory body through which the
international community can help countries in the process
of post conflict, peacebuilding, recovery, reconstruction
and development. India was selected as a member of the
Organisational Committee of the PBC under the category
of the top five providers of military personnel and civilian
police to the UN peacekeeping operations. India has
contributed US $2 million to the Peacebuilding Fund set
up under the PBC and has paid this amount in full.
India’s candidature for non-permanent seat for
UN Security Council
At the end of December, 2006 India presented its
candidature for a non-permanent seat of the UN Security
Council that becomes available to the Asian Group for
the term 2011-2012. The election for this seat is to take
place at the 65th UN General Assembly Session in 2010.
India has earlier served as a non-permanent member of

the Security Council during 1950-51, 1967-68, 1972-73,
1977-78, 1984-85 and 1991-92.
UN Security Council reform
A Plenary debate on the issue of UNSC reform took place
in UN General Assembly on 20-21 July 2006 in which 86
countries participated. There was a wide acceptance that
without UN Security Council reform, there could be no
genuine UN reform. No participant supported maintaining
the status quo in the UN Security Council while many
favoured an “open-minded” approach, noting that it was
time to undertake serious negotiations so as to bring to a
conclusion the discussion on UNSC expansion and reform
in its working methods.
India continued consultations on this issue within the G4 (Brazil, India, Germany and Japan) as well as with the
larger UN membership.
A two-day General Assembly debate on Security Council
reform was held in New York on 11-12 December 2006.
75 countries, including the P-5 and the G-4 countries
participated in the debate. No country spoke for
maintaining the status quo in the Security Council. There
was an overall recognition that the reform of the Security
Council was an essential ingredient of genuine UN reform
which involved both its enlargement and improvement
in its working methods. Majority of the countries
supported expansion in permanent as well as nonpermanent categories.
Sixth International Conference of New or
Restored Democracies
India participated in the Sixth International Conference
of New or Restored Democracies (ICNRD) held in Doha,
Qatar from 29 October-1 November 2006. E. Ahamed,
Minister of State for External Affairs led the Indian
delegation to the Governmental Meeting. Charnjit Singh
Atwal, Deputy Speaker of Lok Sabha participated in the
Parliamentary Forum held in conjunction with the
Governmental Meeting of ICNRD.
Economic issues
The challenge in the year 2006-2007 was to build on
agreements reached at the 2005 World Summit and
implement areas of agreement. India contributed actively
in debates on development-related issues, which led to
the adoption of a resolution on follow-up to development
as well as a resolution for the strengthening of the

106

Back to Contents

United Nations and International Organizations

Economic and Social Council. As part of the follow-up
process, a separate meeting was organized with a specific
focus on Development at the Plenary of the 61st General
Assembly.

Society and the review of the Commission on Science
and Technology for development. A Resolution on smokefree UN premises, sponsored by India was adopted
unanimously.

A High-level meeting of the General Assembly was
convened on the mid-term comprehensive global review
of the implementation of the Programme of Action for
Least Developing Countries (LDCs) in New York from
18-21 September 2006. Anand Sharma, Minister of State
for External Affairs led the Indian delegation. The meeting
adopted a Ministerial Declaration, which emphasized the
need for continued focus on the commitments made in
the Brussels Programme of Action for the LDCs.

United Nations Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP)
Minister of Commerce and Industry, Kamal Nath led the
Indian delegation to the Sixty Second Session of the
United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia
and the Pacific (UNESCAP) held in Jakarta, Indonesia
from 6-12 April 2006. The theme topic of the Session
was “Enhancing Regional Cooperation in Infrastructure
Development, including that related to Disaster
Management”. The Commission adopted 12 resolutions
including the Intergovernmental Agreement on TransAsian Railway.

Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC)
The substantive session of the Economic and Social
Council (ECOSOC) for 2006 was held in Geneva from
3-28 July 2006. The theme of this year’s high level segment
was “creating an environment at the national and
international levels conducive to generating full and
productive employment and decent work for all”. The
Ministerial Declaration adopted by the ECOSOC
emphasized the need for macro-economic policies to
support employment generation. The work of the
ECOSOC during the session mainly focused on the
implementation of and follow up to the outcomes of major
UN Conference and Summits, including the 2005 World
Summit.
The Spring High-Level Meeting of the ECOSOC with
the Bretton Woods institutions, the World Trade
Organisations and the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development was held in New York on 24 April
2006. The theme for the meeting was “Coherence,
Coordination and Cooperation in the context of the
implementation of the Monterrey Consensus and the 2005
World Summit Outcome”. India was represented at the
meeting by Ashok Jha, Secretary, Department of
Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance. He also
participated in the round table on the sub-theme
“Implementation of and support for the development
strategies, towards the achievement of the internationally
agreed development goals including the Millennium
Development Goals”
Other resolutions adopted during the Session included,
follow-up on the International Conference on Financing
for Development, the World Summit on Information

14th Commission on Sustainable Development
(CSD-14)
The 14th session of the UN Commission on Sustainable
Development was held in New York from 1-12 May 2006.
Dr. Prodipto Ghosh, Secretary, MoEF, led the Indian
delegation. Two outreach events for SIDs were organized
by India on the margins of CSD-14. One was an India
presentation at the Association of Small Island States
(AOSIS) and another was a targeted presentation on rainwater harvesting, solid waste management and renewable
energy sources, which was done for the Pacific Island
Forum (PIF) countries.
UN Framework Convention on Climatic Change
The 12th Session of the Conference of the Parties (COP12) to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change and the 2nd Meeting of the Parties to the
Kyoto Protocol (COP/MOP 2) took place at the UN
Offices in Nairobi, Kenya, from 6-17 November 2006.
Namo Narain Meena, Minister of State for Environment
and Forests attended the High-Level Segment of the COP
from 14-17 November 2006.
Asia Pacific Partnership for Clean Development
& Climate (APPCDC)
Two meetings of the Partnership were held during the year.
The first was in Berkeley, USA, from 18-21 April 2006
and the second in Jeju in Republic of Korea on 12- 13
October 2006. The Action Plans prepared by the eight
task forces have been prepared and adopted by the
Partnership.

107

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

Human Rights
The evolution of the new Human Rights Council
remained a focus of activity and interest. Unlike the lapsed
Commission on Human Rights which used to meet once
a year for a six weeks session in March/April, the Human
Rights Council has now become a standing body with
activities spread over the entire year. This includes no
fewer than three sessions per year, a total duration not
less than ten weeks, as well as special sessions and intersessional meetings.
Anand Sharma, MOS led the Indian delegation to the
first Human Rights Council’s session held in Geneva from
19-30 June 2006. The Council, inter alia, adopted a
Declaration on the Rights of the Indigenous people as
well as Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearances. India participated actively in
deliberations of the Council, including in the Special
Sessions convened in July, October, November and
December, 2006 to discuss issues relating to crisis in
Palestine, Lebanon and Darfur.
The UNGA adopted by consensus two Conventions
entitled ‘International Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities’ (13 December 2006) and
‘International Convention for the protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance’ (20 December
2006).
The report of the High Level Panel set up by the UN
Secretary-General on UN System-wide coherence in the
areas of Development, Humanitarian Assistance and the
Environment was presented on 9 November 2006.
India signed the UN Convention on Jurisdictional
Immunities of States and their property on 12 January
2007.
India, on behalf of the Group of 77, coordinated an action
on resolution on ‘International Cooperation on
Humanitarian Assistance in the field of natural disaster,
from relief to development’.
2006 UN General Assembly High Level Meeting
on HIV/AIDS
The Minister of State, Oscar Fernandes led the Indian
delegation to the UNGA High Level Meeting and
Comprehensive Review of the Progress Achieved in
Realising the Targets set out in the 2001 Declaration of
Commitments on HIV/AIDS’ held in UN headquarters

from 31 May-2 June 2006. A Political Declaration on HIV/
AIDS was adopted at the end of the High Level Plenary
Meeting.
Migration
The High Level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development was held at the UN General Assembly in
New York on 14-15 September 2006. Minister of State
for External affairs, E. Ahamed led the Indian delegation.
A Special International Conference of developing
countries with Substantial International Flows was held
in Lima on 15-16 May 2006. The goal of the Conference
was “to encourage the international community to give
content to the principle of shared responsibility in
migration issues, as a basis to finding common political
solution to the current problem of international
migration”. India played a pivotal role in drafting the Lima
Declaration.
International Convention on the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance
India signed the International Convention on the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance
on the day when it opened for signature in Paris on 6
February 2007
Inter Parliamentary Union (IPU)
Somnath Chatterjee, Speaker of Lok Sabha led the Indian
delegation to the 115th IPU Assembly held from 16-18
October 2006 in Geneva. The Assembly adopted a
resolution on Cooperation between Parliaments and the
United Nations in promoting world peace. The Working
Group on IPU reforms submitted its recommendations to
the Assembly for its inclusion to the IPU Statutes and
Rules.
Geneva Convention-Third protocol
The 29th International Conference of the Red Cross and
Red Crescent Movement was held in Geneva on 20-21
June 2006. During the Conference, the statues of the Red
Cross and Red Crescent movement was amended to
include an additional symbol for the Red Cross and Red
Crescent Movement. Our Mission in Geneva and officers
from the Indian Red Cross Society participated in the
Conference.
UN-Habitat
Kumari Selja, Minister of State (Independent Charge) for

108

Back to Contents

United Nations and International Organizations

Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, led the Indian
delegation to the 3 rd World Urban Forum held in
Vancouver, Canada from 19-23 June 2006.
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Antonio Gutteres visited India on 7-8 December 2006.
He called on Minister for External affair, Pranab
Mukherjee, Minister for Home affairs, Shivraj V Patil,
Foreign Secretary, Shivshankar Menon and Acting
Chairman, NHRC.

to share its expertise with other developing countries. The
meeting adopted a Ministerial Statement, which inter alia,
called for early resumption of Doha round of trade
negotiations as well as implementation of the Millennium
Develeopment Goals and Global partnership for
development.
A Special Ministerial meeting of the Group of 77 and
China was held in Putrajaya, Malaysia on 29 May 2006
on the margins of the Ministerial Meeting of the NonAligned Movement. Anand Sharma, Minister of State for
External Affairs led the Indian delegation.

Elections
India was elected to Human Rights Council on 9 May
2006 by securing the highest numbers of votes of 173 out
of 190, among contested seats.

The Minister for Science and Technology, Kapil Sibal
participated at the Ministerial Meeting of the Group 77
on Science and Technology held at Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
on 3 September 2006.

India was elected to Intergovernmental Cultural Heritage
of UNESCO held on 29 June 2006.

Specialized UN Agencies & Conventions/
Conferences

India’s nominee P N Bhagwati, Former Chief Justice of
India was elected to UN Human Rights Committee held
on 9 September 2006.

World Health Assembly (WHA)
Dr. Anbumani Ramdoss, Minister of Health & Family
Welfare led the Indian delegation to the 59th World Health
Assembly (WHA) held in Geneva from 22-27 May 2006.
Minister chaired the prestigious Committee “A” which
deliberated on the substantive health issues. The issues
which dominated the debate at the WHA included,
disease of the poor and reorientation of R&D in the health
sector to provide easy and affordable access to essential
drugs, destruction of variola virus stocks, adoption of a
10-year framework, outlining a strategic direction for
improving public health, health conditions in the occupied
Palestinian territory and application of International
Health Regulations on a voluntary basis.

Interpol elections were held in Brasilia, Brazil on 19
September, 2006. India’s nominee, Vijay Shankar,
Director (CBI) was elected for one of the two seats for
Asia.
Narinder Singh, Joint Secretary (L&T), Ministry of
External Affairs, was elected for a 5-year term to the
International Law Commission, securing the second
highest number of votes in the Asian Group held on 16
November 2006 in New York.
India was elected to the Executive Council during the
International Telecommunication Union (ITU)
plenipotentiary Conference held from 6-18 November
2006 in Antalya, Turkey. P.K Garg, Wireless Adviser,
Ministry of Communication and Information Technology
was also elected as a member for the Radio Regulation
Board (RRB) of ITU in the same Conference.

Group of 77
Pranab Mukherjee, the then Defence Minister,
participated in the 30th Annual Ministerial Meeting of
the G-77 held in New York on 22 September, 2006. He
expressed the need for more intense international
cooperation for development, and, in the context of
South-South cooperation, reiterated India’s willingness

Secretary, Ministry of health & Family Welfare
participated in the Global Fund Coordination Board
Meeting from 12-15 September 2006 which discussed the
funding for ongoing global programmes on TB, Malaria
and HIV/AIDS.
International Labour Conference (ILC)
Minister of State for Labour and Employment led the
tripartite Indian delegation to the 95th Session of the
International Labour Conference held in Geneva from
31 May-16 June 2006 and the Secretary (L&E)
participated in the ILO Governing Body meeting held
back to back with the ILC from 12-16 June 2006.The
Minister, in his statement, inter alia, emphasized that while

109

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

globalization has contributed to the rate of economic
growth and investment in India, our focus was on
economic growth with a human face and prosperity with
social justice and that growth of a few without
participation of the many would not be sustainable. N.M
Adyanthaya, the Indian workers representative was
elected as the Vice President of the ILC. He was first
Indian worker to receive this honour. India played an
active role during the deliberations on issues which
included eradication of forced labour in Myanmar and
non-observance of Recommendations of the Commission
of Inquiry by Belarus.
UNESCO
UNESCO continued its activities in its key mandates of
Education Culture, natural Sciences, Social and Human
Sciences and Communication. India played a crucial role
in these discussions at the Executive Board at 174th Session
(28 March – 13 April 2006) and 175 th Session (26
September – 13 October 2006) and was often instrumental
in evolving consensus on difficult and contentious issues.
For the first time in 40 years, the Asia Pacific Group
nominated India to co-chair the Drafting Group to
negotiate the draft programme and budget for next
biennium. India also, for the first time in 30 years, chaired
the Executive Council of the International Bureau of
Education.

2006 with thematic discussion on “Maximising the
Effectiveness of Technical Assistance provided to Member
States on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice”. The
Indian delegation attending the meeting played an
important role in the discussions and negotiations on the
various resolutions.
World Food Programme (WFP)
John M. Powell, Deputy Executive Director, WFP visited
India on 22 August 2006.
As a part of India’s commitment to provide food
assistance, through WFP, of 1 million tonnes of wheat
(equivalent to US$ 100 million) to Afghanistan, India
committed to supply of 4th tranche of 15,189 tonnes of
biscuit to meet the requirement of biscuits for the schoolfeeding programme in 2006. Till August 2006, 6811 tonnes
of biscuits were delivered. Under the programme, around
1 million Afghan school children are receiving a package
of 100 grams of biscuit every day.
Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF)
The Central Emergency Response Fund was launched at
the UN in March 2006. Anand Sharma, Minister of State
for External Affairs, led the Indian delegation. India
pledged US$ 2 million to CERF.

Disarmament and International Security
Affairs

UNIDO
Dr. Kandeh K. Yumkella, Director General, UNIDO
visited India in March-April 2006 at the invitation of
Minister of Commerce and Industry. He also called on
PM and discussed further strengthening of cooperation
between the two sides. Subsequently, in July 2006, the
Government of India approved the proposal for UNIDO
Centre for South-South Industrial Cooperation at a total
project cost of US$ 4.5 million for a period of 5 years.

India’s commitment to non-discriminatory and universal
nuclear disarmament and the global elimination of all
Weapons of Mass Destruction continued to be reflected
in its policy pronouncements and diplomatic initiatives.
India’s stand on issues related to disarmament and
international security in various multilateral and regional
forums was premised on India’s national security interests
and its tradition of close engagement with the
international community to promote cooperative efforts
at addressing these challenges.

Commission on Narcotic Drugs (CND)
The 49th session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs
(CND) was held in Vienna in March 2006 with the
thematic debate on “Alternative Development as an
important Drug Control Strategy and Establishing
Alternative Development as a Cross-cutting Issue”.

At the regional level, India’s participation in the
confidence and security building process and structure
under the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) and
Conference on Interaction and Confidence Building
Measures in Asia (CICA) acquired greater momentum.

Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice (CCPCJ)
The 15th session of CCPCJ was held in Vienna in April

Regular contacts were maintained with key international
and non-governmental organisations active in the field
of disarmament with a view to disseminating the Indian
perspectives on disarmament issues.

110

Back to Contents

United Nations and International Organizations

India has been exercising control over exports of sensitive
goods and technologies which can have direct or indirect
application for weapons of mass destruction or their means
of delivery. The enactment in June 2005 of Weapons of
Mass Destruction and their Delivery Systems (Prohibition
of Unlawful Activities) Act reflects India’s responsible
attitude as well as its commitment to contributing to the
objective of global peace and security.

Reduce the salience of nuclear weapons in security
doctrines;

At the Havana Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement,
Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh said that in 1988
Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi had presented to the UN
General Assembly a detailed and credible Action Plan
for Nuclear Disarmament. He expressed his belief that
the time had come for NAM to once again assume an
active and leading role in advocating nuclear
disarmament. Announcing that India had prepared a
Working Paper on Nuclear Disarmament, which would
be presented at 61st UNGA Session, he invited fellow
members of NAM to join India in its efforts to achieve
universal nuclear disarmament and a world free of all
nuclear weapons.

Negotiate a universal and legally-binding agreement
on non-use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear
weapon States;

The then Defense Minister Pranab Mukherjee and Leader
of the Indian Delegation, in his address to the 2006
UNGA, called for revival of momentum for achieving
what late Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi called ‘a nuclear
weapons free and non-violent world’, to be achieved
through negotiations in a time bound manner. He added,
“in recent years, new dangers have emerged due to the
link of proliferation of WMD related materials and
technologies to non-state actors and terrorist groups. The
international community needs to meet these challenges.
India’s record in this regard is impeccable and we have
instituted effective measures to ensure that technologies
developed by us are not leaked in any way”.
India continued to play an active role at the 61st Session
of the UN General Assembly’s First Committee that deals
with disarmament and international security issues. With
a view to spur a dialogue on both the need and the means
to Nuclear Disarmament, India presented in the UN
General Assembly a Working Paper on Nuclear
Disarmament, which sought to:
Reaffirm the unequivocal commitment of all nuclear
weapon States to the complete elimination of
nuclear weapons;

Reduce nuclear danger, including the risks of
accidental nuclear war, by de-alerting of nuclearweapons to prevent unintentional and accidental
use of nuclear weapons;
Negotiate a global agreement among nuclear
weapon States on ‘no-first-use’ of nuclear-weapons;

Negotiate a Convention on the complete prohibition
of the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons;
Negotiate a Nuclear Weapons Convention
prohibiting the development, production,
stockpiling and use of nuclear weapons and on their
time-bound destruction, leading to the global, nondiscriminatory and verifiable elimination of nuclear
weapons.
In recognition of growing international concerns about
the serious global threats posed by the possibility of nonState actors acquiring weapons of mass destruction and
using it, India’s resolution on ‘Measures to Prevent
Terrorists from Acquiring Weapons of Mass Destruction’
was adopted by consensus, as during previous four
Sessions.
India reiterated commitment to its principled stand on
global nuclear disarmament based on the firm conviction
that progressively lower levels of armaments globally will
guarantee undiminished security for all. India believes that
its security would be enhanced in a nuclear-weapons-freeworld. With this commitment to global nuclear
disarmament, India re-introduced its Resolution
“Convention on the Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear
Weapons” which has been adopted annually since 1982.
This Resolution calls upon the Conference on
Disarmament to commence negotiations on an
international convention prohibiting the use or threat of
use of nuclear weapons under any circumstances, as a first
step towards reducing the salience of nuclear weapons.
India’s Resolution on “Reducing Nuclear Danger”, first
introduced in 1998, which calls for the review of nuclear
doctrines and immediate and urgent steps to reduce the
risk of unintentional and accidental use of nuclear
weapons, was also re-tabled.

111

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

India’s resolution “Role of Science and Technology in the
Context of International Security and Disarmament”,
highlighted the qualitative aspects of the arms race, and
the need for a genuinely multilateral and nondiscriminatory response. India has maintained that
technology denial to responsible States does not serve the
objectives of non-proliferation but only signals a punitive
intent.
All these resolutions were adopted by a good majority as
in previous years.
India signed International Convention on Suppression for
Acts of Nuclear Terrorism on 24 July 2006.
UN Disarmament Commission
The UN Disarmament Commission is the only universal
forum with the mandate to deliberate on issues related to
disarmament and arms control and to make
recommendations to the General Assembly. The
Substantive Session of the Commission was convened
from 10-28 April 2006. It has been mandated to consider
in a cycle of three Sessions two agenda items: (i)
Recommendations for achieving the objectives of nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation; and (ii) Practical
confidence-building measures in the field of conventional
weapons. The Commission was also mandated to consider
at its 2006 Session measures for improving the
effectiveness of the methods of work of the Commission.
India actively participated in the deliberations underlining
India’s abiding commitment to nuclear disarmament
UN Secretary General’s Advisory Board on
Disarmament Matters
The Board, comprising members nominated by the
Secretary General on the basis of equitable geographical
representation, makes recommendations to the Secretary
General on the issues related to disarmament and
international security. It also acts as a board of trustee for
the UN Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR).
It holds two Sessions annually, one each in New York and
Geneva. India, in its capacity as a member of the Board,
attended both the Sessions.
The Conference on Disarmament
The Conference on Disarmament (CD) is the ‘sole
multilateral disarmament treaty negotiating body’ and
comprises 65 militarily significant States. In 2006 Session,
it met at Geneva on 23 January-31 March, 15 May-30

June and 31 July -15 September. Besides the usual formal
and informal plenary meetings, the Conference held this
year structured and focused discussions on the issues on
CD’s existing agenda and new issues, additional to its
agenda. India actively participated in these meetings and
in deliberations on various proposals. During
consultations, India adopted a flexible and constructive
approach in order to contribute to establishing a
Programme of Work for the CD that reflected the concerns
and priorities of all its Member States.
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC)
India continued to play an active role at the Organization
for the Prohibition of the Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
at The Hague. India is an original State Party to the
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) since its entry
into force in April 1997. India continued to fulfill all its
obligations under the Convention in line with its
commitments. India’s record on the destruction of its
chemical weapons in accordance with the timelines set
by the Convention is well known and widely recognized.
India played a key role at the Eleventh Conference of
States Parties to the CWC at The Hague (5-8 December
2006) as well as at the forty-fifth, forty-sixth and fortyseventh sessions of the 41-member Executive Council,
where it has been an active member since the inception
of the Organization in 1997. India highlighted all issues
of interest and concern to it and to other developing
countries. India also actively participated in various
subsidiary bodies of the organization.
Biological Weapons Convention (BWC)
The Sixth Review Conference of the States Parties to the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological)
and Toxin Weapons and on their Destruction (BTWC)
concluded its three-week session on 8 December 2006
adopting a final declaration on the various articles of the
Convention, and a series of decisions and
recommendations on various issues related to the effective
implementation of Convention.
The Indian delegation participated actively in the
deliberations. In his statement, the leader of the Indian
delegation reiterated India’s commitment to working
towards further strengthening of the Convention and its
full implementation. He inter alia expressed India’s support
for creation of an institutional mechanism and for the

112

Back to Contents

United Nations and International Organizations

launch of new inter-sessional process of annual meetings
of experts and State Parties.
India circulated to State Parties a paper including
suggested text relating to each of the articles of the
Convention for the article by-article section of the Review
Conference’s Final Declaration. India played an active
role in the negotiation and adoption of the text.
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons
(CCW)
India is a High Contracting Party to the Convention on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which may be Deemed to be
Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects
(CCW) and has ratified all its protocols, including the
Amended Protocol II on Prohibitions or Restrictions on
the Use of Mines, Booby Traps and other Devises and
Protocol V on Explosive Remnants of War. India has also
ratified the Amendment to Article 1 of the Convention.
India, on behalf of the NAM Group, coordinated six
Sessions of the Working Group on Explosive Remnants
of War in 2004-05.
The third Review Conference of the States Parties to the
Convention on CCW was held at Geneva from 7-17
November 2006. India was nominated by the NAM Group
to chair the Drafting Committee. India actively and
constructively participated in the work of the Conference,
underlining India’s commitment to the humanitarian
principles that the CCW Convention embodies and to
fully abide by its obligations under international
humanitarian law.
The Annual Meeting of the States Parties to the Amended
Protocol II to the Convention on CCW on Prohibitions
or Restrictions on the use of Mines, Booby Traps and other
Devises was also held at Geneva on 6 November 2006.
India informed the Meeting about the steps taken by it to
implement the provisions of Amended Protocol II and its
commitment to the vision of a world free of landmines.
India remains committed to the objective of a nondiscriminatory, universal and global ban on anti-personnel
land mines through a phased process that addresses the
legitimate defence requirements of the states while
ameliorating the critical humanitarian crisis that has
resulted from an indiscriminate transfer and use of land
mines. India attended, as an observer, the 7th Annual

Meeting of the State Parties to the Ottawa Convention
at Geneva. While India shares the humanitarian concerns
arising out of indiscriminate use of APLs, it is not a party
to the Ottawa Convention, as the Convention fails to
take into account the legitimate security interests of
countries which necessitates the usage of landmines for
defensive purposes within valid security norms and in
accordance with internationally acknowledged and well
defined safety parameters.
Small Arms and Light Weapons (SALW)
India is acutely aware of the problem of proliferation of
and illicit trafficking in small arms and remains committed
to participating actively in international search for
effective solutions, including the implementation of the
Programme of Action (PoA) adopted at the UN
Conference on Illicit Trafficking in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, held in July 2001.
The first United Nations Conference to Review Progress
made in the Implementation of the Programme of Action
to Prevent, combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held from 26
June-7 July 2006, failed to reach consensus on its final
declaration. There was also no agreement on convening
of another Review Conference. India underlined that the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons poses a great
danger to the security of a state and called for a complete
prohibition on transfer of these weapons to terrorists. India
stressed the priority that it has attached to full
implementation of the Programme of Action as a means
to combat transnational terrorism and organized crime
and highlighted the steps that it has taken to implement
the programme.

International Atomic Energy Agency
This year marked the 50th anniversary of the foundation
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). The
Indian Prime Minister sent a special message recalling the
important contributions of the IAEA and highlighting
India’s close and active association with the Agency in
its endeavour to promote peaceful uses of nuclear energy
and technology. Prime Minister’s message was delivered
at the 50th IAEA General Conference held at Vienna from
18-22 September 2006 by Dr Anil Kakodkar, Chairman,
Atomic Energy Commission (AEC), and Head of the
Indian delegation to the Conference.

113

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

India offered Bhabatron, an indigenously designed and
fabricated, cobalt 60 teletherapy unit for the Agency’s
“Programme of Action for Cancer Therapy – PACT”. At
a special event organised in the margins of the General
Conference on “the New Framework for the Utilization
of Nuclear Energy in the 21st Century: Assurances of
Supply and Non-Proliferation”, Chairman, AEC presented
a paper on the utilisation of thorium for meeting the twin
challenges of energy and non-proliferation.
India participated at a special exhibition organised by the
Agency to mark the 50th anniversary, which included a
working model of an indigenously developed PWHR
reactor, highlighting India’s three stage nuclear power
programme and important achievements in the field of
application of nuclear technology for general welfare and
development.
The Indian delegation played an active role in the
discussions and negotiations on the various resolutions
adopted by the General Conference especially relating to
nuclear power; technical cooperation; nuclear S&T and
applications; safeguards and verification. Along with the
other members of the group called ‘Friends of Nuclear
Energy’, India played a leading role in the adoption of an
important resolution on nuclear power applications. India
also underlined its commitment to the Agency’s safety
and security related activities by joining the IAEA’s “Illicit
Trafficking Data Base (ITDB)” in April 2006.
India continued to organise training programmes for
participants from other member-States in a variety of fields
relating to nuclear Science & Technology, applications,
safety & security, etc.

Outer Space Affairs
India participated in the 49th session of the UN Committee
on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UNCOPUOS), held in
Vienna from 7-16 June 2005.
Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) contributed
US$ 20,000 towards the establishment of Disaster
Management International Space Coordination
Organisation (DMISCO) under the UN Office of Outer
Space Affairs, Vienna.
Dr. B.N. Suresh, Director, Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre,
Thiruananathapuram was appointed as the Chairman of
the Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee of the

Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space for the
year 2006.
India played an active role in the formulation of the Terms
of Reference for the International Committee on Global
Navigation Satellite System (ICG), which were adopted
at ICG’s first meeting held at Vienna in November 2006.
The ICG also unanimously accepted the Indian invitation
to host its second meeting in Bangalore during the second
half of 2007.

Non-Aligned Movement
The Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh led the Indian
delegation to the 14th Summit meeting of the Non-Aligned
Movement held in Havana from 11-16 September 2006.
The Summit adopted a political declaration, on the
“Purposes, Principles and Role of the Non Aligned
Movement in the Current International Juncture”, a Final
Document that reflects positions of the Movement on
important regional and international issues, and a
Declaration on Palestine. Apart from these documents,
it also adopted a document on Methodology of the
Movement, a Statement on the Islamic Republic of Iran’s
Nuclear Issue and an Action Plan to implement the
various actionable elements listed in the Final Document.
The Ministerial segment before the Summit Conference
was led by Anand Sharma, Minister of State for External
Affairs, who also led the Indian delegation at the
Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of the
Non Aligned Movement (NAM-CoB) held in Putrajaya,
Malaysia on 29-30 May 2006, in preparation of 14th NAM
Summit. Prime Minister in his statement at the Plenary
Session, reaffirmed India’s conviction that the Non
Aligned Movement remains particularly relevant in the
current international scenario. Calling for NAM to define
itself as the “voice of moderation, harmony and reason”,
the Prime Minister underlined that NAM is uniquely
placed to play the role of a bridge of understanding. He
emphasized the fact that the cooperative worldview of
NAM was in itself a rejection of the notion of a “clash of
civilizations”. Prime Minister’s speech touched upon
several of India’s long-standing core concerns, including
international terrorism, the continued conflict in West
Asia, the inequitable processes of globalization, nuclear
disarmament and energy security. He also proposed a
NAM initiative on energy security and a separate NAM

114

Back to Contents

United Nations and International Organizations

initiative on Africa that would focus on human resource
and agricultural development.
The Prime Minister’s participation at the XIV Summit
was received very warmly by the Cuban hosts as well as
the NAM membership at large. In an overwhelming
gesture, President Fidel Castro of Cuba, still convalescing
and hence unable to participate in the Summit, received
Prime Minister for a bilateral meeting on 16 September
2006. The response of NAM member countries to the
statement made by Prime Minister at the Plenary was
highly positive, with a number of them supporting his ideas
and proposals in their statements. On the sidelines of the
Summit, Prime Minister also had a number of bilateral
meetings including with HoG/S of Pakistan, Iran,
Venezuela, Mongolia, Sri Lanka, Malaysia and Mauritius;
Crown Prince of Qatar; Deputy Prime Minister of Nepal
and UN Secretary General.

Commonwealth
India is the largest among the 52 members of
Commonwealth and is its fourth largest financial
contributor. India has increased its annual contribution
to the Commonwealth Fund for Technical Cooperation,
which provides technical assistance to the
Commonwealth developing countries, from GBP 800,000
in 2005-06 to GBP 850,000 in 2006-07. India is the largest
contributor (with commitment of Euro 1 million) to the
Commonwealth Connects Special Voluntary Fund,
created by the Heads of Government at Malta CHOGM
in November 2005 to bridge the digital divide in the
Commonwealth countries and is a member of the Steering
Committee established to carry forward its action
programme. To further enhance India’s technical
assistance to the Commonwealth developing countries
through the Commonwealth Secretariat, India has
decided to offer 50-70 slots in select courses under ITEC
and SCAAP and will provide up to five ICT experts for
periods upto six months under Commonwealth Connects
Programme. India will also jointly conduct training
programmes for Small & Medium Enterprises (SMEs)
Managers from Africa and South Asia.
India continues to be one of the principal supporters and
contributors of the Commonwealth Joint Office in New
York, which facilitates participation by Commonwealth
small states in UN activities through an effective presence
at the United Nations Headquarters.

The fourth event of the first phase of joint
Commonwealth-India Small Business Competitiveness
Development Programme was held in Chennai in April
2005 and the first event of the second phase of the
Programme was held in Noida in November 2006.
A five- day workshop, jointly organised by the
Commonwealth Secretariat with the India’s Ministry of
Commerce and the United Nations Development Fund
for Women South Asia Regional Office, was held in New
Delhi from 28 August 2006 on ‘Gender, Trade Policy and
Export Promotion for South Asia’.
India remained a member of key Commonwealth bodies,
including the Executive Committee of the
Commonwealth Secretariat, the Standing Committee on
Terrorism, and the Commonwealth Advisory Board on
Sports. India rejoined the Executive Committee of the
Commonwealth Foundation and was elected to become
a member of the Accreditation Committee of the
Commonwealth Secretariat and Grants Committee of the
Commonwealth Foundation. India actively participated
in the meetings of these Committees and those of the
Board of Governors of the Commonwealth Secretariat
and the Commonwealth Foundation.
Pranab Mukherjee, former Defence Minister (now
Minister of External Affairs) represented India at the
Commonwealth Foreign Ministers’ Meeting during
UNGA in New York on 22 September 2006. P.
Chidambaram, Minister of Finance attended the
Commonwealth Finance Ministers’ Meeting in Colombo
from 12-14 September 2006. India also participated in
the Commonwealth Youth Ministers meeting in the
Bahamas in May 2006, Commonwealth Health Ministers’
Meeting in Geneva in May 2006 and Commonwealth
Public Services Ministers Meeting in Sydney in October
2006. Florence Mugasha, Deputy Secretary General of
the Commonwealth, visited India in September-October
2006.
The General Assembly of the Commonwealth
Parliamentary Association (CPA) at its annual conference
in Abuja, Nigeria elected Somnath Chatterjee, Speaker,
Lok Sabha as the President of the CPA and Dr. Manmohan
Singh, Prime Minister as Vice-Patron of the CPA for a
period of one year. India will host the 53rd annual
Conference of CPA in New Delhi in September 2007.
H.A Halim, Speaker of West Bengal Legislative Assembly

115

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

continues to remain the Chairman of the Executive
Committee of the Commonwealth Parliamentary
Association (CPA) for 2005-08.
At Malta CHOGM in November 2005, the Heads of
Government endorsed the Commonwealth Action
Programme for the Digital Divide (renamed as
Commonwealth Connects). They also endorsed
establishment of a Steering Committee and a Special Fund
to enable implementation of specific activities under the
action programme. India is the largest contributor to the
CAPDD Special Fund and is a member of the Steering
Committee. India had announced a contribution of Euro
1 million for the programme out of which Euro 350,000,
has been disbursed. An International e-Partnership
Summit of the Commonwealth Connects Programme will
be held on 23-24 March 2007 in New Delhi.

ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF)
The 13th ARF Ministerial Meeting was held in Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia, on 28 July 2006. India was represented
by Rao Inderjit Singh, Minister of State for Defense. The
Ministerial Meeting inter alia adopted a Concept Paper
on ties between Track I and Track II in the ARF, and
between the ARF and Other Regional and International
Security Organizations. Pursuant to the decision taken
at the ARF Ministerial Meeting, India hosted ARF
Workshop on Cyber Security from 6-8 September 2006
in New Delhi.
India participated in the ARF Intersessional Group
Meeting held in Manila, Philippines in March 2006 and
Senior Officials’ Meeting in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, in
May 2006. India also participated in the Defense Officials
Dialogue and ARF Security Policy Conference which took
place, along with the above two meetings, respectively.
India participated in the Confidence Building Measures
(CBM) related activities organized by the Member States
viz. ARF Seminar on Energy Security, in October 2006 in
Brussels; ARF Workshop on Stockpile Management
Security in October 2006 in Bangkok; ARF Workshop
on Communicable Diseases in Vietnam in September
2006. India also participated in the Inter-sessional Group
Meeting on Counter Terrorism and Transnational Crime
in Beijing, in March 2006; Inter-sessional Meeting on
Disaster Management in Chingdao in September 2006;
first intersessional-group meeting of the 14th ARF held in
Batam, Indonesia in November 2006.

Conference on Interaction and
Confidence Building Measures in Asia
(CICA)
India is a founding member of CICA. Murli Deora,
Minister for Petroleum and Natural Gas, represented
India, as special envoy of the Indian Prime Minister to
the Second CICA Summit, held in Almaty on 17 June
2006. The Summit adopted a Declaration and Statue of
the CICA Secretariat was signed in presence of the Heads
of the delegations. India deposited the Instrument of
ratification on 12 September 2006.

International Law and Developments
Report of the Sixth Committee:
Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism
(CCIT)
The Ad hoc Committee on International Terrorism set
up under Resolution 51/210 adopted the following three
conventions: International Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings, 1997; International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism, 1999; and Convention on Suppression of
Nuclear Terrorism, 2005. Since October 2000, it has been
considering the draft Comprehensive Convention on
International Terrorism proposed by India, which had been
proposed as an umbrella Convention dealing with terrorist
acts committed by any means as against the present
sectoral Conventions dealt with specific offences only,
either as regards the means of their commission, (eg.
terrorist bombings) or the objects of the acts (e.g. civil
aviation, or attacks against diplomats). The substantive
provisions of the Draft Convention have been agreed.
However, further progress on the Convention has been
stalled by the insistence of some countries (the OIC group)
which have introduced proposals for excluding from the
scope of the Convention acts carried out in the course of
“people’s struggles against foreign occupation”, in response
to proposals to exclude the acts of “armed forces of a State”
which are subject to other rules of international law.
In view of the rigid, inflexible positions of delegations, no
breakthrough could be achieved in the February Session
of the Ad Hoc Committee.
Oceans and Law of the Sea
At its 61st session, the United Nations General Assembly
discussed the matters related to implementation of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and

116

Back to Contents

United Nations and International Organizations

related agreements; capacity building of States in the
economic, legal, navigational, scientific and technical
fields for full implementation of these instruments;
exploration and exploitation of marine resources in the
Area; effective functioning of the International Seabed
Authority; extended claims of States to the continental
shelf; maritime safety and security; marine environment;
and international cooperation in carrying out lawful
marine activities.
The Review Conference on the Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982
relating to the Conservation and Management of
Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks,
that was held in New York earlier this year, provided a
useful forum for assessing the effectiveness of the
Agreement. The Conference noted with concern that
Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks
were over exploited and depleted. Over fishing and over
capacity are seen to undermine efforts to achieve the longterm sustainability of these stocks. Therefore the
Conference recommended urgent reduction of the world’s
fishing capacity to levels in commensurate with the
sustainability of fish stocks. In this context the legitimate
right of developing States to develop their fisheries for
Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks
in accordance with article 25 of the Agreement was
recognized.
The theme of the seventh meeting of the UN Open-Ended
Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of
the Sea was “Ecosystem approaches to oceans”. The
meeting exchanged views on areas of concern and actions
needed, including on issues discussed at previous meetings,
the definition and implementation of ecosystem
approaches; scientific research; high seas governance;
cooperation and coordination; capacity building; and
threats to marine biodiversity. The text adopted at the
seventh meeting recognized that, by its very nature the
ecosystem approach does not easily lend itself to
mandatory “one-size-fits all” measures. It contains sections
on the guiding principles for the application of the
ecosystem approach, its possible constituent elements, and
the implementation and improved application of the
approach. In this context it has been recognised that
capacity building, technology transfer and greater
consideration of developing countries’ experiences in

implementing ecosystem approaches in marine
management also need to be given due consideration.
Special Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations
The Committee this year approved the proposal on
improvement in its working methods. This proposal aims
to enhance the efficiency of the Committee and seeks
inter-alia, avoid duplication of work of other UN bodies
by establishing a cut-off mechanism to prevent prolonged
and ineffective discussion of some proposals.
Under the agenda item “Peaceful Settlement of Disputes”,
a new resolution entitled “Commemoration of the sixtieth
anniversary of the International Court of Justice”, was
adopted by the General Assembly.
The Russian proposal on effective implementation of
Article 50 relating to Assistance to Third States affected
by the application of sanctions under Chapter VII of the
UN Charter and Peacekeeping Operations under Chapter
VI of the UN Charter remains on the agenda.
Further, the Special Committee is also considering several
other proposals relating to: the maintenance of
international peace and security; the Trusteeship Council;
coordination with other committees/bodies that are also
involved in work related to the maintenance of
international peace and security, in particular with regard
to assistance to third states adversely affected by sanctions.
At its 61st session, the General Assembly considered
proposals concerning these agenda items. Regarding the
proposal for assistance to third states adversely affected
by sanctions under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter under the agenda item of maintenance of
international peace and security, India’s stand over the
years has been that the Security Council should hold the
primary responsibility towards the affected third States,
as a part of the sanctions imposing decisions. India
supported proposals aimed to bring transparency in the
functioning of the UN organs and greater democratization
therein. India has also supported all efforts towards the
continued publication and updating of the Repertory of
Practice of the UN Organs and the Repertoire of Practice
of the Security Council, as these documents are very
important sources of reference.
United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law (UNCITRAL)
During the 39 th Session of the UNCITRAL, the

117

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

Commission: approved the key objectives and major
policies of the draft legislative guide on secured
transactions; adopted revised legislative provisions on
interim measures of protection to be integrated into the
UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial
Arbitration; and adopted recommendation on form of
arbitration agreement (compromise) as part of
interpretation of articles II (2) and VII(1) of the 1958
New York Convention on Recognition and Enforcement
of Foreign Arbitral Awards.
The Legal & Treaties Division participated in Working
Group meetings of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) relating to
Transportation and Security Interests. It also participated
in the 39th Annual Session of UNCITRAL held in June
this year at Vienna. The main achievements of the 39th
session were the approval in principle of the key objectives
and major policies of a draft legislative guide on secured
transactions and adoption of revised legislative provisions
on interim measure of protection and the form of the
arbitration agreement.
The Legal & Treaties Division further participated in the
seventeenth and eighteenth sessions of Working Group
III (Transport Law) of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), held
respectively at New York, USA from 3-13 April 2006 and
at Vienna, Austria from 6-17 November 2006. The
Working Group is negotiating a new convention, with a
view to review the existing laws relating to the
international carriage of goods by sea and other modes,
to cope with the practical changes in this field that
emerged due to technological developments. At the
seventeenth session, discussions were held on provisions
relating to the right of control; transfer of rights; delivery
of goods; scope of application and freedom of contract;
and shipper’s obligations. At the eighteenth session, the
working Group deliberated on issues concerning the
transport documents and electronic transport records,
delay in delivery, limitation of liability, rights of suit and
time for suit, final clauses, including relationship with
other conventions and general average.

IMO Legal Committee
The IMO’s Legal Committee meeting was held in Paris,
at UNESCO building, as its headquarters building in
London is undergoing refurbishment. The Legal

Committee discussed many issues placed on its agenda
that inter alia include: Draft Convention on Wreck
Removal; Ad Hoc Working Group on Liability and
Compensation regarding claims for death, personal injury
and abandonment of seafarers; Revision of Athens
Convention relating to the Carriage of Passengers and
their Luggage by Sea 1974; Fair Treatment of Seafarers;
and Monitoring and implementation of HNS Convention.
In particular, the Committee finalized the text of the Draft
Wreck Removal Convention that could be adopted by
the IMO in its forthcoming Diplomatic Conference to be
held in Nairobi, Kenya in the April 2007.

International Hydrographic Organization
(IHO)
The work on the reorganization of the International
Hydrographic Organization ended with the convening of
the eighth and final meeting of the Strategic Planning
Working Group (SPWG) held in Busan, South Korea,
from 2-4 May 2006. A list of documents were finalised
which shall be considered by the IHO conference to be
held in Monaco next year. Also participated at the SPWG
Legal Experts Meeting held in Monaco in June 2006. This
meeting vetted and cleared the IHO Documents finalised
at Busan.

International Sea Bed Authority
The Legal & Treaties Division also participated in the
Finance Committee meeting held during the 12th Session
of the International Seabed Authority held from 7—11
August 2006 at Kingston, Jamaica. During the Session,
the Committee recommended establishment of the
International Seabed Authority Endowment Fund whose
corpus will be drawn from the existing Pioneer Fund.

AALCO
The Golden Jubilee Session of the Asian-African Legal
Consultative Organization (AALCO) for the year 2006
was held in New Delhi from 3-8 April 2006. During the
Session, the organization discussed the following issues
of international law: Report on matters relating to the
work of the International Law Commission at its Fiftyseventh Session; International Terrorism; emerging issues
on Law of the Sea; Establishing Cooperation against
Trafficking in Women and Children; The International
Criminal Court and its Recent Developments; Report on
the Work of the UNCITRAL and Other International

118

Back to Contents

United Nations and International Organizations

Organizations in the field of International Trade Law;
Environment and Sustainable Development; and
Expressions of Folklore and its International Protection.

SAARC
The Legal & Treaties Division participated in the 6th
Meeting of SAARC Sub -Group on International
Arbitration held in Kathmandu on 19—20 September
2006 which finalized the SAARC Arbitration Rules.

BIMSTEC
The second BIMSTEC Joint Working Group (JWG)
CTTC Sub Group on Law and Enforcement measures was
held in New Delhi from 4-6 September 2006. It discussed
issues relating to harmonization of laws of members states
in the field of international terrorism, illicit drug trafficking
and transnational organized crime. It also considered the
Indian revised draft text of an agreement on “Cooperation
in Combating Terrorism, Illicit Drug Trafficking and
Transnational Organized Crime.

Regional Convention on combating
Piracy & Armed Robbery (ReCAAP)
The First Governing Council Meeting of the ReCAAP
was held in Singapore from 27-30 November 2006. The
representatives, Tay Lim Heng of Singapore and VADM
RF Contractor from India declared elected unanimously,
as the Chairperson and Vice chairperson of the First
Governing Council respectively for a period of two years.
The Meeting considered and discussed various issues
leading to the establishment of a new institution namely,
the Information Sharing Centre (ISC) having its
permanent Secretariat in Singapore. Yoshiaki Ito from
Japan was elected as the Executive Director of the ISC
unanimously. The ISC under the leadership of Ito and
other staff would collectively monitor and effectively
implement the laid down objectives of the ReCAAP.

Antarctica
The Legal & Treaties Division participated at the XXIX
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Committee Meeting
(ATCM)’s Legal and Institutional Working Group held
in Edinburgh from12-16 June 2006. The Meeting adopted
a number of technical and legal decisions dealing with
environmental monitoring, the amendment to the Annexe
VI of the Environmental Protocol of 1996, building a new
Indian station at Larsemann Hills at Antarctica and above

all, arrangements for holding the next ATCM in New
Delhi in April/May 2007.

Private International Law
India deposited the Instrument of Accession to the Hague
Convention on the Service Abroad of Judicial and Extra
judicial Documents in Civil or Commercial Matters, 1965.
The Convention will enter into force for India from 1
August 2007. India is also actively considering becoming
a party to the Hague Convention on the Taking of
Evidence Abroad in Civil or Commercial Matters, 1970
and for becoming a member of the Hague Conference, as
well the 1980 Convention on the Civil Aspects of
International Child Abduction. These measures would
help the Indian courts and parties to civil suits in a great
way in seeking international cooperation inter-alia for the
service of documents in and in the taking of evidence
from a large number of foreign countries, which are States
parties to these conventions. The Convention on Child
Abduction facilitates the return/access of children
wrongfully taken abroad in violation of a custody order to
one of the parents. The L&T Division has participated in
the Regional Workshops jointly organized by the Ministry
of Overseas Indian Affairs and the National Commission
for Women on the Problems of NRI Marriages.

Humanitarian Law
The Legal & Treaties Division has participated in the 3rd
Informal High-Level Expert Meeting on international
humanitarian law held in Montreux, Switzerland on 2224 May 2006. During this meeting the expert group,
among other things, considered the draft manual on Air
Warfare modeled on San Remo Manual on Naval Warfare.

Investments
Bilateral investment promotion agreement (BIPA)
negotiations were held with Slovakia, Jordan, Trinidad &
Tobago, Romania and UAE. Further, investment
negotiations were held with Canada and Mexico.
Agreements with China, Slovakia, Jordan, and North
Korea were signed during the year.

Extradition & Mutual Legal Assistance in
Criminal Matters
The Legal & Treaties Division participated in bilateral
negotiations for concluding extradition treaties,
agreements on mutual legal assistance in criminal and in

119

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

civil matters with foreign countries. The Division
examined extradition requests and other requests for
international cooperation received from the domestic as
well as foreign jurisdictions and rendered legal advice
therein.

Cabinet Notes
Several cabinet notes were examined and cleared from
legal angle which inter alia include: Proposal for becoming
a party to the Inter-Governmental Agreement on TransAsian Railway Network; Acceding to the Hague
Convention on the Service Abroad of Judicial and Extra
judicial Documents in Civil or Commercial Matters, 1965;
amendments to existing Merchant Shipping Act, for
implementing the ISPS Code which is developed by the
IMO as a part of mandatory obligation under the SOLAS
Convention, 1974; UNESCO Convention on Protection
and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions;
WIPO’s Madrid Agreement on Registration of Marks and
Designs; Implementing legislation to the UN Convention
on Corruption; Conservation and Management of Marine
Turtles and their Habitats of the India Ocean and South
East Asia; Regional Cooperation Agreement on
Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships in
Asia. Further, Cabinet Notes relating to BIPA with China,
Trinidad & Tobago, Uruguay, Democratic Republic of
Korea, Jordan, amendment protocol to the investment
agreement with Mozambique and Mexico were examined.
Cabinet notes relating to double taxation avoidance
agreements with UAE and Myanmar and preferential
trade agreement (PTA) with Mauritius were also
examined and cleared.
The Legal & Treaties Division has prepared briefs on
various topics for the 61st session of UNGA and also briefs
for the annual session of the Asian African Legal
Consultative Organization held in New Delhi 2006. It
provided opinion on matters relating to the
Commonwealth, Antarctica, acceding to Hague
Conventions on Private International Law; UNESCO
Convention on Cultural Diversity; Parliament questions;
international humanitarian law, human rights; refugees;
environmental aspects of oil exploration in the territorial
sea and EEZ of India, etc. It also dealt with various
Parliament Questions on the subject of international law.
Rendered legal opinions on several property and project
matters, agreements, etc., and also court cases involving
sovereign and diplomatic immunities & privileges.

The Legal & Treaties Division has examined and cleared
several defence Cooperation agreements, that inter alia
included: Agreement with Russia on Joint Exercise by
India and Russia; draft Protocol with Russia for Conduct
of Indo-Russia Joint Exercise (EX INDRA 06); MoU on
Defence Cooperation with Chile; Letter of Exchange for
the Renewal of Treaty of Transit with Nepal; Agreement
on Defence Cooperation with Peru; Framework
Agreement on Defence Cooperation with Thailand; MoU
on Military Cooperation with Rwanda; MoU on Defence
Cooperation with Colombia.
The Legal & Treaties Division has examined and cleared
the agreement between India and China for opening up
of Consular Missions in Kolkata by the Chinese side and
in Gongzhau (China) by India. Various other international
legal issues and cases, in particular before the Indian
courts, relating to the application of Vienna Convention
on Diplomatic Relations, 1961; Vienna Convention on
Consular Relations, 1963; Passport related matters under
the provisions of the Passports Act, 1967; Section 86 of
the Indian Civil Procedure Code requiring the consent of
the Central Government before suing the foreign
government in Indian Courts were examined.
India has signed/ratified many multilateral/bilateral
treaties/agreements with foreign countries during the year.
These inter alia include: Agreement concerning the
Establishing of Global Technical Regulations for Wheeled
Vehicles, Equipment and Parts Which Can Be Fitted and/
or Be Used on Wheeled Vehicles; International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism; Statute of the Secretariat of the Conference
on Interaction and Confidence Building Measures in Asia;
Kuala Lumpur Declaration on the East Asia Summit
(ASEAN Countries); Agreement on South Asian Free
Trade Area (SAFTA); SAARC Agreement on Mutual
Administrative Assistance in Customs Matters;
Framework for Co-operation on the Information Society
between the Governments of the Republic of India, the
Federative Republic of Brazil and the Republic of South
Africa. A comprehensive list is placed at Appendix X. A
list of Instruments of Full Powers issued during the year
2004 is at Appendix XI and a list of Instruments of
Ratification is at Appendix XII.

120

Back to Contents

Multilateral Economic Relations

SAARC

The Thirteenth SAARC Summit, held in Dhaka on 1213 November 2005, decided that India would host the
Fourteenth SAARC Summit in 2007. The Summit took
place on the eve of SAARC entering into the third decade
of its existence. There was recognition amongst the
Leaders that the time has come to move SAARC from a
declaratory phase into implementation. Emphasizing on
the need for greater connectivity in the region, Prime
Minister, during the Summit, stated “if we wish the next
20 years in SAARC to be different, we should take the
first decision to reconnect the countries of the
subcontinent… and then to reconnect the subcontinent
to the larger Asian neighborhood”. India expects the
Fourteenth SAARC Summit in New Delhi on 3-4 April
2007, to carry forward this theme of connectivity.
The Fourteenth SAARC Summit will witness, for the first
time in its history, an enlargement in its membership, to
include Afghanistan. This will complete the regional
identity of SAARC. The modalities for Afghanistan’s entry
into SAARC were finalized at the 27th SAARC Council
of Ministers Meeting held in Dhaka on 1-2 August 2006.
The President of Afghanistan and Heads of State/
Government of the existing SAARC member countries
would sign a Joint Declaration at the Fourteenth SAARC
Summit. By signing the Joint Declaration, Afghanistan
would become party to all existing SAARC Agreements,
Declarations and legal documents.
The 27th Council of Ministers Meeting has also decided
the Guidelines for Observers into SAARC. For the first
time five Observers – China, Japan, European Union
(EU), Republic of Korea (ROK) and the United States of
America — would be invited to attend the Fourteenth
SAARC Summit. SAARC will benefit from these external
linkages and help its economic integration with the
international community.
India has made a number of proposals to reinvigorate
SAARC. India’s proposal for a regional centre on disaster

10

management and risk reduction was approved and the
SAARC Disaster Management Centre has become
operational from the premises of the National Institute
of Disaster Management, New Delhi from 10 October
2006. The other proposals made by India at the Thirteenth
Summit - a South Asian University, a Tele-medicine
network for the region, organization of a SAARC Car Rally
in the run up to the Fourteenth SAARC Summit, and
setting up of a SAARC Museum of Textiles and
Handicrafts – have also been approved by the 27th Council
of Ministers. All these proposals are intended to enhance
regional cooperation. The modalities for implementing
these proposals are under discussion
The SAARC Car Rally will symbolize vividly South Asia’s
regional identity and draw attention to the urgent need
to improve regional transport infrastructure. It will
highlight the geographical and cultural diversity of the
region. It is intended to promote people to people contact,
tourism and business opportunities in the region. The Car
Rally will start from Bangladesh and arrive in New Delhi
on the eve of the Summit. The Leaders of SAARC
countries will flag off the Rally on 3 April 2007.
SAFTA has entered into force from 1 January 2006.
Despite ratifying the SAFTA Agreement, Pakistan, in its
customs notification on SAFTA has singled out India from
the agreed and negotiated “Sensitive List”, restricting
trade with India to the existing bilateral “Positive List”.
India regards this as a violation of the Agreement and
raised its concerns at the 27 th Council of Ministers
Meeting. It was decided that this issue would have to be
resolved by the SAFTA Ministerial Council (SMC) before
the next Council of Ministers Meeting with a view to
ensure a smooth implementation of the Agreement.
Agreements on (i) Promotion and Protection of
Investment, (ii) SAARC Arbitration and SAARC
Conciliation Rules are under discussion. There is only one
outstanding issue relating to the Most Favored Nation
(MFN) clause. Pakistan is not prepared to accept a

121

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

formulation on MFN in the Investment Agreement. India
maintains that MFN is the cornerstone of the Agreement.

achieving the South Asian Economic Union (SAEU) in
a gradual and phased manner.

During the first meeting of SAARC Home Ministers in
Dhaka on 1 May 2006, member countries were called upon
to provide enabling legislation for the Convention on
Suppression of Terrorism. The SAARC Secretariat was
also asked to prepare an Annual Status Report on the
implementation of the Convention and the Additional
Protocol on terrorism. Other important decisions taken
at the Home Ministers’ meeting included exploring the
possibilities of establishing SAARCPOL and networking
arrangements among Police Authorities in member states.
India offered to host two Workshops to strengthen the
SAARC Terrorist Offences Monitoring Desk (STOMD)
and the SAARC Drug Offences Monitoring Desk
(SDOMD). The Meeting further called upon Member
States to share information amongst one another on the
best practices in eradicating drug abuse, drug trafficking
and money laundering on an annual basis. It also discussed
the establishment of a Regional Task Force for the
implementation of the Convention on Trafficking in
Women and Children for Prostitution.

ASEAN-India Relations

The First Meeting of the SAARC Finance Ministers which
was held in Islamabad on 11 July 2006, drew up a
Framework and a roadmap for the SAARC Development
Fund (SDF). The SDF will be an umbrella financial
institution for SAARC development funding, in place of
the South Asia Development Fund (SADF). It will have
three windows – Social, Economic and Infrastructure. The
SDF will hold its first Governing Board Meeting in January
2007.
India is a very strong advocate of collaboration in regional
projects, particularly in areas such as infrastructure,
poverty alleviation and dealing with cross border
challenges such as natural disasters, pandemics like HIV
AIDS, and Avian Flu, and terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. India’s offer of US $ 100 million would be
utilized for projects in other SAARC countries on poverty
alleviation once the SDF is operationalised. Along with
SAFTA, the SDF has the potential to move SAARC into
an implementation phase bringing tangible benefits to the
people in the region.
An Intergovernmental Expert Group (IGEG) on financial
issues has also been set up to develop a roadmap for

Taking forward its “Look East” policy, which was initiated
in 1992, India continued its efforts to increase its
integration with the world economy, particularly with the
countries of the East. India also played an active role in
furthering the economic interests of developing countries
in various international organizations and in multilateral,
regional and sub-regional groupings.
Substantial progress was achieved, insofar as
implementation of specific projects under the ASEANIndia Cooperation is concerned. At the ASEAN-India
Joint meetings, India’s efforts to provide assistance to
Cambodia, Lao PDR, Myanmar and Vietnam have been
appreciated. Entrepreneurship Development Centres have
been established by the Government of India in Cambodia,
Lao PDR and Vietnam and efforts are being made to
establish one in Myanmar.
The 12th ASEAN-India Technology Summit was organised
in New Delhi on 6 – 7 November 2006. Science and
Technology Ministers from ASEAN countries
participated.
India conducted a Special Diplomatic Course for ASEAN
countries in August/September, 2006. 22 young ASEAN
diplomats participated in the course. At the conclusion
of the course MOS (AS) awarded Diplomas to the
participants.
India participated in the 3rd ASEAN-India Working Group
meeting on Transport and Infrastructure. The meeting
was held at Chiang Mai, Thailand on 16 May 2006.
Likewise, India also participated in ASEAN-India
Consultations on Agriculture which was held at Bohol,
Philippines on 28-29 August 2006. Consultations were
held back-to-back of the Special Senior Officials Meeting
of the 27th ASEAN Ministers of Agriculture and Forestry.
A 3-day Workshop on Information Systems Security for
System Administrators from ASEAN Countries was
organized at Manesar, Gurgaon on 29 – 30 August 2006.
21 ASEAN participants attended the Workshop.
Twenty-seven entrepreneurs from ASEAN countries made
a visit to India to attend ASEAN-India Small and Medium
Enterprises Conference on Business Linkages and

122

Back to Contents

Multilateral Economic Relations

partnerships. Entrepreneurs also held one-to-one
meetings with the Indian industry.
ASEAN-India Working Group, Joint Cooperation
Committee and ASEAN-India Senior Officials Meeting
at the Joint Secretary and Secretary level met to review
progress of the on-going ASEAN-India projects and to
discuss future cooperation.
A 2-day Seminar to provide a platform to share the
experiences of ASEAN countries in the area of e-learning
and e-learning technologies was organized at Hyderabad
on 6-7 November 2006.
A 3-day Workshop of ASEAN countries on Bioinformatics
Human Resource was organsied in Delhi on 14-16
December 2006.
The Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources
organized a 2-day workshop on Renewable Energy for
ASEAN Member countries on 18-19 December 2006 in
New Delhi.
A 2-day India-ASEAN Seminar on Shruti Drishti, an
integrated Text-to-Speech (TTS) and Text-to Braille (
TTB) System for Visually Impaired persons was organized
at Pune on 18-19 January 2007.
An FTA between ASEAN countries and India is currently
being negotiated. 14 meetings of the Trade Negotiations
Committee (TNC) have been held so far, including the
one held in Jakarta from 16-18 November 2006. IndiaASEAN Trade Ministers’ met in Cebu (Philippines) on
12 January 2007 to discuss issues relating to exclusion
lists and tariff concessions. The India-ASEAN FTA is
expected to be finalized by July, 2007.
ASEAN Post Ministerial Conference was held at Kuala
Lumpur in July, 2006 with ASEAN Dialogue Partners,
including India, to exchange views on international issues.
MOS (Defence) headed the delegation.
Prime Minister participated in the 5 th ASEAN-India
Summit held in Cebu, Philippines on 14 January 2007.

East Asia Summit
Foreign Ministers of East Asia Summit (EAS) countries
met in Kuala Lumpur in July. The 2nd EAS was held at
Cebu, Philippines on 15 January 2007 in which Prime
Minister participated.

The Cebu Declaration on East Asian Energy Security was
signed during the Summit. It was agreed to establish an
EAS Energy Cooperation Task Force. Singapore would
be hosting next EAS Energy Ministers Meeting to consider
ways to enhance energy cooperation. India’s proposal to
revive Nalanda University received positive response. To
deepen economic development and regional integration,
EAS agreed to launch a Track Two Study on a
Comprehensive Economic Partnership in East Asia
(CEPEA) among EAS participants.

Mekong-Ganga Cooperation ( MGC)
The Mekong-Ganga Cooperation (MGC) is an initiative
launched in Vientiane in November 2000 by six countries
– India and five ASEAN countries, namely, Cambodia,
Lao PDR, Myanmar, Thailand and Vietnam. Tourism,
education, culture and transport and communications
have been identified as thrust areas for cooperation.
A museum of Traditional Textiles of MGC countries is
being set up in Siem Reap, Cambodia by the Indian
Council for Cultural Relations.
Under MGC, India offers 10 culture-based scholarships
to each of the MGC countries. India has also offered to
host 100 pilgrims from MGC countries in the year 2007.
India took over the chairmanship of MGC from Thailand
on 12 January 2007 at a specially convened meeting called
for this purpose on the margins of the ASEAN Summit in
Cebu where the Indian delegation was led by the EAM.

G-8 Summit
Prime Minister participated in the 8th G-8 Summit held
in St. Petersburg, Russia on 17 July 2006. He was joined
by the leaders of Brazil, China, Mexico and South Africa,
who also participated, as outreach countries, like India.
President of Congo in his capacity as AU Chairman and
President of Kazakhstan in his capacity as Chairman of
CIS States attended the Summit. Heads of International
Organizations, namely, UN Secretary General, WTO
Director General, IAEA Director General, World Bank
President and EU Commission President were also present.
The main themes of the Summit were, Energy Security,
Education and Challenge of Infectious Diseases and
Pandemics.
During the Russian Presidency of G-8, several meetings
at Ministerial level were organized in some of which, the

123

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

Indian side participated at the level of Finance Minister
and MOS (Education).

Meeting would be preceded by a BIMSTEC Cultural
Festival.

G-15

The 2nd Meeting of the Sub-Group of Intelligence Sharing
of BIMSTEC under the Joint Working Group of Counter
Terrorism and Transnational Crimes was held in Colombo
from 24-25 July 2006.

As a founder member of the Group of Fifteen (G-15),
India played an active role in various G-15 projects and
activities, in order to promote economic and technical
cooperation among the G-15 countries.
MOS (AS) headed a delegation to participate at the XIII
G-15 Summit. The Summit was held at Havana, Cuba
under the Chairmanship of Algerian President on 14
September 2006. Leaders of Iran, Venezuela, Malaysia,
Zimbabwe, Kenya, Brazil, Egypt, Indonesia, Jakarta and
Sri Lanka participated at the Summit. The Summit was
held on the margins of the XIV Summit of the NonAligned Movement. The theme of the Summit was Rural
and Agricultural Development and the Management of
Water Resources. At the end of the Summit a Joint
Communiqué was issued by the Leaders.

Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM)
At 6th ASEM Summit meeting that was held in Helsinki
on 11-12 September 2006, India along with other Asian
members, was welcomed to join ASEM. On receiving
formal invitation from the Asian-ASEM Coordinators,
China and Brunei, India accepted membership of the 45member group of ASEM. An Indian delegation led by
Secretary (East), participated in the Asian-ASEM Senior
Officials Meeting held in Brunei Darussalam on 20-21
December 2006, and the ASEM Senior Officials Meeting
held in Berlin, Germany, on 24-25 January 2007.

Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral
Technical and Economic Cooperation
(BIMSTEC)
The first BIMSTEC Ministerial Meeting on Culture was
held in Bhutan from 23-25 May 2006 proceeded by Expert
Group Meeting on 22 May 2006. Paro Initiative was
adopted at the Meeting which articulates a set of vision,
opportunities, drivers and strategies that will serve as a
roadmap for socio-economic development, driven by
creative cultural industries for the BIMSTEC region. It
was agreed to set up a BIMSTEC Cultural Industries
Commission and the BIMSTEC Cultural Observatory in
Bhutan. Bangladesh would be hosting the 2nd Ministerial
Meeting on Culture in April 2007. The Ministerial

The First Inter-Governmental Expert Group Meeting to
examine the establishment of the permanent BIMSTEC
Secretariat was held in Bangkok from 25-26 July 2006.
This was followed by the 2nd Meeting held in Bangkok on
26-27 October 2006.
The 12th Meeting of the Trade Negotiating Committee
(TNC) in the context of the Framework Agreement on
BIMSTEC FTA was held in Colombo from 25-28 July
2006. Further, the 13th Meeting of TNC was held in
Myanmar on 6-10 November 2006.
The Asian Institute of Transport Development (AITD),
New Delhi, conducted training courses for participants
from BIMSTEC countries in the transport sector. The 3rd
Meeting of the CEOs of Railway set-ups in BIMSTEC
countries was held in Yangon on 8-9 December 2005.
The 9th BIMSTEC Ministerial Meeting was held on 9
August 2006 in New Delhi and E. Ahamed, Minister of
State for External Affairs (EA) led the Indian delegation.
A Joint Statement was issued at the end of the Meeting.
It was agreed to enhance cooperation in various sectors
under BIMSTEC, i.e. trade and investment, transport and
communication, tourism, energy, technology, fisheries,
poverty alleviation, culture, agriculture, counter-terrorism
and trans-national crimes, environment and disaster
management, public health, people-to-people contact,
BIMSTEC Website and BIMSTEC Secretariat. It was
urged that the negotiations on trade in goods under the
FTA be concluded before the next Summit. The 2nd
BIMSTEC Summit is proposed to be held in India in 2007.
The 9th Ministerial Meeting was preceded by the 11th
Senior Officials’ Meeting (SOM) on 8 August 2006.
Secretary (East) led the Indian delegation. The Lead
Countries presented progress reports on the respective
sectoral activities. A Report was adopted at the end of
the Meeting.
India assumed Chairmanship of the BIMSTEC at the 9th
Ministerial Meeting held in New Delhi on 9 August 2006.

124

Back to Contents

The Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh with the Presidents of Russia and China, Vladimir Putin and Hu Jintao
at a tripartite meeting, at G-8 summit in St. Petersburg on 17 July 2006.

The Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh with the Foreign Affairs Minister of South Africa, Nkosazana Alamini Zuma,
the Foreign Affairs Minister, Brazil, Celso Luiz Nunes Amorim, the MoS for External Affairs Anand Sharma, the President of
South Africa, Thabo Mbeki and the President of Brazil, Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva in Brazil, on 13 September 2006.

125

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

India participated at the 2nd BIMSTEC Tourism Ministers
Round Table and Workshop held in Kathmandu from 2830 August 2006.
The following activities have been undertaken in the
energy sector, in which India has participated:
First meeting of trans-BIMSTEC gas pipeline task
force, Thailand in June 2006.
BIMSTEC meeting on Small Hydro projects, 21
September 2006.
Second Task Force Meeting for trans-power and
development project on 17-18 October 2006.
Workshop on sharing of experiences in developing
hydro projects, New Delhi on 30 – 31 October 2006

The 3rd Trilateral Commission Meeting, preceded by Focal
Points and Working Group Meetings was held from 2830 March 2006. The Indian delegation was led by Anand
Sharma, Minister of State for External Affairs.
The 6th and 7th Focal Points Meetings of IBSA were held
in Brasilia on 21-22 June 2006 and 17-18 August 2006
respectively.
The Working Group Meetings on Energy was held in July
2006 and Maritime Transportation and Other Related
Matters in August 2006, both in New Delhi. The Working
Group Meeting on Trade was held in August 2006 in
Brasilia to formalize the text for Action Plan for Trade
Facilitation, Standards, Technical Regulations and
Conformity Assessment Procedures.

A two day workshop on regional cooperation for Disaster
Risk Reduction and Management among the BIMSTEC
countries was held in New Delhi on 30-31 October 2006.

The 4th meeting of the Trilateral Commission will be
hosted by India in 2007.

IBSA (India, Brazil and South Africa)

Asian Cooperation Dialogue (ACD)

Prime Minister led the Indian delegation for the 1st IBSA
Summit held in Brasilia on 13 September 2006. President
Lula of Brazil and President Mbeki of South Africa also
participated.

The 5th ACD Ministerial Meeting was held in Qatar on
23-24 May 2006 preceded by a consultative meeting of
various Prime Movers and Co Prime Movers on 22 May
2006. During the meeting, the progress in the 19 sectors
of cooperation under ACD framework was reviewed.

The Summit was preceded by a Business Event. This had
impressive participation from all three countries.
A Joint Declaration was issued at the conclusion of the
Summit.
It was agreed that the three countries would explore the
possibilities for concluding an agreement for collaborative
research and development of AIDS, malaria and
tuberculosis diagnostic tools, drugs and vaccines.
The IBSA website was inaugurated during the Summit
(www.ibsa-trilateral.org)
Five trilateral agreements in the areas of maritime
transportation, biofuels, agriculture, information
technology and trade facilitation were signed during the
Summit.

Indian Ocean Rim Association for
Regional Cooperation (IOR-ARC)
The Sixth Meeting of the Council of Ministers (COM) of
Indian Ocean Rim Association for Regional Cooperation
(IOR-ARC) and other related meetings were held from
16-22 February 2006 in Iran. The Indian delegation to
the COM was led by E. Ahamed, Minister of State for
External Affairs (EA).
A Buyer Seller Meet was held from 1-3 November 2006
in Mumbai for enhancing cooperation in the area of Agro
Food Processing and Fisheries.

126

Back to Contents

Technical & Economic Cooperation
and Development Partnership

T he

Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation
Programme or ITEC continued to play a vital role in the
conduct of India’s diplomacy with the developing world.
Visiting Ministers and dignitaries from Asia, Africa and
Eurasia in their interaction with Indian Ministers and
senior functionaries conveyed their continuing interest
in drawing upon the programme, given its contribution
to the developing world in capacity building and human
resource development. Requests were also made for
increasing the quantum of assistance under the
programme.
Under ITEC and SCAAP or the Special Commonwealth
Assistance for Africa Programme, the core of the
programme is the civilian training programme, which has
empowered and continues to empower thousands of
participants from the developing world. In 2006-07 some
4000 participants from 156 ITEC/SCAAP partner
countries (list of ITEC/SCAAP partner countries at
Appendix-XV) were accepted to the 220 courses in various
and diverse disciplines of use and value in their countries.
39 institutions were empanelled to conduct the courses
(list at Appendix-XIV).
The value of the courses was reflected in the interest
shown by regional and multilateral groupings to also be
associated with and avail of the programmes conducted
under ITEC. Training slots were, therefore, provided to
participants from the Association of South East Asia
Nations (ASEAN) member countries, G-15, the Bay of
Bengal Initiative for Multi Sectoral Technical and
Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC), Mekong Ganga
Cooperation (MGC), the African Union(AU), the AfroAsian Rural Development Organization (AARDO), the
Pan African Parliament, the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) and the Commonwealth. In response to
special requests, specialized courses including on Capacity
Building on the World Trade Organization (WTO) for
African countries was conducted by the Indian Institute

11

of Foreign Trade (IIFT); a special programme for African
Cotton Exporters was conducted by South India Textile
Research Association (SITRA), Coimbatore for 30
participants from Africa; a special programme on
Government and Finance was conducted by Institute of
Government Accounts Finance (INGAF) for South
African Municipal CEO and CFOs and a Special Course
on Prevention of HIV-AIDS in the Work-place by the
V.V. Giri National Labour Institute. Also to be conducted
in the last quarter of 2006-07 is a Special Course on
Management Development for SME Managers at the
request of the Commonwealth Secretariat. Special courses
for BIMSTEC and MGC countries on (i) Trans-Asian
Railway Network; and (ii) Information Technology and
its Application for Railways were arranged during the year.
A special course will be conducted for the Pacific Island
countries on SMEs by National Institute of Small Industry
Extension Training (NISIET), Hyderabad in March 2007.
A delegation from the Upper Nile Province of Sudan
attended a study tour and training course conducted by
the Bureau of Parliamentary Studies and Training (BPST)
in November 2006.
In the field of Defence Training too the rate of utilization
of some 350 slots offered to the developing world remained
high particularly in courses at the National Defence
College (NDC) and the Defence Services Staff College
(DSSC) which also allows participation from the
developed world, on a self-financing basis.
The year under review also saw 58 experts being deputed
overseas at the request of various countries during the
year. The fields covered by these experts are Information
Technology, Diary Farming, Town Planning, Defence,
Fisheries, Agriculture, Legal Affairs, and
Telecommunications
Assistance was extended to Guyana during the visit of
the Vice President of India Bhairon Singh Shekhawat,

127

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

who gifted books, computers and printers for a new
Resource Centre named after Rabindranath Tagore at the
University of Guyana. India also gifted seeds to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, extended
assistance for transporting books to Ethiopia, assisted Fiji
in agro analysis, gifted medicines to Vietnam and
computers and peripherals to Grenada.

Development Partnership and Projects
Cooperation
In advancing further and strengthening India’s
‘development partnership’ with other developing
countries, increasing emphasis is being placed on the
delivery of development projects as part of India’s overall
economic development cooperation programme.
Simultaneously, further progress is being made in
developing in-house expertise in project delivery and
related cooperation work, with a view to ensuring
maximum cost-effectiveness, expeditious delivery, and
optimum coordination.
During this year, a training centre in IT sector was
established in record time of 3 months at Havana, called

‘India-Cuba Knowledge Centre’, which was inaugurated
by MOS Anand Sharma in September 2006, on the
occasion of the XIV NAM Summit. The centre would
impart training to over 400 Cubans every year. Among
the major ongoing projects are an ‘India-Maldives
Friendship Faculty of Hospitality and Tourism Studies’ at
Male, Maldives, at an estimated cost of about Rs.35 crore,
development of SMEs sector in Zimbabwe (Rs.22.50
crore), conservation and restoration of the World Heritage
Ta Prohm Temple at Siem Reap in Cambodia, and a
multidimensional project for the development of
information technology sector in Laos. There are other
projects at various stages of consideration and
implementation for Vietnam, Indonesia, Timor Leste,
Mongolia, Laos, etc., in various sectors such as telemedicine/tele-education, archaeology, IT, and specialty
medical treatment.
Aid for Disaster Relief
India’s cooperation programme for providing prompt and
effective relief for disaster-struck people around the world
was maintained continuing from past years.

128

Back to Contents

Investment & Technology Promotion

The ITP Division has prepared its annual publication
“Dynamic Business Partner: Investor Friendly
Destination” which will soon be under print. The
publication has been developed with the intent of
providing the reader a comprehensive picture of India’s
economic growth, sectoral developments, social and legal
background and potential business and investment
opportunities. With the intention of a wider reach and
making it user friendly, the publication will be
accompanied by a CD version.
The ITP Division continues to provide to entrepreneurs
and policy makers global perspectives on the trends in
trade and opportunities for exports and advise on market
strategy through the medium of its detailed Investment
and Business Brief. The Brief also serves as a handy and
useful document for all our Missions abroad in equipping
them with the latest developments in the Indian economy
along with facts and figures relating to our trade and
investments and helps them in their own promotional
activities.
The Division’s website <www.indiainbusiness.nic.in>
which is devoted exclusively for the economic and
commercial aspects of India’s diplomacy is being revamped
with new features and hyperlinks with the aim of providing
comprehensive and latest information for global investors
and businessmen about the opportunities in India. The
website has emerged as a useful and reliable source of
information which is evident from the number of business
and investments related queries received by the Division.

12

concerning reforms and liberalisation of the economy and
simplifying of investment procedures and expeditiously
processed proposals relating to opening of Liaison/Branch
offices by foreign companies in India.
The Division took active part in Governmental/nonGovernmental meetings on Energy issues and through its
network of Missions facilitated the work of Indian
companies.
The Division interacted with Export Promotion Councils,
Trade and Industry bodies, such as CII, FICCI,
NASSCOM, ASSOCHAM, etc., Department of
Commerce and DIPP for promotion of India’s exports and
investment initiatives. Periodicals, Journals and other
relevant information brought out by these organizations
and concerned Government agencies were regularly
circulated to Indian Missions abroad to keep them abreast
of various developments in knowledge based industries
such as IT, Biotechnology and Pharmaceuticals.
As part of its efforts to enhance greater air-connectivity
between India and different regions of the world with a
view to making India as an attractive business and
investment destination, ITP Division actively participated
and made positive contributions in the bilateral civil
aviation talks held with several countries, including, inter
alia, Tanzania, UAE, Singapore, Spain, Egypt and Oman.

In its external publicity, the Division in collaboration with
the XP Division of the Ministry has successfully projected
the image of India as an established economic power with
attractive potential for investment and business through
special supplements, brochures, CD ROMs, films, etc.

As the nodal point for Energy Security in MEA, the
Division was actively involved in the preparation and
organisation of India-Electricity 2006, an International
Exhibition-cum-Conference held in New Delhi in May
2006, showcasing the energy sector of the country. A
Representative of the Division was also part of the Indian
delegation led by the Union Minister for Power that visited
USA and Canada in April/May 2006 for promoting the
above Exhibition-cum-Conference.

The Division participated and contributed actively in the
meetings of Foreign Investment Promotion Board, Reserve
Bank of India, Board of Trade and other policy meetings

As part of the overall drive to promote FDI inflows into
India, the Division has been actively associated with the
Sub-Group on Investment from West Asian countries

129

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

established by the Department of Economic Affairs. A
key mandate of the Sub-Group, among other areas, is to
study the opportunities for investments by West Asian
countries in India. In this connection, a delegation of the
Sub-Group, including a Representative from this Division
visited UAE and Saudi Arabia from 15-19 November
2006. The visit was successful as it provided the
opportunity for one-to-one interaction with potential
investors. Areas of Interest indicated by them for equity
investment, included real estate, power and fertilizer.
The Division actively pursued the policy of using Lines of
Credit on concessional terms for promotion of India’s

political, economic and commercial interests. During the
period April-November 2006, agreements on LoCs
amounting to US$ 1200 million approx. have been
approved for disbursal. The LoCs have helped Indian
companies to obtain project contracts and orders for
supply of goods and services in number of countries in
Africa, Asia and Latin America.
The ITP Division provided financial assistance to the
Indian Council for Research on International Economic
Relations (ICRIER), New Delhi for organizing a Seminar
on “Indo-US Knowledge Initiative in Agriculture” held
in New Delhi on 16 January 2007.

130

Back to Contents

Policy Planning and Research

The Policy Planning and Research Division serves as a
nodal point for interaction with the University Grants
Commission (UGC) and its affiliates and the Area Study
Centres (ASC) located in various universities and
specializing in research on various regions of the world.
The Division extended financial assistance to various
academic institutions/think-tanks located in different
parts of the country for holding conferences, seminars,
preparation of research papers, exchange of scholars and
support for Track-II programmes on issues related to India’s
external relations and security. A list of seminars/
conferences/meetings/study projects organized/
undertaken by institutions/NGOs partly funded by the
Policy Planning & Research Division is given at AppendixXIII.
A Foreign Policy Coordinating Committee (FPCC) has
been constituted in the Ministry. The Committee will
function under the supervision of EAM and PP&R
Division, and will provide the Secretariat for FPCC. FPCC
will work on themes such as India’s relations with its
neighbours, global issues, relations with major regions and
countries, economic issues, and case studies/historical
research. The FPCC met twice during 2006 and
deliberated on important foreign policy issues. A
computerized database of experts and institutions
specializing in policy research and analyses has already
been developed by the PPR Division and is updated on
regular basis.

13

The Policy Planning and Research Division continued
issuing Monthly Summary for the Cabinet. This covers
the broad spectrum of India’s relations with different
countries of the world during the month.
The Research Section of the Division continued to edit
and publish the Annual Report of the Ministry. The
Report serves as a compendium of India’s interaction with
the rest of the world in the political, economic, and
cultural fields, including the views of the government on
various facts of international relations.
The Section also remained seized of the depiction of
India’s international boundaries in foreign publications.
Cases of incorrect depiction were taken up with the
concerned governments or the publisher through the
Indian Mission abroad for necessary corrective measures.
The Division was also responsible for scrutinizing the
depiction of India’s external boundaries in the foreign
publications imported into the country, and offered its
advice to the Ministries dealing with the matter. It
coordinated the supply of map- sheets to various
Government and semi-Government agencies for use in
their official work with the Survey of India and the
Ministry of Defence. The Research Section dealt with
requests from research scholars for access to the records
of the Ministry.

131

Back to Contents

Protocol

14

India’s increasing engagement with the international
community has resulted in a large number of visits to India
by foreign dignitaries. This trend has amplified
considerably in the past two years during which the
number of incoming VVIP/VIP visits has almost doubled.
A similar trend has emerged in terms of increase in Foreign
Resident Diplomatic Missions in Delhi. Their number has
increased from 116 in 2003 to 130 in 2006. The number
of foreign Representatives of Diplomatic Missions in Delhi
is also increasing with about 150 posts added annually.
USA, Brazil, Australia, Germany, Malaysia, Japan and

Spain have opened their Consulates General in
Hyderabad, Chennai, Bangalore and Mumbai in 2006.
This trend is expected to continue, with the International
community viewing India as an emerging global player.
The Conference Cell organized/assisted 8 Conferences
from 1 April – 5 December 2006. Conference Cell also
assisted the Territorial Division concerned in organizing
the Conference of Indian Heads of Mission from countries
of East and South East Asia from 1-4 September 2006
and India-Myanmar SOM Meeting on 27-28 September
2006.

Visits for 2006
State Visits by Head of State/Government/Vice President and equivalent level
S. No. Dignitary
1.

Dates

Custodian of the two Holy Mosques King Abdullah Bin Abdul Aziz Al-Saud
of Saudi Arabia

January 24-27

2.

H.E. Mr Jacques Chirac, President of the French Republic

February 19-21

3.

H.E. Mr Geroge W Bush, President of USA

March 1-3

4.

The Hon’ble John Howard, PM of Australia

March 5-8

5.

H.E. Begum Khaleda Zia, Prime Minister of Bangladesh

6.

H.E. Mr Hamid Karzai, President of Afghanistan

7.

H.E. Mr Tassos Papadopoulous, President of Cyprus

April 11-16

8.

H.E. Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Amir of Kuwait

June 14-19

9.

H.E. Mr. Emomali Sharifovich Rehmanov, President of Tajikistan

10.

H.E. Mr. Traian Basescu, President of Romania

11.

H.E. Mr. Hu Jintao, President of China

12.

H.M. King Abdullah II Bin Al Hussein, King of Jordan

13.

H.E. Mr. Festus Gontebanye Mogae, President of Botswana

March 20-22
April 9-13

August 6-10
October 22-24
November 20-23
November 30-December 2
December 7-13

Official/Working visits by Head of State/Government/Vice President and equivalent level
1.
The Taoiseach Mr Bertie Ahern, PM of Ireland
January 16-21
2.

H.E. Dr Jan Peter Balkenende, PM of Netherlands
132

January 17-20
Back to Contents

Protocol

3.

H.H. Sheikha Mozah Bint Nasser Al-Missned, First Lady of the State of Qatar

February 6-13

4.

H.E. Mr Matti Vanhanen, Prime Minister of Finland

March 10-15

5.

H.E. Mr Mikhail E Fradkov, Chairman of the Government of Russian Federation
(Prime Minister)

March 16-17

6.

H.E. Mr Abdool Raouf Bundhun, Vice President of Mauritius

May 7-16

7.

H.E. Girija Prasad Koirala, Prime Minister of Nepal

8.

H.E. Mr. Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero, President of Government of Spain [Prime Minister]

9.

H.M. Jigme Singye Wangchuck, King of Bhutan

10.

Crown Prince of Bhutan

11.

Deputy President of South Africa

12.

H.H. the Aga Khan

13

Vice President of Burundi

14.

Crown Prince of Norway

15.

Prime Minister of Belgium

16.

H.E. Mr. Mahinda Rajapakse, President of Sri Lanka

November 25-29

17.

Crown Prince of Bhutan

November 26-30

June 6-9
July 2-5
July 26-31
August 26-31
September 9-13
September 19-23
October 6-10
October 29-November 2
November 2-7

Official visits by Foreign Minister and equivalent level
1.

H.E. Mr Taro Aso, Foreign Minister of Japan

January 3-4

2.

H.E. Mr Lyonpo Khandu Wangchuck, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Bhutan

3.

H.E. Mr Frederick Mitchell, Foreign Minister of the Bahamas

4.

H.E. Dr Carlos Morales Troncoso, Secretary of State for External Relations of the
Dominican Republic

February 16-23

5.

H.R.H. Prince Saud Al-Faisal Bin Abdul Aziz Al-Saud, Foreign Minister of Saudi Arabia

February 21-22

6.

H.E. Mrs Thorgerdur Katrin Gunnarsdottir, Minister of Education & Acting
Foreign Minister of Iceland

January 15-16, 2006
January 22-29

February 26-Mar 3

7.

H.R.H. Prince Saud Al Faisal Bin Abdul Aziz Al Saud, Foreign Minister of Saudi Arabia

February 21-22

8.

H.E. Mr Dai Bingguo, Special Representative on the Boundary Question of PR of China

March 10-14

9.

H.E. Dr Cheikh Tidiane Gadio, Foreign Minister of Senegal

March 22-25

10.

H.E. Dr Artis Pabriks, Foreign Minister of Latvia

March 20-24

11.

H.E. Sheikh Hamad Bin Jassim Bin Jabr Al-Thani, Deputy PM and Foreign Minister of Qatar April 18-21

12.

H.E. Mr Raymond Ramzani Baya, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Democratic Republic of Congo

May 2-7

13.

H.E. Mr Mangala Samaraweera, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Sri Lanka

May 6-9

14.

H.E. Mr Davies Katsonga, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Malawi

133

May 9-14

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

15.

H.E. Mr Joao Bernardo De Miranda, Foreign Minister of Angola

May 9-14

16.

H.E. Mr. Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo Addo, Foreign Minister of Ghana

June 9-11

17.

H.E. Mr. Mohamed Benaissa, Foreign Minister of Morocco

June 25-27

18.

H.E. Ms. Mariam Aladji Boni Diallo, Foreign Minister of Benin

June 26-27

19.

H.E. Dr. Rangin Dadfar Spanta, Foreign Minister of Afghanistan

20.

H.E. Mr. Jorge Enrique Taiana, Foreign Minister of Argentina

21.

H.E. Mr. Francisco Carrion Mena, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Ecuador

July 16-20

22.

H.E. Mr. Ahmed Ben Said Jaffar Foreign Minister of Union of Comoros

July 25-28

23.

Foreign Minister of Ivory Coast

August 3-8

24.

Foreign Minister of Thailand

August 7-9

25.

Foreign Minister of Mauritius

October 5-10

26.

Foreign Minister of Brunei Darussalam

October 10-15

27.

Foreign Minister of Maldives

October 23-28

28.

Foreign Minister of Congo

October 25-29

29.

H.E. Mr. Marco Hausiku, Foreign Minister of Namibia

October 26-30

30.

H.E. Mr. Sam Kutesa, Foreign Minister of Uganda

31.

Foreign Minister of UK

November 1-9

32.

Foreign Minister of Hungary

November 2-6

33.

Foreign Minister of Nepal

34.

Foreign Minister of Netherlands

35.

Foreign Minister of Iran

November 15-18

36.

Foreign Minister of Russia

November 16-17

37.

Foreign Minister of Fiji

November 20-22

38.

Foreign Minister of Pakistan

November 25-28

39.

Foreign Minister of France

40.

Foreign Minister of Norway

December 13-15

41.

Foreign Minister of Egypt

December 15-17

42.

AU Chairperson Konare

December 19-22

June 29-July 1
July 2-8

October 29-November 2

November 5-11
November 6

November 30-December 1

Private/Transit visit of Heads of State/Government/Vice President and First Ladies and equivalent
level
1.

Transit visit of Vice President of Indonesia (Delhi)

2.

Private visit of the First Lady of Kazakhstan

3.

H.R.H. Princess of Morocco

January 17 & January 22
January 31-February 2

134

Back to Contents

Protocol

4.

Eldest Queen of Bhutan

February 5-15

5.

H.R.H. Prince El Hassan Bin Talal & Princess Sarvath El Hassan

6.

Private Visit of HE Dr Janez Drnovsek, President of Slovenia (Bangalore)

7.

H.E. Mr Gilbert Bukenya, Vice President of Uganda

February 28-March 5

8.

H.E. Mr Francis Albert Rene, Former President of Seychellles

February 27-March 6

9.

Private Visit of HE Mr Gerard Schroeder, Former Chancellor of Germany

10.

Mrs Varshnie Jagdeo, First Lady of Guyana

11.

Private Visit of HH Lalla Latiffa, Queen Mother of Morocco

March 20-28

12

Private visit of HRH Prince of Wales and Duchess Camilla Parker

March 26-31

13

Transit visit of the President of Gabon (Delhi)

14.

Transit visit of Prime Minister of Turkey (Delhi)

15.

Private visit of Ms Aisha Gaddahfi, Daughter of Libyan Leader Muammar Gaddhafi

16.

Transit visit of HE Mr Lyonpo Sangay Ngedup, PM of Bhutan – Delhi

17.

Prime Minister of Tanzania

18.

Crown Prince of Thailand (Mumbai)

19.

King of Malaysia

20.

Czech President (Mumbai)

21.

Royal Thai Princes

October 10-13

22.

President of Slovak

October 18

23.

Duke of York

24.

President of Rwanda

November 1-2

25.

President of Uganda

November 2-3

26.

President of Madagascar

November 4-5

27.

Royal Thai Princes

28.

Queen of Belgium

November 24-December 3

29.

Former US President Bill Clinton

November 29-December 1

30.

President of Cyprus

February 1-6, 2006
February 16-18

March 10-11
March 5-16

May 3-7
May 12
May 16-22
June 2-3 & June 6
September 1
September 10
September 20-22
October 5

October 20-November 4

November 8-11

December 4 & 9

Visits abroad of President/Vice President/Prime Minister of India
1.

Vice President’s visit to Dubai (UAE) for funeral of Prime Minister of UAE

January 5-6

2.

President’s visit to Singapore, Philippines and Republic of Korea

3.

President visit to Myanmar and Mauritius

March 8-14

4.

Prime Minister’s visit to Germany and Uzebekistan

April 22-26

5.

Prime Minister’s visit to St. Petersburg

January 31-February 9

July 16-18

135

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

6.

Prime Minister’s visit to Brazil

September 10-14

7.

Prime Minister’s visit to Cuba

September 14-18

8.

Prime Minister’s visit to UK

9.

Vice President’s visit to Guyana and Trinidad & Tobago

10.

PM’s visit to Japan

October 9-14
November 5-13
December 13-16

List of Foreign Ambassadors/High Commissioners who Left India during the period 01.04.2006 to
30.11.2006 on Completion of Assignment
Name

Date of Departure

H.E.Mr.Benjamin Ruiz
Ambassador of Peru

01.04.2006

H.E.Mr.Jaromir Novotny
Ambassador of Czech Republic

05.04.2006

H.E.Mr.Dr.Oleh Semenets
Ambassador of Ukraine

30.04.2006

H.E.Mr. Tran Trong Khanh
Ambassador of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam

22.05.2005

H.E.Mrs. U.C.Dwarka Canabady
High Commissioner of the Republic of Mauritius

31.05.2006

H.E. Mr. Karna Dhoj Aadhikary
Ambassador of Royal Nepal

05.06.2006

H.E.Mr.Walid A. NASR
Ambassador of Lebanon

07.07.2006

H.E.Mr. Michael Sternberg
Ambassador of the Royal Danish Embassy

10.07.2006

H.E.Ms. Lucie Edwards
High Commissioner of Canada

02.08.2006

H.E.Mr. Elyes Kasri
Ambassador of Tunisia

20.08.2006

H.E.Dr. Kheir Eldin A. Latif Mohamed
Ambassador of the Arab Republic of Egypt

31.08.2006

H.E.Mrs. Igna Erikson Fogh
Ambassador of Sweden

10.09.2006

H.E. Dr. Abdalmahmood Abdalhaleem Mohammad
Ambassador of the Republic of Sudan

12.09.2006

H.E.Mr. See Chak Mun
High Commissioner of the Republic of Singapore

28.09.2006

H.E.Mr. Donnilo Anwar
Ambassador of the Republic of Indonesia

30.09.2006

H.E.Mr. Mr.Sturla Sigurjonsson
Ambassador of Iceland

12.10.2006

136

Back to Contents

Protocol

H.E.A.G.Abdullahi, mni
High Commissioner of the Federal Republic of Nigeria

12.11.2006

H.E.Mr. Aziz Ahmed Khan
High Commissioner for the Islamic Republic of Pakistan

30.11.2006

List of Foreign Ambassadors/High Commissioners WHO Presented their Credentials during the
period 01.04.2006 to 30.11.2006
Name

Presentation of Credentials

H.E.Mr. Antonio Fwaminy Dacosta
Ambassador of the Republic of Angola

05.04.2006

H.E.Dr. Noureddine Bardad-Daiidj Ambassador of the People’s Democratic
Republic of Algeria

05.04.2006

H.E.Mr. Mustapha Ahmed Mohamed Noman
Ambassador of the Republic of Yemen

05.04.2006

H.E.Mr. Abdulla Ebrahim A.Alzoy Al Shehhi
Ambassador of the United Arab Emirates

05.04.2006

H.E.Mr. Halil Akinci
Ambassador of the Republic of Turkey

05.04.2006

H.E.Mr. Sturla Sigurjonsson
Ambassador of the Republic of Iceland

05.04.2006

H.E.Mr. John Bentum- William
High Commissioner of the Republic of Ghana

05.04.2006

H.E.Mr.Bernd Mutzelburg
Ambassador of the Federal Republic of Germany

05.04.2006

H.E. Mr. Carlos Abad
Ambassador of the Republic of Ecuador

19.06.2006

H.E. Ms. Gennet Zewide
Ambassador of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia

19.06.2006

H.E.Mr. Salohiddin Nasriddinov
Ambassador of the Republic of Tajikistan

19.06.2006

H.E. Mr. Kemal Muftic
Ambassador of Bosnia & Herzegovina

19.06.2006

H.E. Mrs. Irina A. Orolbaeva
Ambassador of the Kyrgyz Republic

19.06.2006

H.E. Mr. Frank Hans Dannenberg
Ambassador of Dominican Republic

19.06.2006

H.E. Mr. Mookhesswur Chonee
High Commissioner of the Republic of Mauritius

19.06.2006

H.E.Mr. Vu Quang Diem
Ambassador of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam

12.09.2006

137

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006 - 2007

H.E.Mr.Saydakmal S.Saydaminov
Ambassador of the Republic of Uzbekistan

12.09.2006

H.E.Mr. David Malone
High Commissioner of Canada

12.09.2006

H.E.Mr. Ole Lonsmann Poulsen
Ambassador of Denmark

12.09.2006

H.E. Dr. Mohamed Abd El Hamid Higazy
Ambassador of the Arab Republic of Egypt

12.09.2006

H.E.Mr. Calvin Eu Mun Hoo
High Commissioner of Singapore

13.11.2006

H.E.Mr. Tarcisiuss Adrian Eri
High Commissioner of the Papua New Guinea

13.11.2006

H.E. Dr.Hynek Kmonicek
Ambassador of the Czech Republic

13.11.2006

H.E.Dr. Sayed Makhdoom Raheen
Ambassador of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan

13.11.2006

H.E. Ms. Dorcas Kgosietsile.
High Commissioner of Botswana

13.11.2006

H.E.Mr. Mpumelelo Joseph Ndumiso Hlophe
High Commissioner of the Kingdom of Swaziland

13.11.2006

The following countries opened their resident missions in Delhi during the period 1/4/2006 to
30/11/2006
1

Dominican Republic

Embassy

01.05.2006

2

Papua New Guinea

High Commission

10.10.2006

3

Republic of Botswana

High Commission

02.11.2006

List of Conferences organised/assisted by the Conterence Cell (from 01.04.2006 to 05.12.2006)
1.

11th BIMSTEC Senior Officials Meeting SOM, New Delhi, 8 August 2006.

2.

9th BIMSTEC Ministerial Meeting, New Delhi, 9 August 2006.

3.

Second Meeting of the BIMSTEC Sub-Group on Legal and Law Enforcement Issues, New Delhi, 4-6 September
2006.

4.

First Meeting of the Organizing Committee for the SAARC Car Rally, New Delhi, 18-19 September 2006.

5.

First Annual Meeting of the Immigration Authority of the SAARC Members States, New Delhi, 20 September
2006.

6.

10th ASEAN-India Working Group Meeting, New Delhi, 16-17 October 2006.

7.

2nd Regional Economic Cooperation Conference, New Delhi, 18-19 November 2006.

8.

2nd Meeting of the Organizing Committee of the SAARC Car Rally, New Delhi, 30 November-1 December
2006.

138

Back to Contents

Consular, Passport & Visa Services

The Consular, Passport & Visa (CPV) Division through
its Passport Offices all over the country and Consular
Wings in Indian Missions/Posts abroad constitutes the
public face of the Ministry of External Affairs.

Passport Offices
There are presently 31 Passport Offices and 16 Passport
Collection Centres in India. It is proposed to open new
Passport Offices at Amritsar, Dehradun, Raipur, Shimla,
Coimbatore and Madurai in 2007. All Passport Offices
are computerized; and these Passport Offices issue
machine-printed and machine readable passports as per
the guidelines laid down by the International Civil
Aviation Organisation. Grant orders for issue of passport
are generated electronically. All routine passport related
work such as generation of cash, index checking, printing
of passports, addresses and dispatch is computerized and
records are maintained electronically. Passport
applications are being scanned and stored electronically.

Passport Services
There has been a significant increase in the number of
passports issued over the years. Over 40 lakh passports
were issued in 2006 compared to 35.7 lakh passports in
2005. The total revenue generated from all Passport
Offices also increased from Rs 417 crores in 2005 to Rs.
427 crores in 2006. The Ministry has been continually
taking a number of measures to make the passport issuance
system simpler and speedier for the comfort and
convenience of the passport seeking public. Some of these
important steps are delineated as under:
a)
Revised Passport Issuance Guidelines
External Affairs Minister announced a set of revised
passport issuance guidelines at the All India Passport
Officers’ Conference in Chennai on 22 December 2006
for the convenience and benefit of passport applicants.
These new procedures strike a balance between the needs
of security and citizen comfort. The time period for
issuance of passports under the Tatkal category has been

15

reduced from 20 and 10 days to 14 and 7 days respectively.
The re-issuance of passports under the Tatkal scheme will
be done in 3 working days as against 5 days at present
without any extra charges to the applicants. Hitherto, the
identity of applicants was established preponderantly
through police verification prior to issuance of a passport.
This procedure has been cumbersome and time
consuming. The revised rules provide alternative and more
efficient means for establishment of identity. Post-passport
issuance police verification will, however, continue to be
conducted.
b)

Decentralization through District Passport
Cells and Speed Post Centres
With a view to taking the passport issuance and related
services nearer to the doorsteps of the applicants, District
Passport Cells (DPCs) have been opened at the district
level where the office of the District Magistrate/
Superintendent of Police receives passport applications
and after scrutiny and police verification, forwards them
to the concerned Passport Office for issuance of passports.
Currently, there are 463 DPCs in India covering more
than 77 percent of the country. The passport applications
are also received through the network of Speed Post
Centres, which was widened from 220 to 1095 Centres in
September, 2006.
c)
Online Applications
Online submission of passport applications has been
introduced in Mumbai, Chandigarh, Chennai, Bangalore,
Ahmedabad, Malappuram, Lucknow, Pune, New Delhi,
Kolkata, Goa, Bareilly and Patna. It is proposed to
introduce the scheme in other Passport Offices as well in
2007.
Infrastructure
Efforts are being made continually to acquire suitable plots
of land for housing Passport Offices. Suitable plots have
been acquired for Passport Offices in Mumbai,
Visakhapatnam and Guwahati and purchase of land at

139

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

Srinagar, Surat and Thane is under process. New buildings
for Passport Offices at Bangalore, Lucknow and Jaipur
are nearing completion. Construction of building at
Bhubaneswar is likely to commence shortly.
Public Grievance Redressal Mechanism
Steps have been taken to strengthen the public grievance
redressal mechanism in all Passport Offices. Facilitation
Counters and Help Desks have also been set up to assist
applicants and also to attend to grievances/complaints
expeditiously. A public grievance redressal mechanism also
exists in the CPV Division under the close supervision of
the Joint Secretary (CPV) and Chief Passport Officer.

Passport Adalats
Passport Offices have been holding Passport Adalats
periodically to redress the grievances of passport
applicants. These Adalats have been very useful in
disposing of old passport-related cases and also in the
issuance of passports to applicants.

Right to Information Act (RTI)
A Central Public Information Officer and Assistant Public
Information Officers have been appointed to provide
information to applicants under the RTI.

Website
The website of CPV Division www.passport.nic.in, which
was established in 1999 is being updated from time to
time to make it more user-friendly. It has detailed
information on passports, visas, consular matters and PIO
cards. It also has downloadable forms. The main website
provides status enquiry check of passport applications
submitted at Delhi. It is also linked to the status check
on the websites of all the Passport Offices.

Creation of Additional Posts
Approval from the Ministry of Finance for creation of 293
additional posts in various categories was received in
September 2006. The process for filling up these posts in
various Passport Offices has already been set in motion,
which will be completed by March 2007. Another proposal
for creation of 287 posts in Indian Missions/Posts abroad
is presently under consideration of the Ministry of Finance.

Consular Attestation
During January-December, 2006 more than 470,000
documents were attested in the CPV Division, of which
220,000 were commercial documents. This service is
rendered on the same day without any charges and is
prompt and efficient.

Consular Services
There are 115 Indian Missions and 50 Posts abroad in
115 countries. Indian Mission/Posts abroad, which have
been rendering an array of services apart from providing
a constructive mechanism for interacting with members
of Indian communities abroad. They issue passports and
visas, arrange registration of births and deaths of Indians
abroad, handle cases of compensation for death, render
assistance to Indian workers in resolving labour related
issues like payment of salaries, outstanding dues and
disputes between employers and employees.

Tatkal Scheme

Our Missions/Posts also provide consular assistance to
Indians in jails and approach local authorities for
expediting judicial proceedings against the Indians and
repatriating them to India on expiry of their jail terms.
Though at present, there is no provision for rendering
free legal assistance to Indian prisoners abroad, the
consular staff members of our Missions/Posts periodically
visit the Indian prisoners in foreign jails to render all
possible consular assistance as and when required.

The “Tatkal Scheme”, which was implemented in 2000
in recognition of the genuine needs of some passport
applicants for urgent issue of passports has been further
liberalized recently. Passports are issued out-of-turn to
eligible applicants on post police verification basis
provided such cases are certified by an officer not below
the rank of Under Secretary to the Government of India
or his equivalent in the State Governments/Armed Forces.

Indian Embassies in Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia and UAE in the Gulf region have introduced, with
effect from April 2006, provision of free legal aid for two
hours twice a week to Indian workers for resolving their
labor related problems. Indian Missions in Kuwait, Oman,
Qatar, and Saudi Arabia have also set up, as a welfare
measure, Indian Citizen Welfare Funds to provide financial
assistance to Indians in distress and medical assistance to

140

Back to Contents

Consular, Passport & Visa Services

needy Indians, to arrange air tickets for repatriation of
stranded Indians to India and temporary accommodation
for stranded housemaids and medical assistance to
destitute Indians.

Issuance of Visas
Over the years, the procedure for grant of visas by our
Missions and Posts has been simplified. Most Missions and
Posts grant visas either across the counter on the same
day or at the most within 48 hours. Our Missions/Posts
issued over 57 lakhs visas during 2006, compared to 55.5
lakhs visas in 2005.

Visas Waiver Agreement for Diplomats
and Officials
Visa waiver agreements with Mongolia and Mexico came
into force in February 2006, thereby increasing the number
of such countries to 35. Efforts are being made to sign
such agreements with other countries.

Issuance of Diplomatic and Official
Passports
The CPV Division issued 2444 diplomatic and 25, 265
official passports in 2006 compared to 1632 and 18, 560
passports issued in 2005.

Computerization of Missions/Posts
abroad
This Ministry has classified Missions/Posts abroad into two
groups, the first group consists of 26 Missions/Posts
providing a large volume of passport and visa services and
the second group comprises 120 Missions/Posts providing
a smaller volume of passport and visa services. The process
of computerization of Passport/Visa section has been
successfully completed in London, New York, Islamabad,
Kuwait, Dubai, Abu Dhabi, Muscat, Dhaka, Riyadh,
Madrid, Paris, Singapore and Colombo. The process of
computerization in the remaining Missions/Posts would
be completed by March 2007. In the second group, which
consists of 120 Missions/Posts, visa services in 67 Mission/
Posts have already been computerized. This Ministry
expects to complete computerization of remaining
Missions/Posts by March 2007.

New Projects
The Ministry has embarked on several projects with a view

to modernizing and upgrading the passport/visa issuance
system. These are as follows:
(i)
Centralized Printing of Passports
Currently all 31 Passport Offices in India and a few
Missions/Posts abroad are issuing Machine Readable
Passports (MRPs) as per the standards laid down by the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). It is
proposed to issue passports centrally from the CPV
Division in respect of other Missions/Posts as it would be
cost effective. A pilot project is expected to be launched
in this regard by February 2007.
(ii) Issuance of e-Passports
In accordance with ICAO guidelines it is proposed to issue
e-passports or bio-metric passports in India. A Technical
Committee has been constituted to finalise specifications
of the e-passports and it is expected to submit its report
shortly. It has been decided to launch a pilot project for
issuing e-passports to all diplomats and officials by the
end of 2007.
(iii) NISG Work Study
The National Institute of Smart Government (NISG) has
been entrusted with task of undertaking a time-bound
work to study on the passport issuance system, including
its IT aspects and suggest ways and means towards setting
up of a model passport office in the future. The study is to
be completed by April 2007.
(iv) Outsourcing of Visa Work
Outsourcing of visa work was undertaken in Dhaka in
2005. A proposal to outsource visa work for Indian
Mission/Posts in the UK is under consideration of the
Ministry. Another 30 Mission/Posts in Europe, USA,
Canada, etc., have been authorized to outsource visa
services. This will help us to tide over the problems of
space, security, manpower constraints, etc. in several
Missions/Posts abroad.

Consular Agreements
During 2006, bilateral treaties on extradition and mutual
legal assistance were negotiated with several countries to
put in place a legal and institutional mechanism to combat
organized crime, international terrorism and drug
trafficking and to respond to the growing international
dimensions of financial and other crimes.

141

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

An MoU to combat organized crime was signed in January
2006 with Saudi Arabia. A Mutual Legal Assistance
(MLAT) Treaty in Criminal Matters was singed with Spain
in June, 2006. MLATs in Criminal Matters also came into
force with Belarus and Mauritius in 2006.
During the year an Indian delegation visited Mexico to
negotiate Treaties on Extradition and Mutual Legal
Assistance in Criminal Matters, and finalized and initialled
the draft Extradition Treaty between the two countries.
A delegation from Egypt visited India to negotiate the
Extradition Treaty and Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty
in Criminal Matters.

Cases and Legal Assistance
The Ministry actively pursues requests for extradition and
legal assistance from foreign Governments both for
criminal and civil/commercial offences, which also include
financial matters. The requests for extradition emanate

from our obligations under the Extradition Treaties or
Extradition Arrangements entered into with various
countries. During the year 2006, five extradition requests
received from various investigating agencies were
forwarded to the Foreign Governments. During the same
period, 2 persons (Kosaraju Venketshwar Rao from
Thailand and Govind Prasad Srivastava from Belgium)
were extradited to India. During the year, 24 extradition
requests were received from foreign countries. The
Government of India received 93 requests for legal
assistance in criminal/civil and commercial matters. The
Government of India forwarded 39 requests for legal
assistance in criminal matters to foreign countries. The
Government of India also received approximately 2500
warrants/summons/ notices and other judicial documents
from the judicial Authorities/State Governments/
Investigating agencies in India for services/execution on
persons residing abroad.

142

Back to Contents

Administration and Establishment

Administration

Pranab Mukherjee assumed the charge of the Ministry
of External Affairs on 25 October 2006 following the
relinquishment of additional charge by the Prime Minister.
The External Affairs Minister is assisted by two Ministers
of State, E. Ahamed and Anand Sharma. Shivshankar
Menon assumed charge as Foreign Secretary on 1 October
2006, following the retirement of Shyam Saran.
Effective pursuance of India’s foreign policy objectives
necessitates greater Indian diplomatic presence abroad.
Towards this goal, it was decided to open new Missions /
Posts in Kinshasa (Democratic Republic of Congo),
Melbourne (Australia), Ljubljana (Slovenia), Juba
(Sudan), Phuentsholing (Bhutan) and Songkhla
(Thailand).
A critical component in the effective functioning of Indian
Missions / Posts abroad is the locally recruited staff. To
enhance the attractiveness of working in Indian Missions
abroad, and to suitably adjust the pay scales on account
of increase in the cost of living, the Ministry implemented
a comprehensive review of pay scales for locally recruited
staff, under the scheme known as the Global Cluster
Scheme. Consequently, revision in pay scales was
implemented in the first phase of this exercise in 31
Missions / Posts abroad.
As part of continuing efforts to streamline the
administrative machinery of the Ministry, a comprehensive
review of the rules and regulations was carried out, leading
to greater decentralization of decision making. In
particular, greater powers were devolved to Missions in a
number of areas, including financial powers, rules on
Home Leave Fares and Transfer Passages, authorizing
language classes, and utilization of Children Education
Allowance. Monetary limits on delegated powers and
some entitlements, which were no longer commensurate
with prevailing costs, were reviewed. An updated CDROM version of the Rules was brought out, with enhanced
features, for easy access and reference.

16

Despite a severe shortage in human resources on account
of reduction of posts, Ministry fully implemented the
austerity measures of the Government with regard to
abolition of posts and held the Screening Committee
meeting for Optimization of Direct Recruitment. In
addition, tenures at all family stations were increased to a
uniform three years in order to reduce transfer related
expenditure.
To ensure the motivation levels of personnel remain high,
all Departmental Promotion Committee meetings were
held on time. Regular meetings of the Joint Consultative
Committee were also held. A major challenge was to make
the optimum use of sanctioned strength. For this purpose,
renewed efforts were made to fill up all backlog vacancies
in the reserved categories as part of the Special Drive of
the Government. Indents for fresh recruitment were
placed on time and review of deployment of manpower at
all levels was conducted periodically.
The current strength of the Ministry is 3514. Details are
given in Appendix I. These personnel are deployed in
India and in 166 Missions / Posts abroad. This includes
officials from the Indian Foreign Service (IFS), Indian
Foreign Service, Branch ‘B’ (IFS ‘B’), Interpreters Cadre,
Legal and Treaties Cadre and the Library Cadre, but
excludes Group ‘D’ and ex-cadre posts.
Recruitment made to various groups in the Ministry from
1 April-12 January 2006 through Direct Recruitment
(DR), Departmental Promotion (DP) and Limited
Departmental Examinations (LDE), including against
reserved vacancies, are given in the table at Appendix II.
The table at Appendix III gives details of the language
proficiency of officers of the Ministry.
Gender Issue
Gender equality has been a key element of the Ministry’s
overall policy. In keeping with this, equal opportunities
are provided to women officers to take up important
responsibilities.

143

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

Presently, there are 5 women officers at Secretary level, 6
women officers at Additional Secretary level and 32
women officers at Joint Secretary level. A total of 21
women officers are currently posted as Ambassador / High
Commissioner / Permanent Representative / Consul
General. The present distribution of women officers
among the various cadres in the Ministry of External
Affairs is at Appendix XVII.
Persons with Disability
Ensuring adequate opportunity to persons with disability
and to have suitable representation of persons with
disability among its personnel is an important objective
of the Ministry. Towards this goal, the Ministry has
identified posts suitable for appointment of persons with
disability, including the Indian Foreign Service and the
first officer with disability was recruited in the 2006 batch
of the IFS. In all, the Ministry has 37 persons with disability
in various grades and cadres.

Welfare
Welfare Division deals with all matters relating to general
welfare of serving officers and members of staff of the
Ministry and in Missions abroad. Specifically this includes
giving of emergency first aid, transmission of telegraphic
messages in cases of deceased personnel.
Educational Matters
Welfare Section facilitates admission of MEA children in
Kendriya Vidyalayas against 60 seats allotted to this
Ministry by Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan. Welfare
Section has also assisted children of the officials of the
Ministry at Headquarters in securing admissions in
colleges. Also Welfare Section has processed applications
for admission in Medical/Engineering Courses. In 20052006, students were selected from about 40 applications
for admission to Medical Degree courses and from 85
applications 40 children were accorded admission in
engineering courses. This year Welfare Section succeeded
in getting 62 seats in addition to normal quota of 17 seats.
Four applicants were accorded admission to Diploma
Courses against 10 Diploma seats.
Staff Benefit Fund
Welfare Division operates a Staff Benefit Fund formed
over the years by contributions from officers and members
of staff of the Ministry. This is mainly used to give financial

assistance of Rs. 6000/- per death case to meet the funeral
expenses in the case of death of members of staff of MEA.
On the recommendation of Welfare Section External
Affairs Spouses Association (EASA) presented cheques
amounting Rs.20, 000 to each dependents of deceased
employees of the Ministry of External Affairs.
Compassionate Appointment
Whenever a member of the staff passes away, Welfare
Division examines the financial status of the surviving
family members and examines if spouse or any children of
the deceased person is educationally qualified to be
recruited in any Group’C’ or Group’D’ posts. A list of such
persons is maintained in the Welfare Division strictly on
the basis of financial position of the family. Eight
dependents were employed as LDC’s in the Ministry on
compassionate grounds, during the year 2006.
Grant In-Aid
Welfare Section controls Grant in-Aid to all Indian
Missions abroad and to all Regional Passport Offices in
India for recreation facilities and sports activities. The
Division also arranges and financially supports interMinistry sports activities.
Family Disputes
Though rare, Welfare Section extends its help in
settlement of family disputes by listening to their
grievances, differences, complaints and consoling them
to continue a reasonably happy family life.
Flag Days
Welfare Section arranged for celebration of different Flag
Days like Red Cross Day, Communal Harmony Day,
Armed Forces Flag Day and collected funds for these
organizations.
Canteens
Welfare Section administered Departmental Canteens
located in Akbar Bhavan and Patiala House. As usual
the canteens provided quality products and professional
services to the officers and staff of the Ministry. In addition,
the canteens were also able to provide excellent service
to visiting Diplomatic Corps; international visitors and
VIPs. To further augment and improve canteen services,
a canteen under Indian Railway Catering and Tourism
Corporation Ltd, (IRCTC) has also been started in South
Block from November, 2006.

144

Back to Contents

Administration and Establishment

General
As and when officers and members of the staff return from
Missions to Headquarters, they face difficulties in getting
admissions in various public/private schools, gas
connection, ration card, and telephone connections.
Welfare Section issued letters to schools, MTNL, etc.
which helped them in getting these domestic facilities
faster.

Establishment
The charge of the Establishment Division includes fixation
of allowances abroad, purchase and maintenance of
furniture and equipment, leasing and maintenances of
property both in India and abroad, purchase and
maintenance of official cars abroad, supply of Objects
d’Art items, etc.
With regard to the fixation of allowances abroad, the 9th
Annual Review of the Indexation scheme was carried out
by a joint team from the Ministries of External Affairs
and Finance from 9-13 September 2006. The team visited
New York and carried out market survey and also held
extensive discussions with senior officials dealing with
allowances at the International Civil Services Commission
(ICSC) of UN. The Ministry of External Affairs is also
considering, in consultation with Ministry of Finance
(MoF), a comprehensive proposal for the rationalization
of the system of Representational Grant taking into
account the growing global profile of India as well as the
changing cost of living.
Special efforts were made for better maintenance of
Ministry’s premises in South Block and Akbar Bhawan.
Besides upgrading common facilities, the Ministry is
working on a programme to introduce modular sitting
arrangement in various Division/Sections for more
efficient space utilization. Steps have been taken for
upgrading and improving the existing fire fighting
infrastructure in South Block and Akbar Bhawan. A new
Cafeteria in South Block was opened in November, 2006
External Affairs Hostels at K.G. Marg and Gole Market
are being given a facelift. Steps are being taken to improve
the occupancy by effectively addressing the problem of
the security, communication and water supply in the
Ministry of External Affairs’ Housing complex in Dwarka.
The Committee for selection of art objects for Missions/
Posts abroad met on as many as three occasions during

2006, besides several visits to reputed art galleries/ emporia
for identifying suitable art objects. The Committee also
undertook visits to Ahmedabad and Baroda for
establishing direct contacts with regional producers /
suppliers of art work. The requirements of a majority of
the Mission/Posts were met.
The work on the project for renovation of Jinnah House,
Mumbai, the site for the SAARC Sub-Regional Cultural
Centre has been initiated.
The Ministry’s proposal for upgrading the Delegation of
Financial Powers of Heads of Mission/Post abroad for
bringing them in line with the present situation was
approved by MoF. Separately, a number of proposals were
initiated for streamlining the procedures, such as plinth
area norms for leasing of property abroad, provision of
furniture and equipment at the residences of Heads of
Mission/Post, and simplification of procedure for
acquisition of official cars.

Projects Division
Projects Division is responsible for purchase of built-up
properties and construction of properties in India and
abroad for the use of Ministry of External Affairs. Proposals
relating to repairs/renovation of Government owned
properties in stations abroad are also handled by the
Projects Division. As of now, Government owns 78
Chancery Buildings, 84 residences for Heads of Missions/
Posts and 610 residences for officers/staff abroad. Currently
37 construction projects including major renovation/redevelopment projects are at different stages of
implementation.
Amongst projects abroad, construction was started in the
year 2006 for the Indian Embassy Complex in Muscat and
the Luoyong Buddhist Temple in China. Renovation work
is in progress at the residence of the Permanent
Representative of India in Geneva and in three
Government-owned properties in Karachi.
Construction projects in Abuja, Beijing, Kathmandu,
Warsaw, Brasilia and Kabul are at tendering stage. The
re-development projects in Singapore, London and Tokyo
are also at tendering stage. For the Bangkok Embassy
Residence and Indian Cultural Centre project, a
Consultant has been selected.
Built-up properties have been purchased for Embassy

145

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

Residence in Caracas and for Chancery in Buenos Aires
in the current financial year. A plot of vacant land
adjacent to government owned Embassy Residence in
Maputo has also been acquired. The Ministry is making
vigorous efforts to acquire built-up properties in highrental stations. Major proposals under process for purchase
of built-up properties include a Cultural Centre in
Washington and Embassy Residences in Buenos Aires and
Minsk. In addition, a number of purchase proposals from
different Indian missions/posts are also under
consideration.
Amongst projects in India, the ground breaking ceremony
for the prestigious Jawaharlal Nehru Bhavan project was
performed by the Minister of External Affairs on 14
November 2006. The foundation stone for the
Chanakyapuri Residential Complex for officers of the
Ministry of External Affairs was laid by the Minister of
State for External Affairs on 14 August 2006. The
construction on both these projects has commenced.
Construction work on the Foreign Service Institute
Complex in New Delhi is nearing completion and the
Institute has already started functioning from the new
premises. Other projects at various stages of
implementation include the Africa House project for
Indian Council of Cultural Relations in New Delhi, the
AALCO Complex being built in New Delhi for the Asian

African Legal Consultative Organization, Videsh Bhawan,
Kolkata, ICCR Cultural Centre, Kolkata, and a Hostel
project at Canning Lane, New Delhi.
In the current financial year, proposals are being processed
for purchase of land for offices of the Passport Offices at
Srinagar, Jalandhar and Surat.
An allocation of Rs. 160 crores has been made under
Capital Outlay during 2006-07. Budget estimates for 200708 have been kept at Rs. 621.06 crores, to provide for a
number of projects expected to go into construction phase
in the next financial year.

e-Governance and IT
Computerisation of passport and visa issuance system was
completed in Missions at Riyadh, Kuwait, Oman,
Singapore, Bangkok, Paris and Madrid. Outsourcing of
visa application process at HCI Dhaka and AHCI
Chittagong was also completed this year. Computerisation
of passport and visa issuance system in Missions at Doha,
Bahrain, Toronto, Kuala Lumpur, Birmingham, Jeddah and
Colombo is underway.
Separately, visa issuance system in 67 Missions and Posts
was computerized. Work on facilitating printing of
Machine Readable Passports by Missions and Posts is
underway.

146

Back to Contents

Coordination

The Coordination Division consists of three wings, viz.,
Parliament Section, Coordination Section and Education
Section.

Parliament Section
The Coordination Division is designated as the nodal
point of the Ministry of External Affairs for all work
relating to Parliament including questions-answers,
assurances, debates on foreign relations and laying of
reports on the Table of both Houses of Parliament. The
Division also has the responsibility to organize the
meetings of the Consultative Committee on External
Affairs, and coordinate the work relating to the
Parliamentary Standing Committee on External Affairs,
and other Parliamentary Committees with regard to the
matters relating to the Ministry of External Affairs.

17

Posts abroad was also undertaken by the Coordination
Division; pledges were administered to the officials, both
at Headquarters and in our Missions abroad.
The Section also examines the requests for grant of no
objection for holding international conferences, seminars,
workshop, grant of Amateur W/T Licence under the
Indian Telegraph Act 1885, grant in aid to Indo-foreign
cultural friendship and cultural societies located in foreign
countries. The Section also handles the work relating to
grant of diplomatic clearances for non-scheduled flights,
visits by foreign naval ships and vessels.
The Coordination Section issued revised guidelines for
provision of courtesies by Indian Missions/Posts abroad
to visiting Indian dignitaries, delegations and officials. The
Section provided useful inputs to the Indian Olympic
Association (IOA) and the Ministry of Youth and Sports

Coordination Section

to seek support of the Asian countries for India’s bid to

The Coordination Section processes all proposals for grant
of no objection from the political angle for the foreign
visits of Governors, Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Deputy
Chairperson of Rajya Sabha, Union Ministers, Ministers
in the State Governments, Members of Parliament,
Members of State Legislative Assemblies, members of the
judiciary, government officials, etc.
During the year, the Coordination Section also processed
a large number of approvals for participation of various
Indian sportsmen and sports teams in the international
events abroad and foreign sports persons in India.
The Section coordinates the work relating to grant of
Padma Awards to foreign nationals. The nominations are
obtained by the Coordination Division from Indian
Missions abroad and the recommendations of the Ministry
conveyed to the competent authorities of the Government
of India. Observance of the Anti-Terrorism Day (21 May),
Sadbhavana Diwas (20 August) and Quami Ekta Week/
Diwas (19-25 November) in the Ministry and Missions/

host the XVII Asian Games in Delhi in 2014. The Section
also issued the guidelines for twinning of states in India
with the provinces of foreign countries. The Coordination
Section assisted the Inter-State Council Secretariat,
Ministry of Home Affairs, in the preparatory work for the
4th International Conference on Federalism, which is
scheduled to be held in New Delhi in November 2007.
The Coordination Section represented and gave the input
of the Ministry at a number of inter-ministerial meetings
on various issues. Similarly, the Coordination Section
collated inputs from various Divisions of the Ministry in
preparation of documents, notes and briefs on important
subjects.

Education Section
The Education Section deals with the selection,
nomination and admission of foreign self-financing
students from 63 friendly, neighbouring, and developing
countries against reserved seats in the MBBS/BDS/PG/

147

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

BE/B.Pharma and diploma courses in various institutions
in India. It also processes the cases of political clearance
of foreign students seeking admission to the Graduate and
Post- Graduate courses in Engineering, Medicine,
Management and other technical and professional courses
including elective training/internship in various medical
institutions and research courses. For the above work,
the Section liaises with a number of institutions, agencies
and Ministries/Departments of Government of India.

During the academic year 2006-07, Education Cell
received and processed 122 and 77 applications for
admission to the MBBS/BDS and B.E/B.Pharma courses
respectively. In addition, during the period from January
- November 2006, 900 applicants were granted no
objection from the political angle to pursue various courses
in India.

148

Back to Contents

Right to Information

The Right to Information Act 2005 required the setting
up of a practical regime of right to information for citizens
to secure access to information under the control of public
authorities, in order to promote transparency and
accountability in the working of every public authority in
the country. Amongst other provisions of this Act, every
public authority shall maintain all its records duly
catalogued and indexed in a manner and form which
facilitates the right to information under this Act and
ensure that all records that are appropriate to be
computerized are, within a reasonable time and subject
to availability of resources, computerized and connected
through a network of different systems all over the country
so that access to such records is facilitated. In order to
give effect to this Act in the Ministry of External Affairs,
a new Division called Right to Information Division (RTI)
was created with effect from October 2005.

18

As per the mandate of the Act, a comprehensive list of
information has been put online under the title “Basic
Information Related to MEA”. The list covers all aspects
of the Ministry, its structure, allocated business, functions,
decision making process, cadre management, and details
of subsidy programmes with list of beneficiaries. Particulars
of facilities available to the citizens for information
including names and address of public information officers
(as per article 4(1)(b)(xvi) of RTI Act 2005) as well as
that of the Chief Appellate Authority (under Sec 19(1)
of RTI Act 2005) for the Ministry, Indian Council for
Cultural Relations, Indian Council of World Affairs and
Central Passport Offices can be accessed on the website
of the Ministry, viz. www.mea.gov.in. Some of the
applications which do not pertain to this Ministry were
transferred to the appropriate Public Authority.

The RTI Division is headed by a Joint Secretary level
officer, who is also the Central Public Information Officer.

149

Back to Contents

19

External Publicity

The External Publicity Division, as the interface of the
Ministry with the media, continued to project India’s
foreign policy objectives through interaction with both
Indian and international media. The concerns and
viewpoint of the Government on various issues were
actively articulated and widely disseminated through
regular and special press briefings, statements,
backgrounders and postings on MEA website.
The major activities of the Division focused on issues that
included inter alia the Composite Dialogue Process
between India and Pakistan, India’s relations with its
immediate and extended neighbourhood – Bhutan,
Bangladesh, Nepal, Sri Lanka, Afghanistan, Myanmar,
Iran and with major countries like USA, Russia and China.
India-US relations, particularly the consideration of the
Bill on Indo-US Civil Nuclear Cooperation in the US
Congress attracted considerable attention during the year.
India’s perspective on the issue was projected through
several press briefings and statements. India’s views on
terrorism, international peace, security and disarmament
and the progress achieved by India in the fields of
economy, Science and Technology, IT, biotechnology, etc.
were also highlighted. The reforms in the United Nations
were another major area of foreign policy priority for India.
The Ministry actively projected India’s case for the
permanent membership of UNSC, which was universally
recognized.
The visits of Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh to
Germany, Uzbekistan, St. Petersburg (G-8 Summit),
Brazil, Cuba, South Africa, UK, Finland, Japan and
Phillipines (India-ASEAN, and East Asia Summits)
provided excellent opportunities for articulating India’s
stand on various issues. India’s intense engagement with
the international community was also witnessed through
a number of incoming visits, prominent among them being
that of the Chinese President Hu Jintao, Sri Lankan
President Mahinda Rajapakse, Afghan President Hamid
Karzai and Russian President Putin among others. The

Division used the opportunities provided by these visits
to state India’s positions on all important global and
regional issues. The Division arranged joint press
interactions with the visiting dignitaries as also special
briefings by Foreign Secretary and/or other senior officials
both before and during such visits.
Official Spokesperson’s Office
The Official Spokesperson’s office adopted a proactive
approach in expounding India’s foreign policies through
press releases and statements as well as regular media
briefings by the Spokesperson. This was supplemented by
special background briefings by the Foreign Secretary and
other senior officersof the Ministry on significant issues.
Planning and managing media campaigns and developing
strategies to convey the Government of India’s policies
to the media continued to be a critical aspect of the
functioning of the division. During April 2006-January
2007, more than 200 press releases/statements were issued
on various issues of concern. These were circulated to
the media through emails and simultaneously placed on
the Ministry’s website. The use of SMS’s for informing
the media about briefings and updates to the web site
with the use of a web-based platform remains widely
prevalent and has been appreciated by the media.
Interviews with the Prime Minister, External Affairs
Minister, Ministers of State for External Affairs and other
dignitaries were arranged with Indian and international
newspapers and TV organizations.
Website
Ministry’s website continued to serve as a useful publicity
instrument. The press section of the website http://
meaindia.nic.in was updated on a real-time basis by the
Division with the speeches/interviews/statements on
foreign policy by the Prime Minister, Minister(s), press
releases, transcripts of briefings by the official
Spokesperson and other senior officials. The relevant
articles and op-ed pieces from the Indian and international

150

Back to Contents

External Publicity

media were also uploaded on the official website. A new
link was created to mark the Second Regional Economic
Conference on Afghanistan. Separate sub-sections were
created for Prime Minister’s visits and important
developments.
A Hindi version of the website was launched earlier this
year. This initiative of the Ministry was greatly appreciated,
particularly by the Hindi language media. The website is
widely accessed both inside and outside India and is
hyperlinked to the websites of India Missions/Posts abroad
and various Ministries.
Press Facilitation
The Press facilitation work in terms of extending logistical
and liaison support to foreign media delegations
accompanying Heads of State/Government (HOS/G)
visiting India and Indian media delegations accompanying
the President, Vice President and the Prime Minister on
their visits abroad forms an important part of the work of
the Division. During the year, the Division assisted foreign
media delegations and Indian media in connection with
Head of State / Government and Vice President visits
from Afghanistan, Australia, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Bhutan, Botswana, Burundi, China, Cyprus, Finland,
France, Ireland, Jordan, Kuwait, Mauritius, Nepal,
Netherlands, Norway, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Saudi
Arabia, South Korea, Portugal, Spain, Sri Lanka, Tajikistan
and United States of America through issue of media
advisories, press conferences, facilitating access to
ceremonial areas, meetings and providing assistance for
transport and accommodation. Similar support was also
extended for 35 Foreign Minister level visits apart from
other high dignitaries.
All logistical arrangements, including setting up and
operation of media centers fully equipped with facilities
for filing of stories by journalists, media briefings and other
arrangements, were made by the Division enabling Indian
media delegations accompanying the President, Vice
President and Prime Minister during their visits abroad,
to provide timely coverage. These included President’s
visits to Philippines, Mauritius, Myanmar, Singapore, and
South Korea; Vice-President’s visit to Guyana and
Trinidad and Tobago; and Prime Minister’s visits to Brazil,
Cuba, Finland, Germany, Japan, Phillipines, Russia, South
Africa, United Kingdom and Uzbekistan.

Over 300 strong foreign media representatives based in
India were provided necessary facilitation to enable them
to function smoothly through provision of relevant
information on various issues of interest as well as
assistance in matters of credential documents, visas, and
residence permits. Visa extensions and/or accreditation
facilities were extended to about 340 foreign journalists.
Familiarization Visits
Familiarization visits by foreign journalists to India are a
key element of the Division’s efforts to bring about a more
accurate and contemporary depiction of India in the
foreign media as the journalists obtain a unique, first-hand
impression of developments in India’s politics, foreign
policy, economy, culture and Science and Technology. The
Division, based on recommendations of Indian Missions
abroad, continued to organize several such visits to
important institutions and centres of excellence in India.
Meetings for visiting journalists were also organized with
Ministers, senior officials, intellectuals, academicians, and
business representatives. One hundered and two
journalists were hosted on such visits during 2006 with a
special focus on India’s neighbours and new EU countries.
These included senior journalists and editors from
Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Brazil, Cambodia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Israel, Kazakhstan, Kyrgystan, Nepal,
Pakistan, Portugal, Russia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and Vietnam.
Dissemination of Indian foreign policy and other
areas of interest
This Division in collaboration with Foreign Service
Institute organizes a “Diplomatic Correspondents Course”
for foreign journalists based in India and Indian journalists
covering world affairs. Two week long courses were held
in March 2006 and August 2006. In the latter, for the
first time, journalists from six SAARC nations were invited
to participate.

Public Diplomacy
The Public Diplomacy Division of the Ministry of External
Affairs was created in May 2006. Its mandate includes,
inter-alia, outreach activities inside and outside India, and
audio visual and print publicity. The ever-increasing
engagement of India with the outside world makes it
incumbent that issues related to India’s foreign policy are
effectively projected to enable a more informed

151

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

understanding. Such an understanding requires that issues
of international politics, including those related to
strategic issues, the reformation of global institutions so
that they reflect contemporary realities, and the emerging
global order are discussed and debated in our universities,
think tanks and by the general public to evolve a national
and consensual approach towards them. In this sense, the
Division oversees the matter of public involvement/public
interest in the shaping of the Indian foreign policy.
The objectives of outreach are to be achieved by reaching
out to various actors in India by establishing contacts with
think tanks, research institutions, opinion/decision makers
and media both within and outside India. The Division
draws upon the resources of the Ministry of External
Affairs, as well as, independent experts and researchers
through seminars, workshops and interactions on various
foreign policy related issues.
Outreach Activities
It is with these objectives in mind that the Public
Diplomacy Division has been engaging and supporting
institutions, universities and think tanks, within India,
to highlight the contour of India’s foreign policy, the
objective of which is not only to get inputs for our own
functioning and analysis, but also to encourage wider
discussion, interest and appreciation of foreign policy and
strategic issues.
The External Affairs Minister, Pranab Mukherjee
launched the Global India Foundation on 16 January
2006. The foundation is an independent think tank that
aims to promote national resilience, economic prosperity,
liberal values and the principle of social commitment in
national life.
The Division participated in a “Round Table on India’s
Foreign Policy” organized by the Maulana Abul Kalam
Azad Institute of Asian Studies, Kolkata in October 2006.
The Division also participated in the seminar “Armed
Conflict – Development and Governance in Eastern
India” organized by Women’s College, Shillong and Argue
India at Guwahati on 1-2 December 2006. Jamia Milia
Islamia, New Delhi was supported in organizing a seminar
on “ Rethinking the Third World: Idea, Concept, Category
and Relevance” on 22-23 January 2007.
The Division has launched a Nobel Laureates forum in
partnership with the CII in February 2007. The Laureates

will deliver lectures in India on contemporary themes like
globalization, international order, economics and other
issues topical to India’s foreign policy. Prof. John Nash,
the winner of Nobel Prize in Economics in 1994, delivered
the first lecture on 14 February 2007.
Contacts have been initiated with reputed international
think tanks such as the International Institute for Strategic
Studies, London with whom under an institutionalized
relationship an annual Ministry of External Affairs-IISS
Foreign Policy Dialogue would be conducted. The first
dialogue is scheduled on 5-6 February 2007. The Division
will also be attending an International Conference on ‘The
Future of Public Diplomacy’ in March 2007 at Wilton
Park in London to project the efforts being made by the
Division and to learn form the experiences of other
countries.
A seminar “India and Latin America: Partners in progress”
in cooperation with ICRIER is scheduled for FebruaryMarch 2007 in New Delhi and will include a number of
eminent researchers and scholars form Latin America and
India.
The Division is supporting the organization of a seminar
on “Super Power Rivalry in the Indian Ocean in the 21st
Century” in March 2007. The event is being organized by
the Book Review Trust and has the internationally
renowned scholar, Eric Hobsbaum as a consultant.
The Division participated in the 35th annual conference
on South Asia organized in University of Wisconsin
(USA), and a conference on “ Challenges for Foreign
Ministries: Managing Diplomatic Networks & Optimizing
Value” on 31 May-1 June 2006 in Geneva. Senior officials
of the division had interactive sessions with students of
Jadhavpur University and Tufts University (USA), on
issues relevant to Indian foreign policy. The Division has
also initiated an exercise of getting outside experts to
provide inputs to senior officials of the Ministry on key
issues through focused interactive sessions.
As part of its public outreach programme, the Division
launched Ministry’s Hindi website thereby providing an
opportunity to Hindi speaking people in India, as well as,
abroad to follow the developments in Indian foreign policy.
Anand Sharma, Minister of State for External Affairs
inaugurated the Hindi website on 18 August 2006.

152

Back to Contents

External Publicity

Audio-Visual Publicity
The Division commissions/acquires documentaries aimed
at positive projection of India’s image abroad and sends
these to Indian Missions abroad for presentation, screening
and telecast on foreign TV channels. The procurement
and supply of feature films for participation in film festivals
and Indian film weeks abroad, organizing cultural publicity
and exhibitions, are other audio-visual publicity activities
undertaken by the Division.

the dispatch of Indian feature films for KARA film festival
held in Karachi from 7-17 December 2006. The Division
also supported First South Asian Film Festival in New
Delhi (24-30 October 2006) and Second Indian
International Women’s Film Festival held in New Delhi
from 11-18 December 2006. A documentary Film Festival
on Art & Artists, organized by JD Centre for Arts from
15-17 December 2006 in Bhubaneshwar, was supported
by the Division by providing MEA documentaries.

Several documentaries were completed during the year.
Some of these are, “Spirit to Soul” - a film on the life of
Ustad Vilayat Khan; “Free Media Free Country” - a film
on history of media in India; “Road to Afghanistan” - a film
on India’s assistance towards reconstruction in
Afghanistan; “Seeds of Knowledge” - a film showcasing
India as a knowledge destination; “Partnership for
Prosperity” – a film showing economic cooperation
between India and GCC countries and a film on India’s
maritime exchanges with South East Asian countries over
2000 years. A DVD set containing 2000 images of
“Monuments of India” was also completed and dispatched
to our Missions. The documentary film “Road to
Afghanistan” was screened as curtain raiser to the 2nd
Regional Economic Co - operation Conference on
Afghanistan that took place in New Delhi on 18-19
November 2006. The film has been dubbed in Dari and
Pashto languages for wider dissemination by our Mission
in Kabul. Some of the documentaries acquired/
commissioned by the Ministry were telecast on foreign
TV channels.

The Missions/Posts were supplied audio-visual material
in the form of Betacam cassettes, CD-ROMs, audio and
video CDs, DVDs and Cassettes for library and
presentation purposes. Missions/Posts’ requests to sanction
audio-visual equipment, dish antennas, etc. were also
approved by the Division.

The Division sent feature films and extended all support
to the Indian Missions in Sao Paulo (Brazil), Mexico,
Vienna (Austria), Harare (Zimbabwe), Istanbul (Turkey),
Nicosia (Cyprus), Damascus (Syria), Tripoli & Malta
(Libya), London (UK), Stockholm (Sweden), Minsk
(Belarus), Caracas (Venezuela), Santiago (Chile), Rome
(Italy), Johannesburg & Durban (South Africa), Addis
Ababa (Ethiopia), Washington (USA), Prague (Czech
Republic), Muscat (Oman), Moscow (Russia), Tel Aviv
(Israel), Cairo (Egypt),Dakar (Senegal), Rabat (Morocco),
Buenos Aires (Argentina), Almaty (Kazakhstan), Paris
(France), Budapest (Hungary) and Windhoek (Namibia)
for organizing the Indian film festivals/film weeks abroad.
The Division facilitated 8th Osian’s Cinefan Film Festival
held in New Delhi from 14-23 July 2006 and organised

A photo exhibition titled “India-Bhutan: Along the
Friendship Trail” was organized in Gangtok (13-17
November, 2006), Siliguri (21-25 November, 2006) and
Guwahati (2-6 December, 2006).
During the year twelve documentary films, viz., Ustad
Bismillah Khan & Benares, Dismantling the Digital Divide,
Manufacturing Sunshine, Tech Check, The Sky is not the
Limit, Cosmopolitan Culture of India, India- Infrastructurean opportunity, Song of the Sanctuary, A short history of Indian
spices, Fifty years of Satyajit Ray’s masterpiece Pather Panchali,
India-Myanmar Relations, Back to Gondwana land were
approved for commissioning. One documentary on Shri
Mulk Raj Anand was approved for acquisition. The film
projects are under various stages of production.
Print Publicity
In line with Government’s policy, books on a wide range
of subjects ranging from India’s art & culture to history,
economic achievements, developments in the field of
Science & Technology, foreign policy, etc. were supplied
to Missions for presentation and use in their libraries.
Books, audio CDs and DVDs were also provided for
presentation to visiting dignitaries/delegations, journalists
and participants of international seminars in India.
In addition, the Division brought out booklets on Kailash
Mansarovar Yatra 2006, India’s Assistance Programme in
Afghanistan, brochures on official visits of Rastrapatiji and
Prime Minister. The Division also extended full financial
support to our Embassy in Madrid to start the publication
of ‘Hola Namaste’ a bi-monthly Spanish magazine.

153

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

The process of translating and printing the German
version of Ministry of External Affairs’ publication ‘India:
A Dynamic Democracy’ has been initiated. Similarly in
order to reach out to Spanish and French speaking
territories, the Ministry of External Affairs’ publication
‘India: Timeless Splendour’ has been translated into Spanish
and French languages and is currently under print.
Journals, magazines and other publicity material on India
continued to be regularly sent to Missions abroad to aid
their own publicity efforts.

India Perspectives, the monthly magazine of the Ministry,
is printed in 15 different languages with a combined printrun of about 65,000 copies. Besides highlighting India’s
rich cultural heritage it also seeks to showcase the
impressive strides India is making in the fields of Science
& Technology, industry, agriculture, space and energy. The
orientation of the magazine is being revised to pay greater
attention to economic and strategic issues.

154

Back to Contents

Foreign Service Institute

Training for IFS Probationers

One of the primary activities of the Institute is the
training of IFS Probationers. The objective of the training
programme for IFS Probationers is to prepare the
Probationers to handle the wide range of tasks that they
would be required to perform during their professional
careers, both in Missions and Posts abroad as well as in
India. The IFS Probationers of the 2005 Batch were
accordingly put through a comprehensive one-year
training programme, which included modules on
International Relations and Foreign Policy, Defence and
Security, Economic Diplomacy, International Law,
Parliamentary Affairs, Cultural Diplomacy, Protocol and
Consular matters. The programme also included modules
on practical skills such as administration and accounts,
communication skills, representational skills and relations
with the media. The training modules were implemented
through lectures, interactive sessions, seminars as well as
attachments to various leading institutions. In order to
enable the participants to enhance their knowledge of
India’s immediate neighbourhood and to familiarize them
with the work of Indian Missions abroad, the training
programmes included a Mission Orientation Visit to Sri
Lanka in May 2006. The 2005 batch Probationers were
also deputed to various bilateral and multilateral Missions
abroad on 4-week Mission Attachments to enable them
to obtain a deeper understanding of the various aspects
of the functioning of our Missions abroad. The 2005 batch
of IFS Probationers completed their training with the
Institute in January, 2007 and have been reverted to the
Ministry for training in various Divisions before posting
abroad.
After completion of the Foundation Course at the Lal
Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration in
Mussoorie, the 2006 Batch of the IFS Probationers have
commenced their one-year comprehensive training
programme with the Foreign Service Institute from
January 2007.

20

Promotion of links with other training
institutes
The Institute maintains regular contacts with other
training institutions such as the Lal Bahadur Shastri
National Academy of Administration, the National
Academy of Direct Taxes, the National Academy of
Customs, Excise and Narcotics, the Institute of Secretarial
Training and Management and the Bureau of Police
Training and Research. The Institute is making efforts to
develop ties with other training institutes with a view to
further develop the relationship between the Indian
Foreign Service and other Services, an area which has
been assigned high priority by the Ministry of External
Affairs. With this objective in mind, the Institute
organised a special training programme for Senior IPS
officers entitled “Main Currents in India’s Foreign Policy”
in December 2005 at the request of the Bureau of Police
Research and Development (BPR&D). Following the
success of this training programme, BPR&D has requested
the Institute to organize a similar course for senior IPS
officers in 2006-07. A special training programme was also
organized for the first time for officers from the Cabinet
Secretariat in May 2006. The Third Programme for
Diplomatic Correspondents was organised from 28
August-1 September 2006, in association with the
External Publicity Division of the Ministry. The Fourth
Programme for Diplomatic Correspondents is likely to be
held in March 2007. At the request of Air India, a senior
officer of the Institute addressed Air India officers
proceeding abroad on posting, at the Air India Staff
College in Mumbai. The subjects covered the relationship
between Air India offices abroad and Missions/Posts,
cultural sensitivities, dos and don’ts while posted abroad,
common areas of work, joint activities, etc.

Training of staff/officials of the Ministry
FSI regularly conducted the “Basic Professional Course”
for the staff of Ministry of External Affairs. The training
pertained to enhancing the skills of staff members in

155

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

computers and to update them on various aspects of
administration, accounts, consular related work, drafting,
office procedure and forms of communication. FSI, with
the assistance of e-Governance and IT Division of the
Ministry, commenced training of the staff of the Ministry
on specially designed software packages, which are to be
used in accounts work and in consular work. This training
has now become an integral part of the Basic Professional
Course. Since April, 2006, four Basic Professional Courses
have been organized by the Foreign Service Institute.
Bearing in mind the important supervisory nature of the
work undertaken by Section Officers in Missions and Posts
abroad, the first Refresher Course for Section Officers was
organized by the Institute in September 2006 to enable
them to effectively discharge their duties when posted
abroad.
The First Orientation Course for IFS(B) Grade-I Officers
was conducted by the Institute in July 2006. The Course
focused on International Relations and Foreign Policy
issues. Similarly, the first training programme on
Representational and Related Skills was organized for the
same group of IFS(B) Grade-I Officers from 6-9 November
2006.

Programmes for Foreign Diplomats
The Foreign Service Institute has been regularly organizing
courses for foreign diplomats in its efforts at building

bridges of friendship and cooperation with countries
around the world. The courses for foreign diplomats have
been received extremely well and have been greatly
appreciated. The 40th and the 41st Professional Courses
for Foreign Diplomats (PCFD) were organized from 1
February-10 March 2006 and 4 October-10 November
2006 respectively. Twenty eight diplomats from 26
countries attended the 40 th PCFD and twenty five
diplomats from 21 countries participated in the 41st PCFD.
A special four week course for 20 diplomats from
Afghanistan was organized in April 2006. In coordination
with the ASEAN Secretariat, a special course was also
organized for diplomats from ASEAN countries in AugustSeptember, 2006.
In terms of institutional linkages, Agreements/MoUs,
providing an institutional framework of cooperation
between FSI and counterpart institutes in Ecuador and
Romania were signed during the year. Discussions on
possibilities of cooperation were also held with Mexico
and Sudan. Senegal showed a keen interest in training
their diplomats in the ongoing courses conducted by FSI
and requested for ten slots in FSI Courses to be reserved
for them. Already, three participations from Senegal had
participated in the 41st PCFD. FSI hosted the Deans of
counterpart institutes in Croatia, Bulgaria and Mexico
and issues such as mutual cooperation and exchange
programmes were discussed with them.

156

Back to Contents

Implementation of Official Language
Policy and Propagation of Hindi Abroad

The Ministry of External Affairs is making all possible
efforts towards implementation of Official Language Policy
of the Government of India. Documents like Bilateral
Treaties, Agreements, Memoranda of Understanding,
Annual Report of the Ministry and Parliament Questions
are prepared bilingually.
Training in Hindi forms a part of the Foreign Service
Institute (FSI) training programmes conducted for IFS
Probationers and officials of the Ministry before they take
up their assignments in Missions abroad. Between April
and November 2006, eight Hindi training programmes
were organized for officers of the Ministry.
Hindi Advisory Committee has been reconstituted under
chairmanship of EAM on 8 February 2005. A meeting of
the Committee was held on 27 June 2006 under the
chairmanship of MOS (AS).
The implementation of official language policy by all the
Divisions and Sections of the Ministry is monitored by
the Official Language Implementation Committee (OLIC)
under the chairmanship of Joint Secretary
(Administration). Meetings of the Committee are held
every quarter. In the current financial year, two meetings
of OLIC have been held on 22 June 2006 and 14
November 2006.
In compliance of the directives of the Department of
Official Language, Ministry of Home Affairs, Hindi
Pakhwada was organized in the Ministry from 15-30
September 2006 during which a number of officers/officials
took part in various Hindi competitions. Cash prizes were
awarded to the winners.
The Parliamentary Committee on Official Language
inspected Regional Passport Offices at Bhuwaneshwar
(April 2006) and Bangalore (September 2006). Passport
office, Kolkata was inspected by the officers of Hindi
Section in October 2006. Hindi books have been sent to
many Passport Offices for their libraries.

21

The Hindi website of the Ministry was formally launched
by Minister of State for External Affairs, Anand Sharma
on 18 August 2006. It is a mirror image of the Ministry’s
website in English. All information is now available both
in English and Hindi simultaneously on the website.
The Ministry has well-formulated schemes for propagation
of Hindi abroad. Hindi teaching material is supplied to
the foreign educational institutions through Indian
Missions abroad. These include textbooks, Hindi software,
Hindi learning CD’s, dictionaries, etc. Financial support
has been extended to a number of Indian Missions/Posts
for on-line Hindi teaching projects, development of Hindi
text books as per local requirements, purchase of audiovisual equipments for donation to foreign universities
teaching Hindi, organization of Hindi workshops, payment
of honorarium to Hindi teachers abroad, etc.
Regional Hindi Conferences were organized in Australia
(February 2006), Abu Dhabi (February 2006) and Tokyo
(July 2006) with the aim of propagating and promoting
Hindi in different regions of the world.
World Hindi Day was celebrated on 10 January 2007. A
special function was organized in New Delhi to mark the
occasion, in which Minister of State for External Affairs,
Anand Sharma was the Chief Guest. Members of
Parliament, diplomats, eminent Hindi scholars and
writers, media personnel, NRIs including foreign Hindi
writers and students participated in the event. An essay
competition was organized for foreign students at the Agra
and Delhi centre. More than 25 Indian Missions/Posts
abroad also celebrated World Hindi Day with great fervor
and enthusiasm.
Hindi Section coordinates work relating to grant of
scholarships to foreign students to study Hindi at Kendriya
Hindi Sansthan, Agra. There are 100 slots every year. In
2006-07, 71 students availed of the scholarships. The
Ministry also coordinates the work relating to the

157

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

correspondence course for foreign students conducted by
Central Hindi Directorate.

to the establishment of World Hindi Secretariat in
Mauritius.

The Ministry is currently engaged in coordinating work
relating to the organisation of 8th World Hindi Conference
to be held in New York in July 2007. A steering Committee
under the chairmanship of Minister of State for External
Affairs, Anand Sharma, has been constituted for the 8th
World Hindi Conference. It consists of 14 official and 28
non-official members. The first meeting of the Committee
was held on 28 November 2006.

On National days, the President’s address to the nation is
read out in Hindi by most of the Heads of Mission/Post
abroad. Many Missions organized Kavi Sammelans, essay
competitions during the celebration of Hindi Diwas. Some
Indian Missions also bring out Hindi Magazines.
Panels of Hindi interpreters have been drawn up in 29
countries to interpret from the local language into Hindi
and vice-versa.

The Ministry is also actively coordinating work relating

158

Back to Contents

Cultural Relations

The Indian Council for Cultural Relations was formally
set up in 1950, with the primary objective of establishing,
reviving and strengthening cultural relations and mutual
understanding between India and other countries. Its aims,
as enunciated in the Memorandum of Association, are:
To participate in the formulation and implementation of
policies and programmes relating to India’s external
cultural relations
To promote cultural exchange with other countries and
peoples
To promote and strengthen cultural relations and mutual
understanding between India and other countries
To establish and develop relations with national and
international organizations in the field of culture
The council has worked steadily to attain these objectives.
The major activities of the Council are:
Administration of scholarship schemes for overseas
students on behalf of the Government of India and other
agencies, welfare of international students; grant of
scholarships to foreign students to learn Indian dance and
music; exchange of exhibitions; organization of and
participation in international seminars and symposia;
participation in major cultural festival abroad;
organization of “festival of India” in countries abroad;
exchange of groups of performing artistes; organization of
lecture-demonstration by performing artistes abroad;
distinguished visitors programme under which eminent
personalities from abroad are invited to visit India and
experts are sent abroad for delivering lectures on issues of
interest; presentation of books, audio-visual material, art
objects and musical instruments to institutions abroad;
providing the secretariat for the Jawaharlal Nehru award
for international understanding; organization of the
annual Maulana Azad memorial lecture, conducting
Maulana Azad essay competition; publication of books
and journals for distribution in India and abroad;

22

maintaining Indian Cultural Centers abroad; maintaining
a well stocked library and the manuscripts of Maulana
Abul Kalam Azad; digitization of rare manuscripts.

Regional Offices, Centres/Chairs Abroad
The Council has 9 regional offices functioning at
Bangalore, Chandigarh, Chennai, Hyderabad, Jaipur,
Kolkatta, Lucknow, Mumbai and Thiruvananthapuram.
In addition, with a view to promoting awareness and
appreciation of India’s composite cultural heritage abroad,
the Council is also maintaining 18 Cultural Centres in
Cairo (Egypt), Berlin (Germany), Port Louis (Mauritius),
Paramaribo (Suriname), Georgetown (Guyana), Jakarta
(Indonesia), Moscow (Russian Federation), London
(U.K.), Almaty, (Kazakhstan), Tashkent, (Uzbekistan),
Durban and Johannesburg (South Africa), Port of Spain
(Trinidad & Tobago), Colombo (Sri Lanka), Dushanbe
(Tajikistan), Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia), Suva (Fiji) and
Tokyo (Japan) and 2 sub-Centres at Bali (Indonesia) and
Lautoka (Fiji).
The Council is, separately, maintaining Chairs of Indian
Studies abroad to teach Indian languages and other related
subjects under the Bilateral Cultural Exchange
Programmes, Scheme of Propagation of Hindi abroad and
Council’s own programme. Presently 19 chairs are
maintained for teaching Hindi, Sanskrit, Tamil, Modern
Indian History, Indian Civilization in Paramaribo
(Suriname) Budapest (Hungary), Moscow (Russia), Seoul
(South Korea),Warsaw (Poland), Port of Spain (Trinidad
& Tobago), Ankara (Turkey), Sofia (Bulgaria), Bucharest
(Romania), Beijing (China), Madrid (Spain), Bangkok
(Thailand), Paris (France), Osh (Kyrghystan), Tashkent
(Uzbekistan), Brussels (Belgium) and Moka (Mauritius).
The Statutory Bodies of the Council have also approved
five rotating Chairs (3 in Hindi and 2 in Modern Indian
History) at Warsaw (Poland) and one full time regular
Chair of Political Science at Osh, Kyrghystan. Council
has also recently signed MoUs with Sciences Po, Paris

159

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

(France) and University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia
(USA) to depute Visiting Professor of Indian Economics
and Indian Literature on short term basis.

Festivals
India-Japan Friendship Year–2007 (Festival of
India)
A Joint Statement was signed between India and Japan
by the Prime Ministers of both countries in April 2005 to
develop closer relationship not only in political and
economic arenas but also in the field of culture. The Indian
Council for Cultural Relations is coordinating various
events during the India-Japan Friendship Year, 2007 which
will include business seminars, exhibitions, performing art
events, fashion shows, a film festival, food festivals,
seminars, talks/ lectures by eminent personalities and
souvenir shops.
The Festival of India in Japan was inaugurated by the
Prime Minister of India on 14 December 2006 during his
visit to Tokyo.
Public participation was invited for designing the Joint
Logo for the Friendship Year in India and Japan in 2007.
The Joint Logo designed by Indian students was selected
and jointly unveiled by the Prime Ministers of India and
Japan on 14 December 2006 in Tokyo.
Festival of India in Brussels
(7 October 2006 - 26 January 2007)
The Festival of India in Belgium was being held for a period
of four months from October 2006 to January 2007 at the
Palais des Beaux-Arts (BOZAR). The festival was
inaugurated on 7 October 2006 by Dr. Karan Singh,
President, ICCR and Queen Fabiola of Belgium.
The focus of the proposed Festival is to raise the cultural
profile of India in Europe in general, and Brussels in
particular—in view of the fact that, for all intent and
purposes, the city has become the capital of the European
Union (EU) and the seat of all the European institutions.
The Festival events would provide an excellent
opportunity to the EU audience to view India as an ancient
and refined civilization and an energetic, growth-oriented
and vibrant nation with an increasingly important
presence on the international scene.
The Festival encompasses a variety of disciplines around

a central Exhibition ‘TEJAS’ which was conceptualized
by Dr. Kapila Vatsyayan and curated by Ranesh Ray. It
presents a clear picture of the cultural heritage and
contemporary creativity of India, inter-linking the two and
demonstrating the ability of the Indian civilization to
survive and grow, not by cutting itself off from outside
influences, but by absorbing them and thereby enriching
itself. The Exhibition “TEJAS” was jointly inaugurated
by Sonia Gandhi, Chairperson, UPA and Prime Minister
of Belgium on 11 November 2006.
Scholarships and Welfare of International
Students
One of the major activities of ICCR is the implementation
of scholarship programmes for overseas students. The
Council administers various schemes for studies in
undergraduate, post-graduate and doctoral programmes
as well as for pursuing professional courses such as
engineering, pharmacy, accountancy, business
administration and management. The thrust of the
scholarship programme is towards students from
developing nations with a special focus on the
neighbourhood. The Council offered approximately 1300
new scholarships. The percentage of utilization of
scholarship slots has been approximately 50 per cent so
far.
In addition, the Prime Minister of India, during his visit
to Afghanistan last year, had announced 500 scholarships
for Afghan nationals for their higher studies in Indian
universities. The Council was entrusted with the task of
handling these scholarships. Over 400 students have
joined different universities in India.
Apart from this, the Council looks after the general
welfare of international students studying in India under
self-finance and ICCR Scholarship Schemes. Under this
programme, the Council arranged 5 summer camps for
International students during May-June 2006. The
Council also held 5-winter camps, in December 2006.
The Council had organized a meeting of International
Students Advisors of various universities on 2 September
2006 at its office under the chairmanship of President,
ICCR.
The Council has initiated the compilation and creation
of Alumni data bank in respect of students who availed
of scholarships offered by ICCR.

160

Back to Contents

Cultural Relations

Presentation Section
During the period April-December 2006, the Council sent
Books, Object d Arts, Audio-Visual materials, Musical
instruments, Bronze/ wooden Statues, Kathak Costumes
and other materials to 20 Countries i.e. Republic of
Armenia, Uzbekistan, Georgetown, Jamaica, Greece,
Surinam, Bangladesh, Poland, Denmark, Kuwait,
Germany, Slovakia, Afghanistan, Finland, Kenya, Italy,
Kazakhstan, Spain through Indian Missions abroad for
presentation to different schools, universities, local
dignitaries, institutions and for use by our Cultural
Centres.
Incoming Cultural Delegations
ICCR organises the visits of foreign performing artistes to
India for performances in various cities of India. These
groups are hosted under the ambit of bilateral Cultural
Exchange Programmes as well as in response to
recommendations of Indian Missions abroad and requests
received from foreign diplomatic missions and Cultural
Centres in India.
During the period April - December 2006, the Council
hosted the visits of twenty-three foreign cultural groups
from Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Spain, Pakistan, Cote d’Ivore,
USA, Vietnam, China, South Africa, Armenia, Turkey,
Italy, South Korea, Uzbekistan, Russia and Malaysia.
The Council organized a 5-day “Sufi festival” at Kashmir
from 11-15 June 2006, “Malhar Festival” from 1-4 August
2006, “Festival of Music & Dance” by the foreign artistes
resident in India from 12-14 September 2006, The “Spirit
of Tanjore” (a festival of dance & music) from 10-12
October 2006 and the festival of Africa from 19-21
December 2006. The foreign groups also performed in
various other cities including Kolkata, Jaipur,
Changdigarh, Lucknow, Mumbai, Chennai, Kanpur,
Trivandrum. The Council, under its “Retrospectives”
series, organized performances by upcoming artistes.

Publication
The Council has an ambitious publication programme,
which has grown over the years. The Council brings out
six journals in five different languages namely, “Indian
Horizons” and “Africa Quarterly” (both in English),
“Gagananchal” (Hindi), “Papeles de la India” (Spanish),
Rencontre Avec L’ Inde” (French) and “Thaqafat-ulHind” (Arabic). ICCR’s quarterly publications - Indian

Horizons (English), Gagananchal (Hindi) and Africa
Quarterly (English) have been brought out in a new format
and style, which has been greatly appreciated. The
Council also published a special issue of the Hindi
quarterly “Gagananchal “ entitled “150 years of 1857”.
The issue was released in November 2006.
The Council also published 12 books in different languages
including English, Urdu, Hindi, Sanskrit, Arabic and
Bengali, under its Library Fellowship course.
ICCR also participated in the 12th Delhi book Fair from
16-24 September 2006

Conferences and Seminars
The Council organises Conferences and Seminars with a
view to facilitating interaction with intellectuals, opinion
makers and academicians.
During the period April - December 2006, the Council
organized two major international seminars viz an
Indology Seminar at Vilnius University, Lithuania and a
seminar at Bangkok on “Indo-Thai Historical and Cultural
Linkages: the contemporary scenario”. 21 scholars
presented the papers during the seminars.

Library
The personal collection of books and manuscripts
bequeathed by Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, the Founder
President of the Council, forms the core of the ICCR
Library. A catalogue of the manuscripts and personal
books of Maulana Azad has been printed in a book form
in three languages- Arabic, Urdu and Persian. The Library
has also started work relating to restoration of original
manuscripts available in the Library.
An Agreement was signed between Indian Council for
Cultural Relations (ICCR), New Delhi and National
Library, Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia on 9 June 2006 for
digitization of Buddhist Manuscripts in the National
Library of Mongolia.
During the year, six scholars were awarded ICCR’s annual
library fellowship.

Exhibitions
ICCR commissioned three busts of Mahatma Gandhi, two
busts of Rabindranath Tagore, one bust of Kalidasa, one
bust of Indira Gandhi, one statue of Mahatma Gandhi,

161

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

one bust of Indira Gandhi and one portrait of Maulana
Abul Kalam Azad for permanent installation in Rome
(Italy), Berlin (Germany), Frankfurt (Germany), Madrid
(Spain), Shanghai (China), Hanoi (Vietnam) and London
(UK).

delegations to 54 countries covering all continents of the
world. Special emphasis was given to holding workshopscum-lecture demonstrations with local artistes Some of
these cultural groups participated in over 20 international
events /festival such as;

ICCR sent two major exhibitions viz. an exhibition
entitled “Celebrating Women-Amrita Shergil Revisited”
to London and an exhibition called “Women by Women”
to Port Louis (Mauritius), Addis Ababa, Warsaw and
Poland.
ICCR also sponsored two exhibitions viz.(i) Exhibition of
Photographs on Satyajit Ray to Bangladesh and a Dolls
& Dresses exhibition gifted by Shankar’s Dolls Museum,
New Delhi for participation in a festival in Tehran(Iran).
ICCR also organized several incoming exhibitions in New
Delhi which included: (i) A Painting Exhibition “Different
Strokes in Canvas” by foreign artists living in India ; (ii)
an exhibition of the British artistes Anthony Christian
and Marian Fanny Christian and (iii) a painting exhibition
by Kahkashan Jafri, an artist from Pakistan.

Outgoing Cultural Delegations

Houston International Festival in USA
Hannover Industrial Fair in Germany
Biennale Bonn Festival in Germany
the 2nd Shanghai Co-operation Organisation Arts
Festival” in Shanghai
The International Youth Festival in Macau
International Ramayana Festival in Thailand
Distinguished Visitors Programme
As part of its effort to foster and strengthen cultural
relations and mutual understanding between India and
other countries, the Council facilitates exchanges of
eminent figures in public life as well as those of scholars,
intellectuals, academicians and artistes under its
Distinguished Visitors Programme. During the period, the
Council hosted visits of 13 distinguished personalities from
different countries.

During the period, the Council sponsored 67 cultural

162

Back to Contents

Indian Council of World Affairs

During the period April-December, 2006, the Indian
Council of World Affairs organized the following events:
(i)

Lectures

17

(ii) Bilateral strategic dialogues

16

(iii) Seminars

04

(iv) Background briefings

04

(v)

06

Other events (films, receptions, etc.)

23

ICWA seminars attracted between 50-100 persons each.
The ICWA’s master list of invitees has grown from a mere
350 or so to over 1000 during the year 2006 and includes
233 academicians, 203 intellectuals and members of thinktanks and research organizations, 135 diplomatic corps,
108 officials, 112 former diplomats and 125 senior
journalists and media persons. This list is being revised
regularly.

On an average, between 80-150 persons attended each
of the lectures, with as many as 800 persons attending
the lecture by the Chinese President Hu Jintao and over
400 persons attending the lecture by King Abdullah of
Jordan. A complete list of seminars, conferences, lectures
and meetings organized by ICWA during the year are given
in Appendix XVIII.

ICWA is actively pursuing research work. ICWA officials
regularly participated in seminars and contributed papers/
lectures in various reputed national and international
journals. ICWA’s magazine ‘India Quarterly’ was on track
during 2006. Besides, the ICWA has signed MoUs with
counterpart organizations in five countries: Malaysia,
Tajikistan, Mexico, Portugal and Poland.

ICWA organized launch for the following books:

ICWA organized an international seminar “Revival of the
Silk Route: New Initiatives and Engagements for the 21st
Century”, from 8-11 February 2007, in Goa in association
with the Information Centre, Goa.

(i)

“The Tajikon” by Tajik academician Bobojon
Gafurov;

(ii) “Selected Short Stories of Tagore” in Russian;
(iii) “Shopping for Bombs” by Gordon Corera;
(iv) “India and Turkey – Past and Emerging Relations”
by Prof. Aftab Kamal Pasha;
(v)

Thus, the activities of the Council have increased
substantially and received widespread appreciation. The
ICWA has emerged as an important platform for foreign
affairs discussions in India in the year 2006.

“The Ultimate Book of Weapons” by Dr. N.C.
Asthana and Dr. Anjali Nirmal.

163

Back to Contents

Research and Information System
for Developing Countries (RIS)

24

R IS

is New Delhi based think-tank specialized in

international economic relations and development
cooperation. RIS is an autonomous body of the Ministry
of External Affairs. Its mandate is to function as an
advisory body to the Government of India on matters
pertaining to multilateral economic and social issues,
including regional and sub-regional cooperation
arrangements, as may be referred to it from time to time.
RIS is envisioned as a forum for fostering effective policy
dialogue among developing country think-tanks on
international economic issues.
Highlights of the RIS’ work during the year 2006-07 are
presented below:
Research and Policy Inputs Provided to the
Government
RIS conducted research studies to assist the policy
formulation and preparations for major Summit Meetings
and other negotiations held in the year. Some of these

providing inputs for the ongoing ASEAN-India FTA
negotiations on Rules of Origin. Another note on
Safeguarding the Sensitivities of the Agriculture Sector
in ASEAN-India FTA. Lessons from FTAs and EPAs of
the ASEAN Countries and Some Developed Countries
were prepared for the Ministry of External Affairs on 14
July 2006. RIS also provided a Note on India’s trade and
investment with East Asian countries to Ministry of
External Affairs on 19 October 2006.
IBSA Summit
RIS has been conducting studies on the potential of
economic cooperation within the India-Brazil-South
Africa (IBSA) Trilateral Partnership. A policy Brief was
prepared in preparation of the first IBSA Summit and was
circulated at the Summit through Indian delegation. In
addition, inputs for preparation for the Summit were
provided to the Ministry of External Affairs and the
Department of Commerce on 22 August 2006 and 24
August 2006 respectively.

inputs include the followings:
East Asia Summit and India-ASEAN
Summit
RIS has been assisting the government in preparation for
the Second East Asia Summit (EAS). RIS has been
conducting studies on the relevance of EAS as a forum
for initiating approaches towards broader pan-Asian
economic integration in Asia. A Policy Brief was prepared
and provided to the government on the EAS. In addition,
Notes on different issues on the agenda of the EAS such
as Finance, Natural Disaster Management and Energy
Security were also prepared and provided to the Ministry
of External Affairs. RIS is also participating and
representing India in the Meetings of the Economic
Research Institute of ASEAN and East Asia hosted by
the ASEAN Secretary-General as per a mandate by the
Economic Ministers Meeting of EAS. RIS has also been

NAM Summit and South-South Cooperation
RIS conducted a major study on Seizing New
Opportunities for South-South Cooperation as a
background document for the Havana Summit of the
Non-Aligned Movement held in September 2006. The
study was issued as an RIS Policy Brief and was sent to
the Summit for circulation among the delegations
participating in the Summit through Indian delegation.
DG-RIS was represented in the High-level Committee
appointed by the Prime Minister for Economic and Social
Issues on the agenda of the NAM chaired by the
Chairman, RIS. RIS prepared and submitted following
notes as inputs to the work of the Committee: SouthSouth Cooperation on Trade Issues: Some Proposals for
NAM Summit, and South-South Cooperation in Science
and Technology, Energy and Exchange of Development
Experiences

164

Back to Contents

Research and Information System for Developing Countries (RIS)

Relevance of APEC
A comprehensive note on the Relevance of APEC for
India was prepared and made available at the request of
the Ministry of External Affairs on 10 April 2006 for
internal discussion.

indigenous knowledge, South-South cooperation in
information and communication technologies,
implications of emergence of China and India for other
developing countries and global governance, among other
studies.

India-Japan Joint Study Group
RIS assisted the work of Japan-India Joint Study Group
by preparing a number of drafts including on other areas
of economic cooperation, cooperation at WTO, and
regional economic cooperation, Liberalised and Upgraded
Framework for India-Japan Economic Partnership.

Policy Dialogue, Conferences and
Symposia

SAARC Summit Preparations
RIS prepared a concept note on Potentials for Trade in
Services under SAFTA Agreement was sent to the
SAARC Secretariat on 4 August 2006 also incorporating
a proposal of a study on the subject to be undertaken as
per the mandate of the Dhaka Summit at the request of
the SAARC Secretariat, Kathmandu. The proposal was
subsequently revised in the light of the comments received
from the member countries and finalized in consultation
with the Secretariat and negotiated funding with the
Asian Development Bank. RIS also provided comments
on a draft Vision of the Third Decade of SAARC to the
Ministry of External Affairs on 19 July 2006. A note on
South Asian Performance and Challenges Ahead was
made available to the Department of Economic Affairs,
Ministry of Finance on 1 July 2006.

During 2006-07 RIS organized a number of policy
dialogues, conferences and symposia to fulfill its mandate
of fostering intellectual dialogue among developing
countries. The select major events organized in the period
include the following:

BIMSTEC Summit Preparations
RIS prepared a draft note on the Vision for the BIMSTEC
at the request of the Ministry of External Affairs to serve
as an input for the preparations for the Second BIMSTEC
Summit.

Session on Pan-Asian Economic Integration: Its
Relevance, Approaches and Challenges at the
GDN Annual Conference 2007, Beijing on 14-16
January 2007
RIS organized a Session on Pan-Asian Economic
Integration: Its Relevance, Approaches and Challenges
at the GDN Annual Conference 2007 on 15 January 2007
held in Beijing to promote the Indian vision of the PanAsian Economic Community taking advantage of the
global think-tank community at the GDN Conference.
The session was chaired by Dr Hadi Soesastro, Executive
Director, CSIS, Jakarta. It began with the presentation of
a theme paper on the subject based on the work of RIS. It
was followed up by presentations by three panelists viz.
Professor Zhang Yunling, Director, Institute of Asia-Pacific
Studies, Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, Beijing; Dr.
Masanori Kondo, International Christian University,
Japan; and Dr. Pradumna B. Rana, Senior Adviser, OREI,
Asian Development Bank. It was followed up by an open
discussion.

Major research studies conducted during the period
include World Trade and Development Report 2007, customs
valuation in the context of SAFTA, regional cooperation
for infrastructure financing in Asia, studies in preparation
for SAARC Summit, a draft vision of BIMSTEC, prospects
for India-Pakistan trade, prospects for China-India trade
and investments, India-South Korea negotiations for
comprehensive economic cooperation, Mekong-India
cooperation, feasibility study of SACU-India-Mercosur
comprehensive economic partnership, a regime of prior
informed consent and access and benefit sharing for

Conference on South Asia-East Asia Economic
Cooperation and Pan-Asian Integration,
Singapore on 29-30 November 2006
RIS organized this conference jointly with the Asian
Development Bank (ADB), Singapore Centre for Applied
and Policy Economics (SCAPE-NUS), Institute of South
Asian Studies (ISAS), and Institute of Southeast Asian
Studies (ISEAS). The first day of the conference was
devoted to presentation of studies conducted by ADB on
South Asia-East Asia cooperation and potential of
cooperation in select sectors. The second day programme

165

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

organized by RIS was devoted to issues in broader
economic integration and the agenda of the East Asia
Summit. The first session on “Approaches for Pan-Asian
Economic Integration” was chaired by Ambassador K.
Kesavapany, ISEAS. It had following presentations:
Relevance and Approaches for a Broader Asian
Community by Dr. Nagesh Kumar, RIS; Towards a
Comprehensive Economic Partnership in East Asia: The
Japanese Perspective by Dr. Tetsuya Watanabe, Director,
Office of East Asian Economic Integration and
Development, METI, Japan; and ASEAN’s Role in
fostering Pan-Asian Economic Integration by Dr. Denis
Hew, ISEAS. It was followed by a Panel Discussion on
Regional Economic Cooperation in Asia: Agenda for the
East Asia Summit moderated by Dr. Nagesh Kumar, DGRIS and included Panelists: Dr. Mukul Asher, LKYSPP:
Cooperation in Services in Asia; Ambassador Sudhir
Devare, ISEAS: Regional Cooperation for Energy
Security; and Dr. Tan See Seng, IDSS: A Strategic
perspective. The Conference had participation of a large
number of policy makers, business people and academics
based in Singapore and other Asian countries.
Seminar on ASEAN and Pan-Asian Integration
at the IMF/World Bank Annual Meetings,
Singapore on 16-17 September 2006.
RIS jointly with the ASEAN Secretariat organized this
Seminar on 16 September 2006 in Singapore, as part of
the programme of seminars (PoS) coinciding with the 2006
annual meetings of the IMF-World Bank Group. The
distinguished panelists at the Seminar were Haruhiko
Kuroda, President of ADB; Ong Keng Yong, SecretaryGeneral of ASEAN; Dr. Ashok Lahiri, Chief Economic
Adviser, Ministry of Finance; and Ambassador Chan Heng
Chee, Singapore’s Ambassador to the US. Dr. Rodolfo
Severino, former Secretary-General, ASEAN moderated
the discussion. On this occasion RIS also issued and
circulated a Policy Brief on the theme of the seminar to
provide a background of the discussion.
Roundtable on the Agenda of NAM Summit, New
Delhi on 5 September 2006
RIS organized a high-level roundtable in preparation of
the 14th Non-Aligned Summit which was held in Havana,
Cuba on 11-16 September 2006. The Seminar reflected
on the relevance of the NAM movement in the

contemporary scenario and its agenda. Minister of State
for External Affairs, Anand Sharma delivered the
inaugural address. Dr Arjun Sengupta, MP (Rajya Sabha)
and Chairman, RIS and Chairman of the Special
Committee on the Agenda of NAM, chaired the
Roundtable. The Roundtable was addressed by a large
number of eminent experts on international affairs.
Seminar on Economic Cooperation in IBSA:
Exploiting Synergies, New Delhi on 31 August 2006
RIS jointly with CII organized a Seminar as a preparation
for the first IBSA Summit held in Brasilia in September
2006. Dr Arjun Sengupta, M.P., Chairman, RIS chaired
the Seminar. It began with a presentation of RIS study on
the potentials of economic cooperation in IBSA by Dr
Nagesh Kumar, Director-General, RIS. It was followed by
presentations by T.S. Vishwanath, Head-International
Trade Policy, CII, Dr. Veena Jha, Programme Coordinator,
UNCTAD India, New Delhi, R. Vishwanathan, Joint
Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs, Jayant Dasgupta,
Joint Secretary, Ministry of Commerce and Industry, and
Jose Vicente De Sa Pimentel, Ambassador of Brazil and
an open discussion.
Seminar on World Trade and Development
Report, WTO Public Forum, Geneva on 25-26
September 2006
The RIS draft World Trade and Development Report was
presented and discussed at the WTO Public Forum 2006
in Geneva on 26 September 2006. The presentation of
the WTDR by Dr Nagesh Kumar, DG, RIS, was followed
by a panel discussion on its contents. Ambassador Faizel
Ismail, Head of the South African Delegation to the WTO
moderated the panel discussion. The distinguished
Panelists were: Dr Yash Tandon, Executive Director, South
Centre; Dr Sam Laird, Spl. Adviser, Office of SecretaryGeneral, UNCTAD; and Dr Martin Khor, Director, Third
World Network.
The Third Asian Conference on Biotechnology
and Development, Manila on 9-10 November 2006
The Third Asian Conference 2006 on “Biotechnology
Opportunities for Developing Countries” was held in
Manila, Philippines on 9-10 November 2006. The
Conference was organized jointly by RIS and the
Biotechnology Coalition of the Philippines. In the

166

Back to Contents

Research and Information System for Developing Countries (RIS)

inaugural session Dr Rey de la Cruz was the Master of
Ceremonies. Dr William Padolina, Deputy DirectorGeneral, International Rice Research Institute (IRRI)
made the welcome Remarks. Dr Estrella Alabastrom,
Secretary, Department of Science and Technology,
Philippines delivered the Keynote Speech. The
participants addressed the different aspects of the
following
themes:
World
Perspective
on
Biocommercialization; Essential Issues; Advancement and
Prospects in Agri-Biotechnology in Asia: Status and
Priorities; Enabling Issues; Open Forum; Applications of
Biotechnology (Biomedical) and Open Forum.
Seminar on India-Sri Lanka FTA: Trends and
Prospects, New Delhi on 20 April 2006
In order to discuss the issues involved in the aforesaid
process, RIS organized a Seminar on India-Sri Lanka FTA:
Trends and Prospects in New Delhi on 20 April 2006. Dr.
Arjun K. Sengupta, Chairman, RIS chaired the Seminar.
The discussion was led by Dr. Saman Kelegama, Executive
Director, Institute of Policy Studies of Sri Lanka, Colombo
and Professor I. N. Mukherji of the School of International
Studies, JNU, who presented the Sri Lankan and Indian
perspectives respectively. Remarks were made by C.R.
Jayasinghe, High Commissioner of Sri Lanka, Ambassador
Shashank, former Foreign Secretary, Ambassador I.P.
Khosla, President, Association of Indian Diplomats, Dr.
Nagesh Kumar, DG-RIS, among other participants. A large
number of participants from government, business and
industry, and academic circles attended the seminar and
participated in the discussion.
Seminar on Emergence of China and IndiaImplications for African Development, New Delhi
on 5 October 2006
RIS jointly with Export-Import Bank of India organized a
Seminar on 5 October 2006. The Seminar was chaired by
Ambassador L.K. Ponappa, Vice-Chairperson, RIS. The
discussion was initiated by Dr. Andrea-Enrico Goldstein,
Senior Economist, OECD Development Centre, Paris,
who has led an OECD Development Centre Study on
the subject. The presentation was discussed and
commented upon by S.R. Rao, Executive Director, ExportImport Bank of India, and Dr Sachin Chaturvedi, Fellow,
RIS. It was followed by the open discussion in which a
large number of participants took part.

Seminar on East Asia Summit: Strategic and
Economic Issues, New Delhi on 26 April 2006
To take stock of the emerging strategic and economic
configuration in the post-Kuala Lumpur phase, RIS
organized this Seminar. Ambassador A. N. Ram, former
Secretary (ER), Ministry of External Affairs chaired the
event. Dr. Eric Teo Chu Cheow, Council Secretary,
Singapore, Institute of International Affairs, Singapore
and an eminent analyst and commentator on Asian affairs,
made a presentation to initiate the discussion. The
Seminar was also addressed by Professor Muchkund
Dubey, President, Council for Social Development, and
Rinzing Wangdi, Secretary (ER & Coordination), MEA.
It had an extensive open discussion by a large number of
participants.

Outreach, Global
Networking

Presence

and

During the year under review, RIS strengthened its outreach
activities by organizing seminars and symposia in Singapore,
Beijing, Geneva, Manila besides in New Delhi, as
summarized above. The institutional networking relations
were strengthened with a number of institutions such as
the Asian Development Bank, ASEAN Secretariat, the
World Bank, Global Development Network, Export-Import
Bank, CII, Biotechnology Association of the Philippines,
Centre for Strategic and International Studies, Jakarta,
Institute of Developing Economies, Tokyo, the
Commonwealth Secretariat, London, UNDP, New York;
among a number of institutions through collaborations and
joint activities. An MoU was signed with the Institute of
Policy Studies (IPS), Colombo. RIS has collaborated with
IPS for a number of years in publishing the South Asia
Economic Journal, and conducting joint research studies on
SAARC and IOR-ARC. The MoU seeks to further
strengthen these links. An MoU has also been signed
between RIS and Korea Institute for International
Economic Policy (KIEP), Seoul, to promote academic and
research cooperation.

Capacity Building
Programmes

and

Training

Programme on International Economic Issues
and Development Policy
RIS conducts a Programme on International Economic

167

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

Issues and Development Policy (IEIDP) in conjunction
with the ITEC Programme, sponsored by the Ministry of
External Affairs. The programme structure was revised
from 2005-06 in the light of the feed back obtained from
previous batches in a more compact format with a larger
participation. The 2005/06 batch conducted during 20
February 2006-17 March 2006, comprised participants
from six countries viz. Oybek Makhmudov of Uzbekistan;
Irina Arkadyeva, Russia; J.M.O. Ahanda of Cameroon;
I.D. Antonius, Suriname; Y.G. Sardinas, Cuba and M.V.
Razafindrakota, Madagascar. For the 2006-07 batch
scheduled for 19 February-17 March 2007, RIS has
received a long list of nominations and 16 participants
from a diverse group of developing countries will take part
in it.
Training Programme for IFS Probationers
On behalf of the Foreign Service Institute, Ministry of
External Affairs RIS organized a Training Module on
Global Economic Regime and India’s Economic
Engagements for IFS Probationers (2005 Batch) at RIS
from12-16 June 2006.

Special Orientation on WTO for Foreign
Diplomats
At the request of the Foreign Service Institute, Ministry
of External Affairs, New Delhi RIS organized a two lecture
session on the International Trading System for the
Afghan diplomats on 25 April 2006.

RIS Publications
During 2006-07 RIS published four books, issued eight
Policy Briefs and eleven Discussion Papers. Two issues of
the South Asia Economic Journal and three issues of the
Biotechnology and Development Review and four issues of
New Asia Monitor were brought out in addition to four
issues of RIS Diary. (see Appendix XIX) RIS publications
can be downloaded from its website http://www.ris.org.in.

Budget
RIS received a budgetary support of Rupees 150 lakhs
during 2006-07 from the Ministry of External Affairs.

Training Workshop on International Economic
Issues
RIS organized a special Training Workshop on
International Economic Issues for officials of the Cabinet
Secretariat on 22-23 June 2006 at RIS.

168

Back to Contents

Library

25

The Ministry’s Library has over one hundred thousand

issues: Foreign Affairs Documentation Bulletin, a list of

books, rich resource material and a large collection of

selected articles on International Relations and related

maps, microfilms and official documents. It is also

subjects; Recent Additions, an annotated list of Books/

equipped with modern facilities to support research. The

Publications added to the Library.

Library subscribes/receives and maintains about 500
Periodicals, Journals and Newspaper titles. It has an inhouse computer system consisting of a Server, and 12 PCs.

Recently, Library has also initiated steps towards
establishment of virtual library.

The system supports data entry and retrieval in Hindi as

An Article Alert Service has been slated to provide

well. The library has CD-ROM database on foreign affairs

abstracts of important articles from journals subscribed

and current affairs. The Library PCs are also equipped

by MEA library available on net through e-Mail to Foreign

with CD-writers and laser printers. It also has a colour

Service officers and Heads of Division.

scanner (with OCR capability as well as facility for storage
and retrieval of Images), a microfilm/fiche reader printer,

CD-ROM Publication(s)

plain paper photocopiers and a HP Office-jet pro laser

The Library in cooperation with NIC has brought out a

printer with Desk Top Publishing (DTP) software.

full text CD-ROM version of Annual Reports of Ministry

All Documentation/Bibliographic Services as well as other
library operations and services have been computerized,

of External Affairs [from 1948 to 1998-99] and Foreign
Affairs Record [from 1955 to 1999(August)]. The

using an integrated library software package LIBSYS

information on the CD can be retrieved via combination

covering all the features of Library. LIBSYS follows MARC

of searches including search on any given word or

as well as non-MARC format. LIBSYS supports word-

combination of words. This CD-ROM version was

based free text searching using Boolean operators. LIBSYS

prepared based on material available as on 1 January 2000.

provides online validation of input data prior to updating

This CD can be consulted in the Library at Patiala House,

the database. Information on all books, maps, documents

New Delhi.

and selected articles from periodicals received in the

Library users including research scholars are welcome to

Library since 1986, publications received in the Library
since 1986 [and also pre-1986 publications in active use]
are available on-line through intranet in all PCs of Ministry
of External Affairs Library. Library’s information databases
can also be accessed through Internet on Library’s website:

access the Library and its database, including CD-ROM
Database, and the Foreign Affairs Information Retrieval
System (FAIRS). Photocopying and Computer Print-out
facilities are also available to all Library users.
A committee has been set up for library reforms. The

http://mealib.nic.in.
All new documents received in the Library - books, maps,
microfilms, selected articles from periodicals - are being

objective is to expand and establish a modern virtual/
digital library of world-class standard, in a phased manner.

fed on a regular basis in the database on foreign affairs.

The Library is also participating in a project to publish

Using this database and CD-ROM Databases, the Library

volumes of India’s Bilateral Treaties and Agreements

provides Current Awareness Service and Bibliographical

(IBTA) for the period 1981-1990 and the periods

and Reference Services. In addition, the Library regularly

thereafter.

169

Back to Contents

Annual Report 2006-2007

For quick information retrieval, library has started sixty
six (66) online periodicals/ journals subscription along
with print version.

Weeding out of old and obsolete books and journals has
commenced. Substantial progress has been made in this
regard.

In MEA book collection, apart from Diplomacy and
International relations, now the focus is also on building
a strong section on International Economic issues.

170

Back to Contents

HOME

Appendices
Appendix I

Cadre strength at Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad during
2006-07(including posts budgeted by Ministry of Commerce and
those held in abeyance / ex-cadred)

Appendix II

Recruitment made in various groups in the Ministry of External
Affairs and reserved vacancies filled by Scheduled Caste/Scheduled
Tribe/Other Backward Classes (OBC) categories from April to
November 2006

Appendix III

Language-wise Statement of Officers (Grade I to Junior Scale of IFS)
as on 30 November 2006

Appendix IV

Statement showing the number of applications received and passports
issued including under Tatkaal Scheme, miscellaneous applications
received and services rendered as well as Revenue(including revenue
under Tatkaal Scheme) and Expenditure figures of the Passport
Offices from 1st January, 2006 to December, 2006.

Appendix V

Finances of the Ministry of External Affairs in 2006-2007

Appendix VI

The Major Sectoral Allocations in the 2006-2007 Budget (RE)

Appendix VII

Principal Destinations of India’s Aid Programmes

Appendix VIII

Outcome Budget in Respect of Major Heads of Expenditure (2006-07)

Appendix IX

Extracts from C & AG Report on Ministry of External Affairs
other countries

Appendix X

Treaties/Conventions/Agreements Concluded or Renewed by India with
other countries

Appendix XI

Instruments of Full Powers Issued during the period 1 January 2006
to December 2006

Appendix XII

Instruments of Ratification/Accession issued during the period
1 January 2006 to December 2006

Appendix XIII

Conference/ Seminars/ Study projects organized/ undertaken by
Institutions/ NGOs, which were funded, partially or wholly, by Policy
Planning & Research Division till January 2007.

Appendix XIV

List of ITEC Training Institutes in India

Appendix XV

List of ITEC/SCAAP partner countries

Appendix XVI

Countries allotted Defence Training slots in 2006-07

Appendix XVII

Gender-Related Statistics

Appendix XVIII

Seminars/Conferences/Lectures/Meetings organized by ICWA

Appendix XIX

Seminars Organized by RIS
Abbreviations

Back to Contents

Back to Contents

Appendix I
Cadre strength at Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad during 2006-07 (including posts
budgeted by Ministry of Commerce and those held in abeyance/ex-cadred)
S. No

Cadre/Post

Posts at
Headquaters

Posts at
Mission

Total

1

Grade I

5

21

26

2

Grade II

8

26

34

3

Grade III

41

135

176

4

Grade IV

58

85

143

5

Junior Admn. Grade/Senior scale

48

136

184

6

(i) Junior Scale

1

29

30

(ii) Probationers Reserve

35

...

35

(iii) Leave Reserve

15

...

15

(iv) Deputation Reserve

19

...

19

(v) Training Reserve

7

...

7

237

432

669

(i) Grade I

84

122

206

(ii) Deputation Reserve

6

...

6

(i) Integrated Grades II&III

147

229

376

(ii) Leave Reserve

30

...

30

(iii) Deputation Reserve

16

...

16

(iv) Training Reserve

25

...

25

(i) Grade IV

204

409

613

(ii) Leave Reserve

60

...

60

(iii) Deputation Reserve

55

...

55

(i) Grade V/VI

285

96

381

(ii) Leave Reserve

60

...

60

(iii) Deputation Reserve

14

...

14

(i) Grade II of Cypher Cadre

41

148

189

(ii) Leave Reserve

24

...

24

(i) Stenographer’s cadre

186

474

660

(ii) Leave Reserve

47

...

47

(iii) Training Reserve(Hindi)

10

..

10

(iv) Deputation Reserve

12

...

12

13

Interpreter’s Cadre

7

26

33

14

L&T cadre

14

1

15

15

Library cadre

10

3

13

Sub – Total

1337

1508

2845

Grand Total

1574

1940

3514

Sub Total
IFS(B)
7

8

9

10

11

12

APPENDICES

173

Back to Contents

Appendix II
Recruitment made in various groups in the Ministry of External Affairs and reserved
vacancies filled by Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe/Other Backward Classes (OBC)
categories from April to November 2006
Groups

Total No. of Posts

Number of Posts
Reserved
SC

ST

OBC

Unreserved

Group-A

41

8

-

5

28

Group-B

117

34

12

-

71

Group-C

27

6

3

-

18

Group-D

-

-

-

-

-

Ex-Cadre

-

-

-

-

-

Appendix III
Language-wise Statement of Officers (Grade I to Junior Scale of IFS)
as on 30 November 2006
Number of Officers

Language

Number of Officers

Arabic

92

Sinhalese

1

Bhasa Indonesia

12

Thai

2

Chinese

57

Tibetan

2

French

68

Turkish

6

German

30

Dutch

1

5

Gorkhali

1

Japanese

24

Swedish

1

Persian

21

Malay-Bhasa

1

Portuguese

18

Hungarian

1

Russian

80

Vietnamese

1

Spanish

58

Burmese

1

Hebrew

3

Mandarin

1

Kiswahili

6

Ukrainian

1

Nepalese

3

Kazakh

1

Serbo-Croatian

3

Korean

1

Language

Italian

APPENDICES

174

Back to Contents

Appendix IV
Statement showing the number of applications received and passports issued including
under Tatkaal Scheme, miscellaneous applications received and services rendered as well
as Revenue(including revenue under Tatkaal Scheme) and Expenditure figures of the Passport
Offices from 1st January 2006 to December 2006.
Name of
RPO/PO

No. of
Applications
received

No. of
No. of
Passports miscellanissued
eous
applications
received

Miscellaneous
services
rendered

Passports
issued
under
Tatkaal

Revenue
under
Tatkaal
Scheme

Total
Revenue

Total
expenditure

Ahmedabad

237044

242363

22506

22444

4495

6541500

Bangalore

241202

271941

46428

46067

13991

22552500

244047033 30528852*

Bareilly

60404

57327

4163

4155

2257

3661550

65991987

9858227

Bhopal

78132

71097

7106

7064

7015

10614000

88977525

6634062

220581803

25086191

38616

34813

2931

2631

1823

2511999

42249445

3591738

Chandigarh

250131

244664

37164

37167

9303

14329500

290202595

22906268

Chennai

291916

300503

38525

27998

37431

56961000

353321371

30560668

Cochin

203212

205028

54995

54319

21219

30453000

215966232

26372780

Delhi

242415

249174

38652

37458

28495

71323500

308697962

40006455

70059

65957

8925

8549

4944

7576010

76322825

6697074

Bhubaneswar

Ghaziabad
Guwahati

27056

23711

3741

852

2833

4091000

37738100

3107042

Hyderabad

382121

403895

37046

36746

20638

45379100

446532867

34380111

Jaipur

154353

132406

18431

14487

11062

17071000

172830720

17515429

Jalandhar

201527

204765

29147

28374

819

1434100

231403779

22888523

Jammu

16795

13419

1023

789

177

257000

18515305

2871849

Kolkata

156539

152210

19584

19033

5008

7440000

165770806

19393297

Kozhikode

236375

250350

36510

35783

32475

50146000

351169790

30685992

Lucknow

228262

169023

15374

14959

2863

4480300

239152241

27914624

Mumbai

261004

263770

34752

34416

6799

7817000

272624819

51658931

Nagpur

41912

38401

3187

3122

3978

5137000

47566730

2751427

Panaji

25660

25630

6361

6666

1203

1661500

30422152

4295229

Patna

96990

75949

6516

6637

587

868500

99601940

8677703

Pune

97609

168243

14629

14285

6232

8474000

99772330

9380870

Ranchi

27359

24317

3080

2828

2300

3517000

28489200

3179871

Srinagar

13757

11906

1478

1290

345

503000

14707300

8928474

Surat

80000

78246

9782

9413

2406

3021000

85178900

**

Thane

114812

115819

10745

10429

6131

9053900

127153470

**

Trichy

279713

303684

24651

23387

15273

21983500

322993232

26844958

Trivandrum

137150

141280

32163

30997

15005

21751500

135203452

13555470

Vishakha’nam

88241

80821

10782

10181

2140

3217500

98859245

8034263

Malappuram

42348

21056

7684

6431

3051

4982500

53682100

***

4422714

4441768

588061

558957

Total

272298 448810959 4985727256 467777526

*Total Expenditure including Surat.
**The LOC is combined with Regional Passport Office, Ahmedabad.
*** Since no separate LOC has been allotted to this office, expenditure is being incurred from the Budget Grant of PO Kozhikode.

APPENDICES

175

Back to Contents

Appendix V
Finances of the Ministry of External
Affairs in 2006-2007

MEA Expenditure and Budget (2001-2002 to 2006-2007)

The Budget Allocation of the Ministry of
External Affairs in the Budget Estimates
(BE) 2006-2007 is Rs. 3695.05 crores,
which is Rs. 232.95 crores i.e. 5.93 % less
than the BE 2005-2006 (oAppendix VIII

Outcome Budget in Respect of
Major Heads of Expenditure (200607)n account of completion of Tala
Hydro electric project in Bhutan).
But there is an increase in the
Revised Estimates for 2006-2007 by
Rs. 337.70 crores i.e. by 10.9% over
BE 2006-2007 allocation.

Years

Actuals (in Rs. Crores)

%age variation
from previous
year

2001-2002

2624.55

Nil

2002-2003

3253.79

23.98

2003-2004

3344.53

2.79

2004-2005

3756.15

12.31

2005-2006

4089.67

8.88

2006-2007 (BE)

3695.05

-9.65

2006-2007(RE)

4032.75

10.9

Appendix VI
The Major Sectoral Allocations in the 2006-2007 Budget (RE)
Sectors

Allocation (in Rs. Crores)

MEA Secretariat

154.23

Embassies & Missions

951.41

Passport & Emigration

154.98

Special Diplomatic Expenditure

873.01

Technical & Economic Cooperation

1439.23

Contributions to International Organizations

117.93

Grant to Indian Council for Cultural Relations

68.50

Loans and Advances to Foreign Governments

35.20

Others

APPENDICES

238.09

176

Back to Contents

Appendix VII
Principal Destinations of India’s Aid
Programmes

1

Aid to Bhutan accounts for 41.32 % of India’s total aid
and loan budget. Other destinations for Indian aid
programs include African countries – 1.52 %, Nepal –
16 %, Bangladesh – 1.52 %, Maldives - 0.45%, Sri Lanka
- 2.13 %, Myanmar – 3 % and Others including
Afghanistan – 33.95 %.

2

The Government of India has extended loans to the
Government of Bhutan to assist in the implementation
of developmental projects. During 2006-2007, the loan
extended to the Government of Bhutan amount to Rs.
35.20 crores.

3

The Budget of the Ministry of External Affairs is
essentially a Non-Plan Budget. However, from 1996-97,
a Plan head has been established with the approval of
the Cabinet. This primarily caters to certain large
developmental projects undertaken in Bhutan, as part of
project assistance requested by Government of Bhutan
in the Government of India’s “Aid to Bhutan” Programme.
The Tala-Hydroelectric Project currently under
implementation in Bhutan is scheduled to be
commissioned shortly. The other projects in Bhutan being
funded from the Plan head are the Punatsangchu
Hydroelectric Project and the Dungsum Cement Plant
Project. Kabul-Phu-e-Khumri double circuit transmission
line is also funded from Plan Head since last year under
Aid to Other Developing Countries.

4

The estimated expenditure on the Headquarters of the
Ministry of External Affairs during the current financial
year is Rs. 154.23 crores, which forms about 4 % of the
total estimated revenue budget of the Ministry. Estimated
expenditure on Indian Missions and Posts abroad is
expected to be of the order of Rs. 951.41 crores which is
about 24.79 % of the total revenue expenditure of the
Ministry.

5

The Ministry of External Affairs’ revenue from Passport
and Visa fees and other receipts are likely to be of the
order of Rs. 1428 crores. It is estimated that Passport
fees would account for Rs. 650 crores, Visa fees for Rs.
750 crores and other receipts for Rs. 28 crores.

The principal beneficiaries of our Aid and Loan
Programmes in the Current Financial Years are as
under: (RE)
Aid & Loan to Countries

(In Rupees Crores)

Bhutan

541.80

Bangladesh

20.00

Nepal

210.00

Sri Lanka

28.02

Maldives

6.00

Myanmar

40.00

African Countries

20.00

Others

APPENDICES

445.23

177

Back to Contents

Appendix VIII
Outcome Budget in Respect of Major Heads of Expenditure (2006-07)
S.No.

Name of Scheme/
Programme

Objective

Projected Outcomes

1

2

3

4

1.

Advertising
& Publicity

■

Commissioning and purchase of
feature films, dubbing/screening of
documentaries, photographs/
exhibitions/ subscriptions, etc.

■

Printing of publications, purchase of
books for libraries of Missions/Posts
abroad and for presentation to foreign
dignitaries, magazines and periodicals
for Missions/Posts abroad

■

Publication of ‘India Perspective’ magazine

■

Advertisement in prominent
international newspapers

■

Handling visits of foreign journalists.

■

Networking of Passport Offices

■

Enhanced connectivity between
and with Passport Offices

■

Up-gradation of hardware and
central data-base (PISON)

■

Quicker disposal of applications

■

Scanning of passport files

■

Efficient maintenance of records

■

Printing of travel documents

■

Provision of machine
readable passports

■

Computerization of Passport,
Visa and Consular services in
select Missions abroad.

■

Conducting 7 programmes for
participants from 97 countries
and the League of Arab States

■

Conducting training programmes
and refresher courses for officials of
the Ministry of External Affairs and
also other Government offices
and media.

2.

3.

Passport & Emigration

Training

Effective and correct projection of
India’s image abroad.

and retrieval of records
■

Improved efficiency of service

Exposure of foreign/Indian participants
to the various facets of international
diplomacy and also exposure to the
Indian polity, India’s foreign and
security policies, economy, etc.

4.

International
Cooperation

■

Participation in various International
bodies including the United Nations

Advancing of India’s cause and profile,
in line with the trend of India’s role as
an emerging global power

5.

Other Expenditure
(i) Grant in Aid to
Indian Council
for Cultural Relations

■

Cultural Diplomacy through exchange
of cultural delegations, participation
conferences & seminars, publications,
offering scholarships, organisation of
Festivals of India abroad, etc.

Promotion of Indian culture abroad
and also in international exhibitions,
provide a platform to other countries
for showcasing their culture

APPENDICES

178

Back to Contents

Appendix VIII

S.No.

Name of Scheme/
Programme

Objective

Projected Outcomes

1

2

3

4

(ii) Other
Miscellaneous
items

■

Provide grants-in-aid to various
institutions, fund various bilateral
dialogues, holding of seminars and
studies, propagation of Hindi, etc.

Obtain inputs from research by various
institutions, obtain inputs from
bilateral dialogues for shaping policy,
etc.

Technical & Economic
Cooperation with Other

■

Providing of flood relief assistance,
training of teachers in IT courses,

Creation of goodwill amongst the
people of
Bangladesh towards

6.
India

Countries) Bangladesh

7.

Technical &
Economic Cooperation
with Other Countries
ii) Bhutan

■

Construct mega hydro-electric
projects – Tala & Punatsangchu I,
assistance for other developmental
and social projects, power purchase
from Bhutan.

Improved relations with Bhutan, socioeconomic development of Bhutan,
availability of power, promotion of
trade.

iii) Nepal

■

Health projects, construction of
hospitals, establishment of
educational institutions and other
development projects

Socio-economic development, human
resource development, infrastructure
development in Nepal and creation of
goodwill amongst people of Nepal
towards India.

iv) Sri Lanka

■

Small development projects

Goodwill for India

■

Execution of small community
oriented development projects

■

Tsunami relief projectsreconstruction of KKS harbour

■

Defence cooperation.

■

Defence cooperation.

■

Deputation of Indian medical and
para-medical experts

■

Establishment of a Hydrographic
Survey Unit

■

Establishment of a Faculty of
Hospitality and Tourism Studies

■

Reconstruction/maintenance
of infrastructure projects.

■

Cooperation in remote sensing

v) Maldives

8.

welfare activities, repairs/renovation
of institutions/historical buildings,
etc.

Technical & Economic
Cooperation
with Other Countries

APPENDICES

179

General goodwill for India and to
develop long term interests of India

■

Infrastructure development in
Myanmar, improved road
connectivity, promotion of
cross-border trade and tourism
tourism as well as to facilitate
control of insurgency, arms
smuggling, drugs trafficking and
other allied problems.

Back to Contents

Appendix VIII

S.No.

Name of Scheme/
Programme

Objective

Projected Outcomes

1

2

3

4
Strengthening of cooperation with
Myanmar and creation of goodwill
and influence for India.

vi) Myanmar

vii) Other Developing
Countries

■

Tamanthi hydroelectric project

■

Enhancement of cross-border
connectivity and trade.

■

Educational, cultural and
other cooperation

■

Energy supply to India.

■

Reconstruction of dams,
infrastructure development projects,
power transmission project,
reconstruction of health facilities in
Afghanistan

■

Development of infrastructure,
improved health facilities and
generation of goodwill in
Afghanistan

■

Bilateral assistance to countries in
West Asia and North Africa

■

Development of infrastructure in
Palestine, development in Sudan
and other countries in the West
Asia/North Africa region

■

Rehabilitation and relief
assistance to Iraq

■

Enhancement and improvement of
bilateral relations with 156 ITEC
partner countries.

■

Establishment of Information
technology centers in select
countries in South East Asia

■

Training of candidates from other
countries in various civilian and
military training programmes and
SAARC Programmes.

viii) Aid to African
Countries

ix) Aid to Central Asia

Setting up of projects in the agricultural ■
processing sector, Information
Technology centers, Development
projects in countries in West Africa
and East & Southern Africa
■
■
■

9.

Public Works

APPENDICES

■

Generate goodwill towards India
amongst the people of the countries
in West Africa and East &
Southern Africa

■

Enhance connectivity through IT

Setting up of IT Centers
Defence cooperation
Providing agricultural implements to
countries in Central Asia

■

Development of skills in the
Information Technology sector.
General development of the region
and generation of goodwill towards
India amongst the people in the
countries in Central Asia

Construction of chanceries and
residential buildings in 13
countries abroad

■

Creation of assets and
consequential reduction in the
rental liabilities of Government of
India over a period of time.

180

Back to Contents

Appendix VIII

S.No.

Name of Scheme/
Programme

Objective

Projected Outcomes

1

2

3

4

10.

Housing

APPENDICES

■

Acquisition of land and built-up
properties in 5 countries

■

Construction of 10 projects of
construction of office and institutional
buildings in India including Jawahar Bhavan

■

Construction of residences in 3 countries
abroad and residential
quarters/hostel suites in India

■

Acquisition of properties for residential
purposes in 3 countries

■

Repairs and renovation works of
properties abroad.

181

■

Creation of assets and
consequential reduction in
the rental liabilities of
Government of India over a
period of time

Back to Contents

Appendix IX
Extracts from C & AG Report on Ministry of External Affairs

1. Deficient internal control mechanism
Non-institution of effective internal control
mechanism in the Ministry and the Indian Missions/
Posts abroad as well as deliberate disregard of the
existing instructions and procedures resulted in
irregular/unauthorized expenditure of Rs. 4.92
crores and non-recovery of Rs. 15.04 lakh from
India-based officials.
(Report No. 2 of 2006)
2. Avoidable additional expenditure
Indian Missions at Port Moresby, Suva and Helsinki
in violation of Ministry’s instructions of providing
only economy class excursion air tickets to ITEC
trainees, purchased full fare economy class tickets
for 212 trainees during the period April 1996 to

APPENDICES

august 2004 resulting in an estimated additional
expenditure of Rs. 1.44 crore.
(Report No. 2 of 2006)
3. Avoidable extra expenditure
The decision of the Ministry to increase the
composition of the “Haj Goodwill Delegation 2005”
from around 17 persons in the past years to 36 just
ten days before the start of holy “Haj” pilgrimage
resulted in extra expenditure of Rs. 24.50 lakh on
booking of hotel rooms at higher rates.

182

(Report No. 2 of 2006)

Back to Contents

Appendix X
Treaties/Conventions/Agreements Concluded or Renewed by India with other countries

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement

Date of
Signature

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

A. MULTILATERAL
1

Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants 14.05.2002

13.01.2006

2

Global Development Network

28.10.2005

21.12.2005

3

Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy
and Armed Robbery against Ships in Asia

07.04.2006

16.05.2006

Agreement concerning the Establishing of Global
Technical Regulations for Wheeled Vehicles,
Equipment and Parts Which Can Be Fitted and/or Be
Used on Wheeled Vehicles

25.06.1998

18.01.2006

International Convention for the Suppression of Acts
of Nuclear Terrorism

24.07.2006

01.12.2006

Statute of the Secretariat of the Conference on
Interaction and Confidence Building Measures in Asia

17.06.2006

11.09.2006

Kuala Lumpur Declaration on the East Asia Summit
(ASEAN Countries)

14.12.2005

8

Agreement on South Asian Free Trade Area (SAFTA)

06.01.2004

16.03.2006

9

SAARC Agreement on Mutual Administrative
Assistance in Customs Matters

13.11.2005

03.01.2006

Framework for Co-operation on the Information
Society between the Governments of the Republic of
India, the Federative Republic of Brazil and the
Republic of South Africa

13.09.2006

Memorandum of Understanding on Trilateral
Cooperation in Agriculture and Allied Fields between
the Governments of the Republic of India, the
Federative Republic of Brazil and the Republic of South
Africa under the India-Brazil South Africa (IBSA)
Dialogue Forum initiative

13.09.2006

Memorandum of Cooperation between the Members
of the India-Brazil-South Africa Dialogue Forum the
Government of the Republic of India, the Government
of Federative Republic of Brazil and the Government
of the Republic of South Africa on establishing a
Trilateral Task Team on Biofuels

13.09.2006

Trilateral Agreement among the Government of the
Republic of India, the Government of the Federative
Republic of Brazil and the Government of the Republic
of South Africa concerning Merchant Shipping and
other Maritime Transport Related Matters

13.09.2006

4

5
6
7

10

11

12

13

APPENDICES

183

Back to Contents

Appendix X

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

14

15

16

Date of
Signature

Action Plan on Trade Facilitation for Standards,
Technical Regulations and Conformity Assessment
(among India, Brazil and South Africa)

13.09.2006

Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation
and Management of Marine Turtles and their Habitats
of the India Ocean and South East Asia

21.11.2006

Convention on Protection and Promotion of the
Diversity of Cultural Expressions

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

01.12.2006

B. BILATERAL
1

2

3

4

5
6
7

8
9

10

Afghanistan
Memorandum of Understanding between
BIS and ANSA, Afghanistan on the Cooperation in
the filed of Standardization.

10.04.2006

10.04.2006

Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry
of Human Resource Development of the Republic of
India and the Ministry of Higher Education of the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan on cooperation in the
field of Education

10.04.2006

10.04.2006

Memorandum of Understanding between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan on
cooperation in the field of Rural Development

10.04.2006

10.04.2006

Armenia
Agreement between the Government of India and the
Government of Armenia for the Promotion and
Reciprocal Protection of Investments.

23.05.2003

Australia
Trade and Economic Framework between the Republic
of India and Australia

06.03.2006

Agreement between the Government of India and the
Government of Australia relating to Air Services

06.03.2006

30.08.2004

30.05.2006

06.03.2006

MoU between the Central Board of Excise and Customs
of the Republic of India and the Australian Customs
Service on Customs Cooperation and Mutual
Administrative Assistance in Customs Matters
06.03.2006

03.04.2006

Letter of Intent on India-Australia Strategic Research
Fund

06.03.2006

06.03.2006

MoU between the Department of Biotechnology of the
Government of India and the Australian Department
of Education, Science and Training of the Government
of Australia

06.03.2006

06.03.2006

MoU on Defence Cooperation between the Government
of India and the Government of Australia
06.03.2006

06.03.2006

APPENDICES

184

Back to Contents

Appendix X

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

11

12

13

14

15

16
17

18

19

20

Date of
Signature

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

Memorandum of Understanding on Air Services
Agreement between the Government of India and
the Government of Austria

01.06.2006

Azerbaijan
Agreement between the Government of India and the
Government of the Republic of Azerbaijan on the
Inter-Governmental Commission on Trade, Economic,
Scientific and Technological Cooperation

16.06.2006

Bahamas
MoU on Consultations between the Ministry of
External Affairs of the Republic of India and the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Public Service
of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas.

08.09.2005

Belgium
Social Security Agreement Between the Government
of India and the Government of Belgium.

03.11.2006

Bahrain
Agreement between the Republic of India and the
Government of the Kingdom of Bahrain on Juridical
and Judicial Cooperation in Civil and Commercial
Matters for the service of summons, Judicial
Documents, Commissions, Execution of Judgments
and Arbitral Awards.

13.01.2004

Bangladesh
Trade Agreement between India and Bangladesh

21.03.2006

01.04.2006

Agreement for Mutual Cooperation between the
Government of People’s Republic of Bangladesh and
the Government of the Republic of India for Preventing
Illicit Trafficking in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances and Related Matters
21.03.2006

21.03.2006

Botswana
Agreement on bilateral cooperation between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Republic of Botswana

08.12.2006

08.12.2006

Belarus
Treaty between the Republic of India and the Republic
of Belarus on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal
Matters

05.10.2005

01.06.2006

08.09.2005

16.07.2005

18.01.2006

16.07.2005

30.06.2006

Brazil
Arrangement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the Federative Republic
of Brazil on Gainful Occupation for Family Members
of a Diplomatic Mission or Consular Post.
02.02.2006

APPENDICES

185

Back to Contents

Appendix X

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

Date of
Signature

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Agreement between the Government of the Federative
Republic of Brazil and the Government of the Republic
of India on Cooperation in Defence Related Matters

01.12.2003

19.05.2006

Memorandum of Understanding between BIS and
ABNT, Brazil in the filed of Standardization and
Certification

12.09.2006

12.09.2006

Canada
MoU between the Government of India and the
Government of Canada on Climate Change Initiatives,
including Clean Development Mechanism Projects.

08.01.2005

08.01.2005

China
Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation
between the Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic
of India and the Ministry of Agriculture of the People’s
Republic of China in the field of Agriculture

28.03.2006

28.03.2006

Protocol between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the People’s Republic
of China on the Establishment of Consulates General
at Guangzhou and Kolkata

21.11.2006

21.11.2006

Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the People’s Republic
of China on the issue of Property of the Consulate of
the Republic of India in Shanghai

21.11.2006

21.11.2006

Protocol on cooperation between the Ministry of
External Affairs of the Republic of India and the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China
21.11.2006

21.12.2006

The Protocol between the Ministry of Agriculture of
the Republic of India and the General Administration
of Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine of
the People’s Republic of China on Phytosanitary
Requirements for Exporting Rice from India to China

21.11.2006

21.11.2006

Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the People’s Republic
of China for the Promotion and Protection of
Investments

21.11.2006

Agreement of cooperation on Inspection of Iron ore
between Export Inspection Council of the Republic
of India and the General Administration of Quality
Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine of the People’s
Republic of China

21.11.2006

21.11.2006

Exchange Programme between the Ministry of Human
Resource Development of the Government of the
Republic of India and the Ministry of Education of the
Government of the People’s Republic of China

21.11.2006

21.11.2006

APPENDICES

186

Date of Entry
into force

Back to Contents

Appendix X

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

Date of
Signature

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

Memorandum on Cooperation between the Indian
Institute of Public Administration, India and the Party
School of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of China, the People’s Republic of China

21.11.2006

21.11.2006

The Agreement on Forestry Cooperation between the
Ministry of Environment and Forests of the Republic
of India and State Forestry Administration of the
People’s Republic of China

21.11.2006

21.11.2006

Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the People’s Republic
of China on Preventing Theft, Clandestine Excavation
and Illicit Import and Export of Cultural Property

21.11.2006

Memorandum of Understanding between the
Archaeological Survey of India of the Republic of
India and the State Administration of Cultural
Heritage of the People’s Republic of China

21.11.2006

21.11.2006

Memorandum of Understanding between the Indian
Council of Agriculture Research and the Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Sciences for cooperation in
Agricultural Research

21.11.2006

21.11.2006

Memorandum of Understanding between Forward
Markets Commission, India and China Security
Supervision Committee regarding Commodity Futures
Regulatory cooperation

21.11.2006

21.11.2006

Cuba
Memorandum of Understanding in the filed of
Consumer Protection between the Ministry of
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution,
Government of the Republic of India and Ministry of
Domestic Trade of the Republic of Cuba

06.09.2006

06.09.2006

Dominican Republic
Bilateral Cooperation Agreement between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Dominican Republic.

17.02.2006

Joint Statement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of the
Dominican Republic

17.02.2006

Ecuador
Cultural Cooperation Agreement between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Republic of Ecuador

14.07.2006

17.02.2006

Arrangement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the Republic of

APPENDICES

187

Back to Contents

Appendix X

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

Date of
Signature

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

Ecuador on Gainful Occupation for Family Members
of a Diplomatic Mission or Consular Post

18.07.2006

18.07.2006

Fiji
Memorandum of Understanding between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Republic of the Fiji Islands on
Development of Cooperation.

26.10.2006

26.10.2006

Germany
Memorandum of Understanding between BIS and DIN
Germany on the cooperation and mutual interest in the
fields of Standardization and Certification.

24.04.2006

24.04.2006

Agreement between the Ministry of Defence of the
Republic of India and the Federal Ministry of Defence
of the Federal Republic of Germany concerning
Bilateral Defence co-operation

0612.2006

Memorandum of Understanding between Deutsche
Bann AG (Germany) and Indian Railways for
Cooperation in this field of Railways

24.04.2006

Hungary
Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the Republic of
Hungary for the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection
of Investments.

03.11.2003

04.10.2006

Iceland
Cultural Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of Iceland

19.10.2005

03.06.2006

Ireland
Agreement on Cultural Cooperation between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of Ireland.

19.01.2006

21.08.2006

Agreement on Scientific and Technological Cooperation
between the Government of the Republic of India and
the Government of Ireland
19.01.2006

15.11.2006

International Standards Organization (ISO)
Memorandum of Understanding between BIS-NITS
and ISO in the filed of training on Standardization and
related matters

13.09.2006

Israel
Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the State of Israel on
Cooperation in the fields of Health and Medicine

09.10.2003

APPENDICES

188

24.04.2006

02.01.2006

13.09.2006

11.05.2006

20.06.2006

Back to Contents

Appendix X

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

53

54

55

56

57
58

59

60

61

62

63

Date of
Signature

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

Italy
Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry
of Railways of the Republic of India and Ferrovie Dello
Stato S.P.A, the Republic of Italy

21.06.2006

21.06.2006

Memorandum of Understanding on Air Services
Agreement between the Government of India and the
Government of Italy

15.02.2006

15.02.2006

Protocol Amending the Convention between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Italian Republic for the Avoidance
of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal
Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income signed at
New Delhi on 19 February, 1993

09.01.2006

Japan
Protocol Amending the Convention between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of Japan for the Avoidance of Double
Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with
Respect to Taxes on Income

24.02.2006

Korea
Memorandum of Understanding between Coast Guard
and Korean Coast Guard

13.03.2006

Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the Republic of Korea
on Cooperation in the fields of Science and Technology

07.02.2006

Joint Ministerial Statement on the Launching of a Joint
Task Force to Develop a Comprehensive Economic
Partnership Agreement between the Republic of India
and the Republic of Korea.

07.02.2006

Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the Republic of Korea
concerning Cooperation and Mutual Assistance in
Customs Matters.

07.02.2006

Kenya
Memorandum of Understanding on Air Services
Agreement between the Government of India and the
Government of the Kingdom of Thailand

27.04.2006

Kuwait
Agreement between the Republic of India and the
State of Kuwait on Juridical and Judicial Cooperation
in Civil and Commercial Matters

16.08.2005

29.05.2006

13.03.2006

28.07.2006

27.04.2006

11.05.2006

Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the State of Kuwait

APPENDICES

189

Back to Contents

Appendix X

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

Date of
Signature

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on
Income.

15.06.2006

Executive Programme for the Cultural and Information
Exchanges between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the State of Kuwait for
the years 2006-2008

15.06.2006

Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the State of Kuwait
on Drug Demand Reduction and Prevention of Illicit
Trafficking in Narcotic Drugs, Psychotropic Substances
and Precursor Chemicals and Related Matters.

15.06.2006

Memorandum of Understanding on Air Services
Agreement between the Government of India and
the Government of the State of Kuwait

11.07.2006

11.07.2006

Maldives
Memorandum of Understanding between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Republic of Maldives for setting
up of ‘India-Maldives Friendship Faculty of Hospitality
and Tourism Studies’ at Male, Maldives.

10.07.2006

10.07.2006

Mauritius
Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the Republic of
Mauritius on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal
Matters.

24.10.2005

Memorandum of Understanding in the filed of
Consumer Protection and Legal Metrology between
Government of the Republic of India, Department
of Consumer Affairs, Ministry of Consumer Affairs,
Food and Public Distribution, and the Government
of the Republic of Mauritius, Ministry of Industry,
Small & Medium Enterprises, Commerce &
Cooperatives and the Ministry of Women’s Rights,
Family Welfare and Consumer Protection

24.10.2005

24.10.2005

Mongolia
Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of Mongolia on Mutual
Waiver of Visa Requirements for Holders of Diplomatic
and Official Passports.

23.12.2005

23.01.2006

09.12.2005

02.06.2006

Memorandum of Understanding between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of Mongolia on the Establishment of

APPENDICES

190

Back to Contents

Appendix X

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

Date of
Signature

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

India-Mongolia Friendship Agropark for Research and
Demonstration in Darkhan UUL AIMAG, Mongolia.

23.12.2005

23.12.2005

Programme of Cooperation in the field of Culture
between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of Mongolia for the years
2006-2008

23.12.2005

23.12.2005

Agreement on Lease of Land to the Embassy of the
Republic of India between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of Mongolia

23.12.2005

23.12.2005

Morocco
Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry
of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation of the
Republic of India and the Ministry Delegated to the
Prime Minister in charge of Housing and Urbanism of
the Kingdom of Morocco.

13.01.2006

11.02.2006

Myanmar
Framework Agreement for Mutual Cooperation in the
field of Remote Sensing between the Government of
the Republic of India and the Government of the
Union of Myanmar.

09.03.3006

Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in
Buddhist Studies between Indian Council for Cultural
Relations, Government of the Republic of India and
Ministry of Religious Affairs, Government of the
Union of Myanmar.

09.03.3006

09.03.3006

Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in
Petroleum Sector between Ministry of Petroleum and
Natural Gas of the Government of the Republic of
India and Ministry of Energy of the Government of the
Union of Myanmar.

09.03.3006

09.03.3006

New Zealand
Air Service Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of New Zealand. 02.05.2006
Pakistan
Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry
of Defence, Government of the Republic of India, and
the Ministry of Defence, Government of the Islamic
Republic of Pakistan, for the Establishment of a
Communication Link between the Indian Coast Guard
and the Pakistan Maritime Agency.

03.10.2005

Oman
Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry
of the Republic of India and the Ministry of Defence
of the Sultanate of Oman on Military Cooperation.

06.12.2005

APPENDICES

191

06.03.2006

Back to Contents

Appendix X

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

Date of
Signature

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

Pakistan
Agreement between the Government of India and the
Government of Pakistan relating to Rail link between
the two countries via Munabao (India) and Zero Point
Railway Station (near Khokhopar, Pakistan)

31.01.2006

31.01.2006

Memorandum of Understanding between the
Government of India and the Government of Islamic
Republic of Pakistan regarding utilization of funds for
Earthquake Relief Assistance

11.06.2006

11.06.2006

Philippines
Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the Republic of the
Philippines concerning Defence Cooperation

04.02.2006

11.11.2006

Memorandum of Understanding on cooperation in
Agriculture and Related fields between the Government
of the Republic of India and the Government of the
Republic of the Philippines.
04.02.2006

02.11.2006

Poland
Agreement on Economic Cooperation between the
Government of India and the Government of the
Republic of Poland.

12.05.2006

Qatar
Air Service Agreement between the Government
of the Republic of India and the Government of the
Sate of Qatar

14.04.2005

Russian Federation
Memorandum of Understanding on Air Services
Agreement between the Government of India and
the Government of the Russian Federation

21.02.2006

21.02.2006

Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry
of Railways of the Republic of India and the Russian
State Company JSC-Russian Railways

25.03.2006

25.03.2006

Saudi Arabia
Memorandum of Understanding on Combating Crime
between the Republic of India and the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia

25.01.2006

Convention between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the
Prevention of Tax Evasion with respect to Taxes on
Income.

25.01.2006

22.02.2006

Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the Kingdom of Saudi

APPENDICES

192

Back to Contents

Appendix X

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

Date of
Signature

Arabia concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments.

25.01.2006

Cooperation Agreement between the Government of
the Republic of India and the Government of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in the field of Youth and
Sports

25.01.2006

Delhi Declaration between the Republic of India
and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

27.01.2006

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

01.11.2006

Senegal
Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the Republic of Senegal
for the Promotion and Protection of Investments
2006
Serbia and Montenegro
Convention between the Council of Ministers of Serbia
and Montenegro and the Government of the Republic
of India for the Avoidance of Double Taxation with
respect to Taxes on Income and on Capital

23.01.2006

Agreement on Trade and Economic Cooperation
between the Government of the Republic of India and
the Council of Ministers of Serbia and Montenegro

16.03.2006

Singapore
Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the Republic of
Singapore on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal
Matters.

29.06.2005

Memorandum of Understanding on Air Services
Agreement between the Government of India and
the Government of Singapore

11.07.2006

Slovak Republic
Agreement between the Republic of India and the
Slovak Republic for the Promotion and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments.

25.09.2006

26.07.205

04.11.2005

11.07.2006

South Africa
100 Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of South Africa and the Government of the Republic
of India concerning Merchant Shipping, and other
Maritime Transport Related Matters.

03.03.2006

101 Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the Republic of South
Africa on Cooperation in the field of Education

02.10.2006

02.10.2006

102 Memorandum of Understanding between the Indian
Ministry of Railways of the Republic of India and
Transnet Ltd. (SPOORNET) South Africa

02.10.2006

02.10.2006

APPENDICES

193

19.04.2006

Back to Contents

Appendix X

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

Date of
Signature

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Spain
103 Agreement between the Republic of India and the
Kingdom of Spain on Mutual Legal Assistance in
Criminal Matters

03.07.2006

28.07.2006

104 Memorandum of Understanding between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Republic of South Africa on
Cooperation in the field of Housing and Human
Settlements.

27.04.2006

27.04.2006

Sri Lanka
105 Bilateral cooperation Agreement between BIS and
SLSI, Sri Lanka in the fields of Standardization and
Conformity assessment

17.08.2006

17.08.2006

Sudan
106 Memorandum of Understanding between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of Sudan for Cooperation in the field
of Agriculture and Allied Sectors

13.05.2006

Switzerland
107 Memorandum of Understanding on Air Services
Agreement between the Government of India and the
Government of the Kingdom of Thailand

02.06.2006

02.06.2006

Tanzania
108 Memorandum of Understanding on Air Services
Agreement between the Government of India and the
Government of the Tanzania

25.04.2006

25.04.2006

Thailand
109 Memorandum of Understanding on Air Services
Agreement between the Government of India and the
Government of the Kingdom of Thailand

10.02.2006

10.02.2006

Turkmenistan
110 Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the Republic of
Turkmenistan for the Promotion and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments.

20.09.1995

30.05.2006

UAE
111 Memorandum of Understanding on Air Services
Agreement between the Government of India and
the Government of the UAE

04.04.2006

04.04.2006

United Kingdom
112 Air Service Agreement between the Government of
India and the Government of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

08.10.2005

APPENDICES

194

Date of Entry
into force

Back to Contents

Appendix X

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

Date of
Signature

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

United States of America
113 Agreement on Science and Technology Cooperation
between the Government of the Republic of India and
the Government of the United States of America

17.10.2005

16.02.2006

114 Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the United States of
America on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal
Matters

17.01.2001

01.07.2005

Date of Entry
into force

02.06.2006

115 Memorandum of Understanding concerning Consumer
Product Safety between the Department of Consumer
Affairs, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public
Distribution, Government of the Republic of India and
the Consumer Product Safety Commission, Government
of the United States.
12.01.2006

12.01.2006

116 Memorandum of Understanding in the area of Forward
Market Commission of India with the United States
Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC),
USA

18.10.2006

18.10.2006

117 Memorandum of Understanding between BIS and
ANSI, USA in the filed of Standardization,
Conformity assessment and exchange of information
and publications

13.09.2006

13.09.2006

118 Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry
of Coal, Government of India and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency on Establishment
of the Coalbed and Coalmine Methane Clearinghouse

16.11.2006

16.11.2006

119 Air Service Agreement between the Government of
India and the Government of the United States of
America

14.04.2005

Zimbabwe
120 Memorandum of Understanding between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Republic of Maldives for setting
up of ‘India-Maldives Friendship Faculty of Hospitality
and Tourism Studies’ at Male, Maldives.

14.06.2006

APPENDICES

195

14.06.2006

Back to Contents

Appendix XI
Instruments of Full Powers Issued during the period 1 January 2006 to December 2006
Sl. No. Convention/Treaty
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

Date of
Full Powers

In favour of Shri K. M. Chandrasekhar, Secretary, Department of Revenue,
Ministry of Finance for signing the Protocol Amending the Convention between
the Government of the Republic of India and the Government of the Italian
Republic for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal
Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income signed at New Delhi on 19th February, 1993

09.01.2006

In favour of Shri S. Jaipal Reddy, Minister of Urban Development and Culture for
signing the Cultural Cooperation Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of the Republic of Ireland

18.01.2006

In favour of Shri Balakrishna Shetty, Ambassador of India to Senegal for signing the
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government
of the Republic of Senegal for the Promotion and Protection of Investments

18.01.2006

In favour of Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of State (Independent Charge) for Science
and Technology and Ocean Development for signing the Agreement on Scientific
and Technological Cooperation between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of Ireland

19.01.2006

In favour of Shri P. Chidambaram, Minister of Finance for signing the Convention
between the Council of Ministers of Serbia and Montenegro and the Government
of the Republic of India for the Avoidance of Double Taxation with respect to
Taxes on Income and on Capital

23.01.2006

In favour of Shri Alok Prasad, High Commissioner of India to Singapore for signing
the Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery
against Ships in Asia

16.02.2006

In favour of Shri Kamal Nath, Minister for Commerce & Industry for signing the
Agreement on Trade and Economic Cooperation between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Council of Ministers of Serbia and Montenegro

16.03.2006

In favour of Shri Sharad Pawar, Minister of Agriculture for signing the
Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation between the Ministry of
Agriculture of the Republic of India and the Ministry of Agriculture of the People’s
Republic of China in the field of Agriculture

23.03.2006

In favour of Shri Kamal Nath, Minister for Commerce & Industry for signing the
Agreement on Economic Cooperation between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the Republic of Poland

12.05.2006

In favour of Shri Sharad Pawar, Minister for Agriculture for signing the
Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of Sudan for Cooperation in the field of Agriculture and
Allied Sectors

13.05.2006

In favour of Dr. M. K. Bhan, Secretary, Department of Biotechnology for signing
the Agreement between the Government of India and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) concerning the
Establishment of a Regional Centre for Biotechnology Training and Education
in India

12.06.2006

APPENDICES

196

Back to Contents

Appendix XI

Sl. No. Convention/Treaty

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

Date of
Full Powers

In favour of Shri Jairam Ramesh, Minister of State (Commerce) for signing the
Agreement between the Government of India and the Government of the
Republic of Azerbaijan on the Inter-Governmental Commission on Trade,
Economic, Scientific and Technological Cooperation

16.06.2006

In favour of Shri S. B. Ghosh Dastidar, Member Traffic, Railway Board, Ministry of
Railways for signing the Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of
Railways of the Republic of India and Ferrovie Dello Stato S.P.A, the Republic of Italy

21.06.2006

In favour of Shri Nirupam Sen, Permanent Representative of India to the United
Nations for signing the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism

06.07.2006

In favour of Shri Badal K. Das, Secretary, Ministry of Culture for signing the
Cultural Cooperation Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the Republic of Ecuador

14.07.2006

In favour of Shri M.K. Lokesh, Ambassador of India to the Slovak Republic for
signing the Agreement between the Republic of India and the Slovak Republic for
the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments.

11.08.2006

In favour of Shri Ashok Jha, Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs for signing
the Agreement between the Republic of India and Bosnia and Herzegovina for the
Promotion and Protection of Investments

11.09.2006

In favour of Dr. Anil Kakodkar, Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission and
Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy for signing the Agreement on the
Establishment of the ITER International Fusion Energy Organization for the Joint
Implementation of the ITER Project; Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities
of the ITER International Fusion Energy Organization for the Joint Implementation
of the ITER Project; Joint Declaration by the Representatives of the Parties to the
ITER Negotiations on the occasion of the Ministerial Meeting for ITER, Brussels,
24 May 2006; and Joint Declaration by the Representatives of the Parties to the
ITER Negotiations on the occasion of the Ministerial Meeting for ITER, Brussels,
24 May 2006

09.11.2006

In favour of Shri Kapil Sibal for the signing the Agreement between the
Government of India and the Government of Norway on Cooperation in the
fields of Science and Technology.

10.11.2006

In favour of Ms. Vijaya Latha Reddy for the signing of Memorandum of
Understanding on the Conservation and Management of Marine Turtles and
their Habitats of the India Ocean and South East Asia

21.11.2006

In favour of Shri Ashok Jha, Finance Secretary, for the signing of the Agreement
between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government of the
republic of Korea for the Promotion and Protection of Investments.

07.12.2006

APPENDICES

197

Back to Contents

Appendix XII
Instruments of Ratification/Accession issued during the period 1 January 2006 to December 2006
Sl. No. Instruments of Ratification/Accession

Date of Issue of Ratification

1

Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants

10.01.2006

2

Treaty between the Republic of India and the Republic of Belarus on
Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters

18.01.2006

Agreement concerning the Establishing of Global Technical Regulations
for Wheeled Vehicles, Equipment and Parts Which Can Be Fitted
and/or Be Used on Wheeled Vehicles

08.01.2006 (A)

Memorandum of Understanding on Combating Crime between the
Republic of India and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

02.02.2006

Agreement on Science and Technology Cooperation between the
Government of the Republic of India and the Government of the
United States of America

16.02.2006

6

Agreement on South Asian Free Trade Area (SAFTA)

20.02.2006

7

Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Defence,
Government of the Republic of India, and the Ministry of Defence,
Government of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, for the Establishment
of a Communication Link between the Indian Coast Guard and the
Pakistan Maritime Security Agency

16.03.2006

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
and the Government of the Republic of India concerning Merchant
Shipping, and other Maritime Transport Related Matters

21.04.2006

Memorandum of Understanding for the Establishment of a Collaborative
Relationship to Combat Transnational Crime and Develop Regional
Co-operation between Indian Coast Guard and Korea Coast Guard

21.04.2006

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the State of Israel on Cooperation in the fields of Health
and Medicine

11.05.2006

Agreement between the Republic of India and the State of Kuwait on
Juridical and Judicial Cooperation in Civil and Commercial Matters

11.05.2006

Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed
Robbery against Ships in Asia

16.05.2006

Agreement between the Government of the Federative Republic of
Brazil and the Government of the Republic of India on Cooperation in
Defence Related Matters

19.05.2006

Protocol Amending the Convention between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of Japan for the Avoidance of
Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with Respect to
Taxes on Income

29.05.2006

Cultural Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of Iceland

23.06.2006

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Republic of Korea on Cooperation in the fields of
Science and Technology

28.07.2006

3

4
5

8

9

10

11
12
13

14

15
16

APPENDICES

198

Back to Contents

Appendix XII

Sl. No. Instruments of Ratification/Accession
17

Date of Issue of Ratification

Agreement between the Republic of India and the Kingdom of Spain on
Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters

28.07.2006

Statute of the Secretariat of the Conference on Interaction and
Confidence Building Measures in Asia

14.08.2006

Cultural Cooperation Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of Ireland

31.08.2006

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Republic of the Philippines concerning Defence
Cooperation

11.09.2006

Agreement on Scientific and Technological Cooperation between the
Government of the Republic of India and the Government of Ireland

15.09.2006

Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in Agriculture and
Related Fields between the Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Republic of the Philippines

02.11.2006

23

International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism

16.11.2006

24

Agreement between the Republic of India and Bosnia and Herzegovina
for the Promotion and Protection of Investments

27.11.2006

Convention on Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural
Expressions

01.12.2006

Cultural cooperation Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of the Republic of Ecuador

01.12.2006

18
19
20

21
22

25
26

APPENDICES

199

Back to Contents

Appendix XIII
Conference/ Seminars/ Study projects organized/ undertaken by Institutions/ NGOs, which were
funded, partially or wholly, by Policy Planning & Research Division till January 2007.
Sl. No.

Event

Institution / Beneficiary

1.

Research project “Threat of Conservative Ascendancy in
Bangladesh & Emerging Challenge to India’s Foreign Policy”.

Omeo Kumar Das Institute of Social
Change & Development (OKDISCD)
Guwahati

2.

Publication of Verbatim Report and papers of the seminar on
“Indian Foreign Policy: Continuity & Emerging Challenges”
held on 21.2.06 in New Delhi.

Foundation for Peace and Sustainable
Development, New Delhi.

3.

Organizing an Intl. Conf. on “India-Africa Relation: The
Emerging Policy & Development Perspective” on 24-26/7/06
in Mumbai.

Centre for African Studies (CAS),
University of Mumbai

5.

Research project “Identifying Cultural Similarities between
Tajikistan and Kashmir”. Completed in 6 months

Centre of Central Asian Studies,
University of Kashmir, Kashmir

6.

Undertake specific projects such as holding international
conferences, publishing and printing original research work,
organizing lecture tours in China for foreign scholars

Centre for Indian Studies, Beijing
University, Beijing

7.

A national conference on “India’s Perspective on West Asia”
on 21-22/8/06 in Delhi

Centre for West Asian Studies, Jamia
Millia Islamia University, N. Delhi

8

Research project on “Reshaping the Discourse on Pakistan
occupied Kashmir”

Centre for Strategic & Regional
Studies (CSRS), University of Jammu

9

Round trip airfare in r/o Prof. Sreemati Chakrabarti to visit
Sun Yat-sen University, Gauangzhou, China

Deptt. Of East Asian Studies,
University of Delhi

10

Seminar on “Foreign Students in India” in Pune on
4 August 2006

University of Pune

11

Research project entitled “India’s External Relation: Role
of Education Sector” by Dr. Kavita Sharma, Prof. JNU

Centre for Policy Research, N. Delhi

12

Proposed return visit of a six member delegation of Indian to
China to continue the Policy dialogue initiated in March 2004.

(RIS) Research and Information
system for Developing Countries,
New Delhi

13

Study project on Lebanon with particular focus on the
implication of the current development for Lebanon from
region for the International order and for India.

Group for Economic & Social Studies
(GESS), New Delhi

14

6th India-Korea bilateral dialogue in Delhi on 11-12
December 20006

ICRIER, New Delhi

15

International Conf. on Private International Law to be held
on 2-3 December 2006 in New Delhi

The Indian Society of International
Law, (ISIL), New Delhi

16

A seminar on “Multilateralism disarmament and arms
control” on 26 - 27 October 2006 in New Delhi

JUN, New Delhi

17

A seminar on “Strengthening Peace process in Sri-Lanka”
on 8-9 September 2006

Institute for Defence Studies (IDSA),
N. Delhi

18

A two day seminar on “Promoting Excellence in Sustainable
Development” on 19-20 December 2006 in New Delhi

Confederation of Indian Industry
(CII), New Delhi

APPENDICES

200

Back to Contents

Appendix XIII

Sl. No. Event

Institution / Beneficiary

19

A seminar on “India-China Border Trade-a Strategy for
Frontier Development” to be held on 5-6 March 2007 at
Gangtok.

Indian Council of Social Science
Research (ICSSR) North Eastern
Regional Centre, Shillong (Meghalaya)

20

Proposed expenditure to be incurred on the visit of two
IDSA’s officials to attend the first meeting of the forum for
dicussing global issues to be held in Washington D.C.
on 1st to 2nd Feb. 2007.

Institute for Defence Studies and
Analyses (IDSA), New Delhi

APPENDICES

201

Back to Contents

Appendix XIV
List of ITEC Training Institutes in India

S. No

Name of Institute

City

1

Administrative Staff College of India

Hyderabad

2

Aptech Limited.

New Delhi

3

Bureau of Indian Standards

New Delhi

4

Bureau of Parliamentary Studies and Training

New Delhi

5

Central Fertilizer Quality Control & Training Institute

6

Central Institute of English and Foreign Languages

Hyderabad

7

Central Institute of Tool Design

Hyderabad

8

Central Institute for Rural Electrification

Hyderabad

9

Central Scientific Instruments Organisation

New Delhi

10

Centre For Development of Advanced Computing

11

CMC Ltd.

12

Comptroller and Auditor General of India

13

Entrepreneurship Development Institute of India

14

Fluid Control Reseach Institiute

15

Human Settlement Management Institute

New Delhi

16

Indian Institute of Mass Communication

New Delhi

17

Indian Institute of Production Management

18

Indian Institute of Remote Sensing

19

Indian Institute of Technology

20

Institute of Applied Manpower Research

New Delhi

21

Institute of Government Accounts Finance

New Delhi

22

International Management Institute

New Delhi

23

International Statistical Education Centre

24

National Crime Records Bureau

25

National Institute of Bank Management

26

National Institute of Educational Planning & Administration

New Delhi

27

National Institute of Entrepreneurship and Small Business Development

Noida, UP

28

National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education & Research

29

National Institute of Rural Development

Hyderabad

30

National Institute of Small Industry Extension Training

Hyderabad

31

NIIT Limited

New Delhi

32

Research & Information System for the Non-aligned and Other Developing Countries

New Delhi

33

RITES

Gurgaon, Haryana

34

SIBIT

New Delhi

35

South India Textile Research Association

Faridabad, Haryana

Mohali (Chandigarh)
New Delhi
New Delhi
Bhat, Gujarat
Kerala

Orissa
Dehradun
Roorkee

Kolkata
New Delhi
Pune

Mohali,Punjab

Coimbatore

36

TATA Infotech Ltd.

37

Technical Teachers’ Training Institute

38

Telecommunications Consultant Indian Ltd. (TCIL)

New Delhi

39

V.V. Giri National Labour Institute

Noida, UP

APPENDICES

New Delhi
Chennai

202

Back to Contents

Appendix XV
List of ITEC/SCAAP partner countries

S. No

Countries

S. No

Countries

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38

Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Anguilla
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia - Herzogovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Burkina Fasso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Cape Verde Island
Cayman Island
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
Colombia
Commonwealth of Dominica
Comoros
Congo
Costa Rica
Croatia

39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76

Cuba
Czech Republic
Djibouti
Dominican Republic
East Timor
Ecuador
Egypt
El-Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethopia
Fiji
Gabon
Gambia
Georgia
Ghana
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Korea(DPRK)
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Latvia

APPENDICES

203

Back to Contents

Appendix XV

S. No

Countries

77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116

Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania
Macedonia
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Micronesia
Moldova
Mongolia
Montserrat
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nauru
Nepal
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Oman
Palau
Palestine
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Qatar
Republic Of Sao Tome
Romania

APPENDICES

S. No

117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
143
144
145
146
147
148
149
150
151
152
153
154
155
156

204

Countries

Russia
Rwanda
Samoa
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Solomon Island
South Africa
Sri Lanka
St. Christopher & Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent & Grenadines
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Syria
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad & Tabago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Turks & Caicos Island
Tuvalu
Uganda
Ukraine
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela
Vietnam
Yemen
Zaire
Zambia
Zimbabwe

Back to Contents

Appendix XVI
Countries allotted Defence Training slots in 2006-07
S.No Country

Army

Navy

Air Force

DSSC

NDC

Total

1

Afghanistan

67

-

-

2

1

70

2

Algeria

-

-

-

-

1

1

3

Bangladesh

11

14

2

-

1

28

4

Bhutan

-

-

-

1

5

Benin

-

1

-

-

-

1

6

Botswana

4

-

-

-

-

4

7

Burkina Faso

1

-

-

-

-

1

8

Cambodia

5

2

8

-

-

15

9

Congo

2

-

-

-

-

2

10

DPRK

2

-

-

-

-

2

11

Ethiopia

2

-

-

-

-

2

12,.

Ghana

4

9

5

1

-

18

13

Indonesia

3

3

1

1

1

9

14

Kazakhstan

3

1

-

1

-

5

15

Kenya

8

3

-

-

-

11

16

Kyrgyzstan

6

-

-

-

-

6

17

Lao PDR

2

-

1

-

-

3

18

Lebanon

5

-

-

1

-

6

19

Lesotho

5

-

-

-

-

5

20

Malaysia

7

6

1

1

-

14

21

Maldives

-

-

-

1

1

2

22

Mauritius

15

16

7

-

-

38

23

Mongolia

7

-

-

1

-

8

24

Myanmar

26

4

4

1

1

36

25

Namibia

-

-

8

-

-

8

26

Nepal

-

-

-

2

1

3

27

Nigeria

5

9

2

1

1

18

28

Seychelles

4

5

-

1

-

10

29

Sri Lanka

-

-

-

3

2

5

30

Syria

-

-

-

1

-

1

31

Tajikistan

10

-

-

-

-

10

32

Tanzania

3

1

-

-

-

4

33

Thailand

2

3

1

1

1

8

34

Uzbekistan

1

-

-

-

-

1

35

Vietnam

7

6

3

1

1

18

36

Zambia

9

-

2

1

-

12

Zanzibar

-

2

-

-

-

2

Total

226

85

45

21

12

389

1

Note: 11 slots under SAP (Bhutan – 1, Maldives-2, Nepal-3, Sri Lanka-5)

APPENDICES

205

Back to Contents

Appendix XVII
Gender-Related Statistics
Cadre

Total
in position

No. of Lady
officers

As % of the total
strength

IFS

618

79

12.7%

IFS-B

2482

339

13.6%

L& T

11

2

18%

Interpreters

18

5

27.7%

Library

11

2

18%

APPENDICES

206

Back to Contents

Appendix XVIII
Seminars/Conferences/Lectures/Meetings organized by ICWA
S. No.

Date

Event

1.

13 April 2006

Lecture on “Cyprus as a Bridge Between India and the European Union”
by Tassos Papadopoulos, President of the Republic of Cyprus

2.

1 May 2006

Reception to commemorate the 51st Anniversary of the Inauguration
of Sapru House

3.

9 May 2006

Dialogue between the Polish Foreign Office Delegation and ICWA

4.

17 May 2006

Talk on “Maldives: A Nation in Transition”by Mohamed Nasheed,
Minister of Information of the Republic of Maldives

5.

20 May 2006

Foreign Affairs Discussion Topic: “Nepal: The Next Steps”;Lead Speaker:
Maj. Gen. Ashok Mehta (Retd.)

6.

23 May 2006

Foreign Secretary’s Meeting with French Diplomats

7.

23 May 2006

Talk on “Recent Developments in Latin America and their Implications
for Regional and Global Politics” by Alcides Rondon, Vice Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Venezuela

8.

24 May 2006

The Fourth “Africa Day” Lecture: “India and Africa – Yesterday and
Tomorrow” (in association with the African Heads of Mission in India)
by Mani Shankar Aiyar, Minister of Youth Affairs & Sports and Panchayati
Raj

9.

3 June 2006

Foreign Affairs Discussion Topic: “Recent Developments in India-Pakistan
Relations”;Lead Speaker: Siddharth Varadaraja, Deputy Editor, The Hindu

10.

3 June 2006

Screening of the documentary film “The Unfinished Revolution” by Suhas
Borker[Beta: 54 min; 1998; English]

11.

12 June 2006

Foreign Affairs Discussion Topic: “Emerging Strategic Architecture in
South-East Asia”;Lead Speaker: A.N. Ram, Former Secretary, Ministry
of External Affairs

12.

16 June 2006

‘Soweto Day’ Screening of ‘Sarafina’ ‘The Sound of Freedom’ to
commemorate the 30th Anniversary of the Students’ Uprising in South
Africa(in collaboration with the High Commission of the Republic of
South Africa)

13.

17 June 2006

Foreign Affairs Discussion Topic: “Recent Developments Pertaining to
Iran: Regional and Global Implications”;Lead Speaker: Shri M. Hamid
Ansari, former Ambassador to the UAE, Afghanistan, Iran and Saudi
Arabia, and Permanent Representative to the United Nations

14.

23 June 2006

Valedictory Function for the Indian Foreign Service 2004 Batch and Award
of the B.K. Sanyal Memorial Medals (in collaboration with the Foreign
Service Institute and the Association of Indian Diplomats)

15.

27 June 2006

Foreign Affairs DiscussionTopic: “Africa in the Post Cold War World: The
Challenge of Nation Building, Peace & Development”;Lead Speaker:
Dr. Gregg Mills, Director, The Brenthurst Foundation, Johannesburg

16.

1 July 2006

Foreign Affairs DiscussionTopic: “Afghanistan: Foreign Policy, Regional
Relations & Future Perspectives”;Lead Speaker: Dr. Rangin Dadfar
Spanta, Foreign Minister of Afghanistan

17.

27 July 2006

The 2nd Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru Memorial Lecture on “The Clash of
Civilisations’ Revisited: Implications of the Global War on Terror and
the Demonisation of the Other” by M.J. Akbar, Editor-in-Chief, The
Asian Age

APPENDICES

207

Back to Contents

Appendix XVIII

S. No.
18.

Date
8 August 2006

Event
(i) Address by Emomali Sharifovich RahmonovPresident of the
Republic of Tajikistan
(ii) Seminar on “India and Tajikistan in International Affairs”and
release of following books “The Tajikon” by Academician Bobojon
Gafurov and “Selected Short Stories” of Rabindranath Tagore
Signing of MoU on Cooperation
between the Indian Council of World Affairs andAcademy of Sciences,
Dushanbe (M. Ilolov, President, Academy of Sciences, Dushanbe,
Republic of Tajikistan and Talmiz Ahmad, Director General, ICWA)
[in collaboration with the India-Central Asia Foundation (ICAF)]

19.

19 August 2006

Foreign Affairs DiscussionTopic: “The Soldier and the State: The Military
and Politics in India and Pakistan”; Lead Speaker: Dr. Maroof
RazaRegional Director [South Asia], Middlesex University

20.

22 August 2006

Lecture on “So Close Yet So Far: Lessons from the Israeli-Palestinian
Peace Process” by Shlomo Ben-Ami, former Foreign Minister of Israel

21.

23 August 2006

“An Evening of Music and Poetry” by Azad Iqbal (grandson of Allama
Mohammed Iqbal)

22.

28 August – 1 September 2006 “3rd Programme for Diplomatic Correspondents” Inauguration by:Shyam
Saran, Foreign Secretary(in collaboration with the FSI)

23.

2 September 2006

Panel Discussion on “The War in Lebanon: Implications for Regional
and Global Politics” (in collaboration with the Indian Association for
Central & West Asian Studies)
Chair: M. Hamid Ansari, Vice President, IACWAS
Speakers: Prof. Toiraj Atabaki,
Prof. Gulshan Dietl,
Centre for West Asian and African Studies,
JNU and Talmiz Ahmad,
Director General, ICWA

24.

9 September 2006

Talk on “Does India Have A Neighbourhood Policy?” by Shyam Saran,
Foreign Secretary

25.

11 September 2006

The 5th Alfred Nzo Memorial Lecture(on the occasion of the 100th
Anniversary of the Satyagraha in South Africa) on “Satyagraha and its
relevance in the ever changing world of the 21st Century” by Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Deputy President of the Republic of South Africa

26.

19 September 2006

Lecture on “Disarmament and International Security in the 21st Century”
[in collaboration with the Foreign Service Institute (FSI)] by Ambassador
Miguel Marin Bosch Director General, Matias Romero Institute of
Diplomacy, Mexico

27.

20 September 2006

Seminar on “India-Sri Lanka Relations: the Path Ahead”
Participants: Rajavarothiam Sampanthan, Member of Parliament, Sri
Lanka; Gajendrakumar Gangaser Ponnambalam, Member of Parliament,
Sri Lanka; Mavai Somasundaram Senathirajah, Member of Parliament,
Sri Lanka; Kandiah (Suresh) Premachandran, Member of Parliament,
Sri Lanka; Selvam Adaikalanathan, Member of Parliament, Sri Lanka;
Talmiz Ahmad, Director General, ICWA

28.

26 September 2006

APPENDICES

Launch of Gordon Corera’s book: SHOPPING FOR BOMBS - Nuclear
Proliferation, Global Insecurity and the Rise and Fall of the A.Q. Khan
Network, by I.K. GujralFormer Prime Minister of India (in collaboration
with Foundation Books)

208

Back to Contents

Appendix XVIII

S. No.

Date

Event

29.

6 October 2006

Lecture on “India-EU Relations: Vision for the Future” by Josep Borrell
Fontlles, President of the European Parliament

30.

16-17 October 2006

Second India-Spain Dialogue ForumKeynote Address on “Dialogue of
Civilisations” by Dr. Enrique Guerrero, Advisor, Office of the Prime
Minister of Spain on 16 Oct. 2006

31.

27 October 2006

India-Lithuania Foreign Affairs Discussion

32.

1 November 2006

Lecture by Crown Prince Haakon of Norway on”Peace and Development:
Why Should we Engage”

33.

2-4 November 2006

The Sixth China-India-Russia Academic Trilateral ConferenceKeynote
Address: China, India, Russia: Getting Out of Backwardness or, “Cunning
Passages of History” by Amiya Kumar Bagchi, Director, Institute of
Economic Development, Kolkata [in association with the Institute of
Chinese Studies (ICS)]

34.

6 November 2006

Signing of MOU on Cooperationbetween The Indian Council Of World
Affairs (ICWA) and the Consejo Mexicano De Asuntos Internacionales
(COMEXI), Mexico

35.

7 November 2006

Ninth Dinesh Singh Memorial Lecture byK.P. Sharma Oli, Deputy Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister of Nepal on “Recent Developments in
Nepal: Foreign Policy Implications”
Chaired by: I.K. Gujral, Former Prime Minister of India [in collaboration
with the Indian Council for South Asian Cooperation(ICSAC)]

36.

9 November 2006

Launch of Prof. Aftab Kamal Pasha’s book: India and Turkey – Past and
Emerging Relations by M. Hamic Ansari, Chairman, National Commission
for Minorities

37.

10 November 2006

Foreign Affairs Discussion on “Political Developments as Bangladesh
prepares for Elections” Lead Speaker: Shri Mahendra Ved,Senior Journalist
and Political Analyst

38.

17 November 2006

Lecture by H.E. Dr. Manouchehr Mottaki, Foreign Minister of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on “Outlook for Convergence in Asia”[in association
with the Embassy of the Islamic Republic of Iran]

39.

22 November 2006

Keynote Address by H.E. Mr. Hu Jintao, President of the People’s Republic
of China
Shri Bhairon Singh Shekhawat,
Hon’ble Vice President of India and
President, Indian Council of World AffairsPresided
Guests participated for Keynote Address included:
1. Hon’ble Shri I.K. Gujral, Former Prime Minister of India;
2. Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Hon’ble Minister for External Affairs;
3. Shri Sri Prakash Jaiswal, Hon’ble Minister of State for Home Affairs
[in association with the Embassy of the People’s Republic of China]

40.

27 November 2006

Lecture by Ambassador Mark Hong Tat Soon, Former diplomat and
Visiting Research Fellow, Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, Singapore
on “Quo Vadis, China?”

41.

30 November 2006

Address by His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn al Hussein on “Jordan
and India: Prospects for Cooperation” [in association with the Embassy
of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan]

42.

5-6 December 2006

Fifth India-Australia Security Roundtable
Keynote Address: “Alliance Management in Contemporary Politics:
Lessons from US-Australia Relations” by Dr. Rod Lyon, Strategy and
International Programme Director, ASPI on 6 Dec. 2006

APPENDICES

209

Back to Contents

Appendix XVIII

S. No.

Date

Event
[in association with Australia-India Council and Australian Strategic
Policy Institute]

43.

7 December 2006

Keynote Address: “Rising Powers, India and China and their Impact on
Prospects of Transatlantic relations” by Dr. Slawomir Debski, Director of
Research and Analyses, Polish Institute of International Affairs and
Signing of MoU

44.

8-10 December 2006

International Working Group Meeting of CSCAP on “Peace Keeping and
Peace Building”

45.

13 December 2006

India-Spain Dialogue on “Parliamentary Democracy and its Contribution
Towards Resolution of Global Conflicts”

46.

20 December 2006

Talk by His Excellency Prof. Alpha Oumar Konare, Chairperson of the
Commission of the African Union on “Africa, India and China: From
Yesterday to Tomorrow”

47.

21 December 2006

Launch of Dr. N.C. Asthana & Dr. Anjali Nirmal’s book: The Ultimate
Book of Weapons by Air Chief Marshal S.P. Tyagi, PVSM AVSM VM
ADC, Chairman, Chief of Staff Committee and Chief of the Air Staff,
Indian Air Force

48.

22 December 2006

Seminar “Towards Consensus in Indian Foreign Policy”

49.

17 January 2007

Release of Dr. K. Santhanam & Shri Ramakant Dwivedi’s book: “INDIA
TAJIKISTAN COOPERATION: Perspectives and Prospects” By Shri E.
Ahamed, Hon’ble Minister of State for External Affairs [in collaboration
with ICAF]

50.

31 January 2007at 6.00 p.m.

Lecture on “Kosovo: Challenges of International Law and Terrorism” by
DR. SANDA RASCOVIC-IVIC, President of Coordination Centre of
the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija [in cooperation with the
Embassy of the Republic of Serbia] Forthcoming Events
February, 2007

51.

2 February 2007

Lecture on “Russian Policy in Central Asia”by MR. DMITRI KOSYREV,
Journalist & Political Commentator (in association with the Russian
Information Agency

52.

7 February 2007at 12.45 p.m.

Annual Lecture of the Association of Indian Diplomats by Dr. A. P. J.
Abdul Kalam, President of India [in cooperation with the Association of
Indian Diplomats]

53.

8-10 February 2007 at Goa

International Seminar on: “Reviving the Silk Route: New Initiatives and
Engagements for the 21st Century” (in association with International
Centre, Goa)

54.

12 February 2007

Briefing by Indian experts for Bavarian delegation on ‘Global Security
from Indian Perspective’

55.

14 February 2007

Lecture on ‘Middle East Peace Process: an Israeli Perspective’ by Mr.
Danny Rubinstein

APPENDICES

210

Back to Contents

Appendix XIX

Seminars Organized by RIS
Talk on Japan’s Foreign Policy in Retrospect, New
Delhi, 24 May 2006.
Screening of the film on NAM, 29 June 2006
International Policy Dialogue on Economic
Consideration of Biosafety and Biotechnology
Regulations in India, New Delhi, 24-25 August 2006
Seminar on International and Product
Diversification, R&D and Innovative Capabilities
in the World’s largest Multinational Corporations,
New Delhi, 12 January 2007
RIS Publications
Books and Reports
World Trade and Development Report 2007:
Building a Development Friendly World Trading
System, Oxford University Press 2007
Towards an Employment-Oriented Export Strategy:
Some Explorations, Published by RIS 2006.
Information Technology, Innovation System and
Trade Regime: India and ASEAN by K.J. Joseph,
London Palgrave Macmillan, 2006.
Environmental Requirements and Market Access:
Reflections from South Asia, by Nagesh Kumar and
Sachin Chaturvedi (eds). New Delhi: Academic
foundation. 2007
Policy Briefs
#22 Doha Round and Developing Countries: Will the
Doha deal do more harm than good?
#23 The Case for an Asian Currency Unit: Need for a
Broad-based Approach

#27 Seizing New Opportunities for South-South
Cooperation: Some Proposals for the 14th NAM
Summit
#28 Regionalism with an ‘Asian Face’: An Agenda for
the East Asia Summit
#29 Facilitating India’s Overland Trade in the Eastern
Neighbourhood
Discussion Papers
#107Monetary and Financial Cooperation in Asia:
Emerging Trends and Prospects by Ramkishen
S. Rajan
#108Towards Comprehensive Economic Co operation between India and Central Asian
Republics by Dr. Ramgopal Agarwala
#109Trade Facilitation Priorities in India and
Commitments at WTO: An Overview of
Current Trends by Sachin Chaturvedi
#110 Reinventing UNCTAD: Some Proposals for the
UNCTAD Mid-term Review by Muchkund
Dubey
#111Demographic Complementarities and
Outsourcing: Implications and Challenges for
India by Mukul G. Asher and Amarendu Nandy
#112Regional Cooperation for Asian Energy Security
by Vipul Tuli
#113 FDI and Spillover Effects in the Indian
Pharmaceutical Industry by Annika Bergman
#114India’s Regional Trading Arrangements by
Rajesh Mehta and S. Narayanan

#24 Towards Comprehensive Economic Co-operation
between India and Central Asian Republics

#115Trade Facilitation and Customs Valuations in
India: Identifying the Gaps by Sachin
Chaturvedi

#25 Case for a Robust India-Taiwan Economic
Partnership

#116India’s Rising Role in Asia by Mukul G. Asher

#26 India-Brazil-South Africa (IBSA) Economic
Cooperation: Towards a Comprehensive Economic
Partnership

APPENDICES

#117Addressing Global Growth Asymmetries through
Regional Trade Integration: Some Explorations
by Ram Upendra Das and Ramaa Sambamurty

211

Back to Contents

Appendix XIX

Journals

3.

1. South Asia Economic Journal (Vol. 7 No. 1)
January-June 2006.

New Asia Monitor, Vol. 3 No. 2, April 2006
New Asia Monitor, Vol. 3 No. 3, July 2006.
New Asia Monitor, Vol. 3 No. 4, October 2006.

South Asia Economic Journal (Vol. 7 No. 2) JulyDecember 2006.
2. Asian Biotechnology and Development Review,
Vol. 8(2), March 2006.
Asian Biotechnology and Development Review,
Vol. 8(3), July 2006.
Asian Biotechnology and Development Review, Vol.
9(1), November 2006.

New Asia Monitor, Vol 4, No.1, January 2007 (in
press)
Newsletter
RIS Diary,Vol. 4 No. 2, April 2006.
RIS Diary,Vol. 4 No. 3, July 2006.
RIS Diary,Vol. 4 No. 4, October 2006.
RIS Diary, Vol. 5 No.1, January 2007 (in press)

APPENDICES

212

Back to Contents

Abbreviations

ACAFD

Advanced Course on Asia for Foreign
Diplomats

ECOWAS

Economic Community of West African
States

ACD

Asian Cooperation Dialogue

EU

European Union

AGPL

Actual Ground Position Line

FICCI

ARF

ASEAN Regional Forum

Federation of Indian Chambers of
Commerce and Industry

ASEAN

Association of South-East Asian Nations

FIEO

Federation of Indian Export Organisations

ASI

Archeological Survey of India

FOC

Foreign Office Consultations

BIMSTEC

Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral
Technical And Economic Cooperation.

FSI

Foreign Service Institute

FTA

Free Trade Agreement

BSF

Border Security Force

GCC

Gulf Cooperation Council

CAN

Community of ANDEAN Nations

GCIM

Global Commission on International
Migration

GOI

Government of India

GSLV

Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle

HAL

Hindustan Aeronautics Limited

HIPC

Heavily Indebted Poor Countries

CARICOM Caribbean Community
CBM

Confidence Building Measures

CD

Conference on Disarmament

CECA

Comprehensive Economic Cooperation
Agreement

CEL

Central Electronics Limited

HOM

Head of Mission

CEP

Cultural Exchange Programme

HOP

Head of Post

CFY

Current Financial Year

HTCG

High Technology Cooperation Group

CHOGM

Commonwealth Heads of Government
Meeting

IBSA

India, Brazil and South Africa

ICCR

Indian Council for Cultural Relations

CICA

Conference on Interaction and
Confidence Building Measures in Asia

ICWA

Indian Council of World Affairs

CII

Confederation of Indian Industry

IFS

Indian Foreign Service

CIS

Commonwealth of Independent States

IGNOU

Indira Gandhi National Open University

CLMV

Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, Vietnam

ILO

International Labour Organisation

COMESA

Community of Eastern and Southern
Africa

IMO

International Maritime Organisation

IRIGC

Chinese People’s Institute of Foreign
Affairs

Indo-Russian Inter-Governmental
Commission

ITEC

Council for Security and Cooperation in
the Asia-Pacific

Indian Technical and Economic
Cooperation

ITPO

Indian Trade Promotion Organisation

CUNPK

Center for UN Peacekeeping

JCE

Joint Committee of Experts

CWC

Chemical Weapons Convention

JEC

Joint Economic Commission

DPC

District Passport Cell

JSG

Joint Study Group

DPRK

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

JTG

Joint Technical Group

CPIF
CSCAP

APPENDICES

213

Back to Contents

Abbreviations

JWG

Joint Working Group

SADC

South African Development Community

LAC

Latin American Countries

SAFTA

South Asian Free Trade Area

LCDS

Least Developed Contracting States

SCAAP

LoC

Line of Credit

Special Commonwealth Assistance for
Africa Plan

LTTE

Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam

SCO

Shanghai Cooperation Organization

MERCOSUR

Market of Southern Cone
Countries

SCPD

Special Course for Palestinian Diplomats

SICA

System of Central American Integration

MNA

Myanmar News Agency

SPDC

State Peace and Development Council

MoU

Memorandum of Understanding

TCIL

NAM

Non Aligned Movement

Telecommunications Consultants India
Ltd

NATO

North Atlantic Treaty Organisation

TEAM-9

Techno-Economic Approach for Africa
India Movement

NDC

National Defence College

UGC

University Grants Commission

NIDM

National Institute of Disaster Management

UMFCCI

NRI

Non Resident Indian

Union of Myanmar Federation of
Chambers of Commerce & Industry

NSCS

National Security Council Secretariat

UNCO-

UN Committee on the

NSSP

Next Steps in Strategic Partnership

PUOS

Peaceful Uses of Outer Space

OECD

Organisation for Economic Cooperation
and Development

UNDC

United Nations Disarmament
Commission

PCFD

Professional Course for Foreign Diplomats

UNGA

UN General Assembly

PIO

People of Indian Origin

UNHCR

UN High Commissioner for Refugee

PIS

Personnel Information System

UNMEE

UN Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea

PLA

People’s Liberation Army

UNSC

United Nations Security Council

PTA

Preferential Trade Agreement

UPA

United Progressive Alliance

RITES

Rail India Technical Economic Services

WMD

Weapons of Mass Destruction

ROK

Republic of Korea

WTO

World Trade Organisation

SAARC

South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation

APPENDICES

214

Back to Contents

Ministry of External Affairs

This Annual Report can also be accessed at
MEA website www.meaindia.nic.in

Annual Report 2006-2007

Ministry of External Affairs
Government of India

Annual Report
2006-2007
Ministry of External Affairs
Government of India


