Annual Report
2007 – 2008

Ministry of External Affairs
Government of India

Published by:
Policy Planning and Research Division, Ministry of External Affairs, New Delhi
This Annual Report can also be accessed at website:
www.mea.gov.in
Designed and printed by:
Cyberart Informations Pvt. Ltd.
1517 Hemkunt Chambers, 89 Nehru Place, New Delhi 110019
E mail: cyberart_infos@yahoo.com
Website: www.cyberart.co.in

Contents

Introduction and Synopsis

i-xvi

1.

India’s Neighbours

1

2.

South East Asia and the Pacific

19

3.

East Asia

31

4.

Eurasia

36

5.

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

42

6.

Africa (South of Sahara)

55

7.

Europe

69

8.

The Americas

82

9.

United Nations and International Organizations

89

10.

Multilateral Economic Relations

101

11.

Technical & Economic Cooperation and
Development Partnership

108

12.

Investment and Technology Promotion

111

13.

Policy Planning and Research

113

14.

Protocol

114

15.

Consular, Passport and Visa Services

120

16.

Administration and Establishment

123

17.

Coordination

127

18.

External Publicity

129

19.

Foreign Service Institute

135

20.

Implementation of Official Language Policy and
Propagation of Hindi Abroad

138

21.

Indian Council for Cultural Relations

140

22.

Indian Council of World Affairs

143

23.

Research and Information System for Developing Countries

144

24.

Library

147

Appendices
Appendix I

Cadre strength at Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad during
2007-08 (including posts budgeted by Ministry of Commerce and
those ex-cadred etc.)

151

Recruitment made in various groups in the Ministry of External Affairs
and reserved vacancies filled by Scheduled Caste/Schedule Tribe/
Other Backward Classes (OBC) categories from April to November 2007.

152

Appendix III

Language-wise Statement of Officers (Grade I to Junior Scale of IFS)

153

Appendix IV

Gender-Related Statistics

154

Appendix V

Statement showing the number of applications received and passports
issued including under Tatkaal Scheme, miscellaneous applications
received and services rendered as well as Revenue (including revenue
under Tatkaal Scheme) and Expenditure figures of the Passport Offices
from 1 January - 31 December 2007.

155

Appendix VI

Finances of the Ministry of External Affairs in 2007-2008

156

Appendix VII

The Major Sectoral Allocations in the 2007-2008 Budget (RE)

157

Appendix VIII

Principal Destinations of India’s Aid Programmes

158

Appendix IX

Outcome Budget in Respect of Major Heads of Expenditure (2007-08)

159

Appendix X

Extracts from C&AG’s Report on Ministry of External Affairs

163

Appendix XI

Treaties/Conventions/Agreements Concluded or Renewed by India
with other countries in the year 2007

167

Instruments of Full Powers Issued during the period 1 January 2007
to December 2007

183

Instruments of Ratification/Accession issued during the period
1 January 2007 to December 2007

186

Conference/ Seminars/ Study projects organized/ undertaken by
Institutions/ NGOs, which were funded, partially or wholly, by Policy
Planning & Research Division till January 2008

189

Appendix XV

List of ITEC/SCAAP partner countries

191

Appendix XVI

Seminars/Conferences/Lectures/Meetings organized by ICWA

193

Appendix XVII

Seminars Organized by RIS

196

Appendix II

Appendix XII

Appendix XIII

Appendix XIV

Introduction and Synopsis

T

neighbours on the basis of sovereign equality and mutual
respect. It extends support to the people of Nepal in their
political transition to a new democratic order. As a close
and friendly neighbour, India supports the restoration of
full democracy in Bangladesh. As Bhutan transitions to a
democratic constitutional monarchy, India continues to
work for Bhutan’s economic development and political
stability. With respect to the ethnic issue in Sri Lanka,
India believes that there is no military solution and that
it is necessary to find a peacefully-negotiated political
settlement, acceptable to all communities, within the
framework of a united Sri Lanka. India continues to help
Afghanistan’s reconstruction and the Afghan government
and people in building a pluralistic and prosperous society.
India is also committed to peace, friendship and good
neighbourly relations with Pakistan and has accordingly
continued with the institutional dialogue with Pakistan.

he foreign policy of India seeks to promote an
environment of peace and stability in our region
and in the world to enable India’s accelerated socioeconomic development and safeguard our national
security. To attain these objectives, India has made
vigorous efforts to develop friendly and cooperative
relations with all its neighbours and to strengthen
engagement with the major powers of the world. India’s
economic diplomacy has attached due importance to
energy security that is vital for an assured high rate of
growth for our economy.
While pursuing the country’s supreme national interests,
India’s foreign policy continues to be characterised by
autonomy of decision-making, commitment to Panchsheel
or the five principles of peaceful coexistence, and equity
in the conduct of international relations.
With the objective of a peaceful, stable and prosperous
neighbourhood, India continues to attach the highest
priority to close and good neighbourly political, economic
and cultural relations with its neighbours. As Chairman
of SAARC, India worked with the other members to
impart dynamism to SAARC processes. The Fourteenth
SAARC Summit held in New Delhi in April 2007 decided
to emphasise concrete regional initiatives, moving from a
declaratory phase to implementation. The Summit
recognised the need to have better intra-regional
connectivity, particularly physical, economic and peopleto-people connectivity. The SAARC Council of Ministers
meeting agreed to implement several social sector and
physical connectivity projects identified by SAARC
Transport Ministers and SAARC Finance Ministers. They
also agreed to operationalise the SAARC Development
Fund immediately. Other important regional initiatives
relate to the setting up of a South Asian University and a
SAARC Food Bank.

India attaches high importance to its bilateral relations
with the People’s Republic of China with whom we have
a strategic and cooperative partnership for peace and
prosperity. This partnership has been further enhanced
and given a global dimension during the successful visit
of our Prime Minister to China in January 2008.
India and Iran share strong historical and cultural ties
with deep civilisational and people to people links. These
underpin a contemporary relationship with emphasis on
trade, investment and regional cooperation. The
momentum in India-Iran bilateral relations was
maintained in 2007-08 through regular exchanges.
India also continued to increase its political and economic
cooperation with countries in East Asia, West Asia,
Central Asia, Africa and Latin America. For the effective
conduct of our foreign economic relations and taking
forward its Look East policy, Prime Minister led the Indian
delegation to the 6th India-ASEAN Summit and the East
Asia Summit. High-level exchanges of visits have also
continued with countries of West Asia and Central Asia.

India remains committed to developing close, friendly and
mutually beneficial political relations with its South Asian
i

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

community, advocating that critical clean technologies
be made available and affordable for developing countries,
even as it assured the world that while pursuing economic
growth, India’s own per capita GHG emissions will not
increase beyond those of developed countries.

Such exchanges included a visit to Libya by the External
Affairs Minister in May 2007. India’s commitment to the
Palestinian cause was reiterated by its participation at the
International Peace Conference on Palestine at Annapolis
in November 2007 and at the donors’ conference on
Palestine held in Paris the following month. India
expressed concern over the events in Gaza and the West
Bank and particularly over the use of violence against
innocent civilians.

India’s economic diplomacy continued to take measures
to attract foreign investments and to provide increased
access to international markets so as to promote economic
growth in the country. India’s foreign policy is also directed
towards bolstering energy security for the country, for
instance, through supporting the efforts of our corporate
entities in acquiring energy assets overseas. Convinced
that regional cooperation is beneficial for the country’s
economic growth, India has also continued its engagement
with economic groupings such as ASEAN, East Asia
Summit, IBSA, G-15, G-8, etc. We continued to press
for closer economic integration with ASEAN countries.
Negotiations continued on the India-ASEAN Free Trade
Agreement (FTA) and the FTAs with Thailand and the
BIMSTEC. The Joint Study on the feasibility of an FTA
with Malaysia was completed.

India’s increasing engagement with countries of Africa
and Latin America received further impetus with the visit
of the Prime Minister to Nigeria in October 2007,
participation in the second IBSA Summit in Pretoria last
year and by visits of the Presidents of Brazil and Mexico
to India in June and September 2007 respectively.
India has made rapid improvements in its relationships
with the major powers of the world while, at the same
time, increasing its economic cooperation with other
developed as well as developing countries. India’s relations
with the USA have been transformed in the past few years.
Indo-US cooperation now spans a wide spectrum
including high technology, space, agriculture, education,
and trade and economic linkages and there is a prospect
of civil nuclear cooperation with the USA and other
friendly countries. India’s relations with Russia are timetested and the visit of our Prime Minister to Moscow in
November 2007 contributed to the further strengthening
of India’s strategic partnership with Russia. The IndiaRussia-China trilateral Foreign Ministers’ Dialogue
continues to be productive. India’s relations with member
states of the European Union (EU) – collectively as well
as individually – have been further enhanced with the
Eighth India-EU Summit held in New Delhi and several
Summit-level interactions with the individual States of
EU including the UK, France, Germany and Italy during
the last year.

Neighbours
Afghanistan: Afghanistan, under the leadership of
President Karzai, has made progress towards internal
stability in a democratic and pluralistic framework.
The deterioration in the internal security situation,
increasing Taliban influence and attacks on our personnel,
establishment and projects in Afghanistan remain a matter
of concern. India highlighted, in different international
and bilateral fora, the centrality of the security situation
to the entire international effort in Afghanistan. India
was also at the forefront of the effort to assist the
Government and people of Afghanistan in building a
stable, democratic, and pluralistic society. Close political
consultations with the Government of Afghanistan and
regular high level contact with the leadership of that
country remained of importance. The momentum in the
bilateral India-Afghanistan relationship created since
2001 was maintained. President Karzai led a high level
delegation to 14th SAARC Summit from 3-4 April 2007
in New Delhi, where Afghanistan was admitted as full
fledged member of the SAARC. The admission of
Afghanistan in SAARC opened a new chapter both in
the history of Afghanistan and in the South Asian regional

At the United Nations, India has continued to press for
UN reform, particularly to make the Security Council
more democratic, representative, and responsive, and for
a revitalization of the General Assembly. India also
continued to play an active role in the international debate
on various global issues, articulating the concerns of the
developing world. On the subject of climate change whose
impact falls disproportionately on developing countries,
India has constructively engaged with the international
ii

Introduction and Synopsis

cooperation process. The Foreign Minister of Afghanistan
attended the SAARC Council of Ministers meeting in
New Delhi in December 2007. From India, Minister for
Water Resources, Vice President of Indian Council for
Cultural Relations (ICCR) and National Security Advisor
visited Afghanistan in July, September and October 2007
respectively.

Chowdhury visited New Delhi on 7-8 December 2007 to
attend the SAARC Council of Ministers Meeting. Regular
meetings at the official-level continued to be held. Issues
of concern to India, including use of Bangladeshi territory
by Indian Insurgent Groups (IIGs), support for terrorist
activities and involvement of Bangladeshi nationals in
crimes in India, have been raised with the Bangladesh
Government. Bilateral trade between both countries has
been growing steadily and stood at Rs. 10,200 crores
(2006-2007). India signed an MoU with Bangladesh on
duty-free exports of eight million pieces of readymade
garments from Bangladesh to India on 16th September
2007. Two trial-runs of a passenger train between Kolkata
and Dhaka were held in July 2007 in preparation for
regular train service between the two cities. As a mark of
India’s abiding commitment to seeing a stable, prosperous
and democratic Bangladesh, India provided Bangladesh
with immediate relief and with bilateral aid of around Rs.
100 crores including cash assistance as well as food aid to
help it overcome the damage caused by various natural
disasters during the year.

India’s direct bilateral commitment to the rebuilding and
reconstruction of Afghanistan is US$ 750 million. Several
thousand Indians are engaged in development work in
Afghanistan. Funds have been committed to projects
spread over a whole range of sectors ranging from
education, health, power, telecommunications &
broadcasting, infrastructure to institutional capacity
building, strengthening of governance and food assistance.
Some important projects completed during this period,
included supply of equipment and supervision of execution
of power transmission project in Faryab province, digging
of 26 tube wells in six provinces, five public toilet-cumsanitation complexes in Kabul, and solar electrification
of 100 villages. The implementation of the scheme of 500
ICCR Scholarships and 500 ITEC training programmes
annually for Afghan nationals, announced by Prime
Minister of India during his visit to Afghanistan in August
2005, is being implemented satisfactorily and along with
other projects plays a significant role in demonstrating, at
a popular level, the close and friendly relations between
the two countries.

Bhutan: During this period, India and Bhutan continued
to share uniquely warm and cordial relations. These
relations were characterized by close consultations,
maturity, complete trust and mutual understanding. In
keeping with the tradition of regular visits and exchange
of views at the highest levels between the two countries,
the King of Bhutan visited India in February 2007.
External Affairs Minister visited Bhutan in July 2007.
These visits led to further consolidation of our economic
and political relations.

Bilateral Trade has shown robust growth. Total trade
turnover in the first six months in 2007-08 (AprilOctober) was Rs. 742.5 crores, compared to Rs. 550 crores
during the same period in 2006-07. Total trade turnover
in 2006-07 was Rs. 978.3 crores.

India continued to be the largest trade and assistance
partner of Bhutan. The implementation of the India
assisted projects agreed under Bhutan’s 9th Five Year Plan
progressed satisfactorily. The 1020 MW Tala hydroelectric
project in Bhutan, built with Government of India
assistance, started full commercial operations. Taking
forward the highly successful and mutually beneficial
cooperation in the field of hydroelectric energy, the
implementation Agreement for the 1095 MW
Punatsangchhu hydroelectric project was signed by the
External Affairs Minister and his Bhutanese counterpart.

Bangladesh: India continued to engage with the caretaker
government in Bangladesh, emphasizing the need for full
restoration of democracy through peaceful, credible, free
and fair elections. The Bangladesh Chief Adviser Dr.
Fakhruddin Ahmed attended the 14th SAARC Summit
in New Delhi during 2-4th April 2007. The Minister of
External Affairs visited Dhaka on 1st December, 2007 to
express India’s solidarity with the people of Bangladesh
in the aftermath of the damage caused by cyclone ‘Sidr’
and announced adoption of villages for rehabilitation as
well as waiver of 5,00,000 tonnes of rice for export. The
Bangladesh Foreign Adviser, Dr. Iftekhar Ahmed

India remains committed to providing assistance to
Bhutan during its transition to a Democratic
Constitutional Monarchy. Negotiations for finalizing
iii

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

India’s assistance package for Bhutan’s 10th Five year plan
are already underway.

transit as well as cooperation in regional and international
issues of mutual interest. Bilateral trade increased by
around 55% in 2006-07 as compared to the previous year.
Mutual commitment to strengthening bonds of friendship
for mutual prosperity, peace and stability in the region
has been reiterated at the highest levels by both
governments.

China: India – China relations remain a high priority of
India’s foreign policy. China is India’s largest neighbour
with whom we have a long history of uninterrupted
interactions. The year under review saw continuity in the
momentum of development of bilateral relations. Prime
Minister visited China in January 2008. Other bilateral
visits from India included Minister for Commerce and
Industries, Deputy Chairman Planning Commission, and
Minister for Panchayati Raj, Youth Affairs & Sports and
DONER leading a 100 member youth delegation. From
China, Mme. Liu Yandong, Minister of the United Front
Work Department and Hu Chunhua, President, All China
Youth Federation leading a 100 member youth delegation
visited India. Economic engagement continued to grow
in prominence with bilateral trade reaching Rs. 80909.74
crores during April – October 2007. China has emerged
as our second largest trade partner. For China, India
became an important export market with China’s exports
to India registering the fastest growth. Both countries
realized the importance of placing bilateral trade on a
strong, diversified and mutually beneficial foundation. The
activities associated with the India-China Friendship
Through Tourism Year 2007, regular high-level
interactions on the sidelines of regional and international
gatherings and sustained exchanges in various fields along
with the addition of newer dialogue mechanisms like the
meeting of the expert-level mechanism on trans-border
rivers, annual defence dialogue, and dialogue mechanism
on disarmament and non-proliferation were the highlights
of the year. The two countries have also been furthering
cooperation in regional and multilateral forums on global
issues such as climate change and energy security. IndiaChina relations today are of regional and international
significance, which found expression in the form of “A
Shared Vision for the 21st Century” signed during Prime
Minister’s visit to China.

Maldives: Bilateral relations between India and Maldives
continued to be close and friendly. The warmth of this
relationship was maintained through high-level
exchanges. President Maumoon Abdul Gayoom himself
visited India on a State Visit from 6-12 February 2008.
Earlier, President Gayoom had visited India in April 2007
to participate in the SAARC Summit in New Delhi in
April 2007. The newly appointed Foreign Minister
Abdulla Shahid visited India in October 2007 and also
for the SAARC Council of Ministers Meeting in December
2007. Foreign Secretary visited Maldives from 27-29
January 2008 for bilateral consultations. He called on
President Gayoom of Maldives besides meeting the
Foreign Minister and Defence Minister of Maldives. Jairam
Ramesh, Minister of State for Commerce, visited Maldives
from 29-31 January 2008.
India extended cash assistance equivalent to Rs. 10 crores
in the aftermath of damage caused to Maldives by tidal
waves in May 2007 and also continued to provide training
facilities to Maldivian nationals in various areas under its
bilateral aid programme. The construction work on a
project relating to the setting up of Faculty of Hospitality
and Tourism Studies, a hotel management training
institute in Maldives with Indian assistance of over Rs.
50 crores commenced in September 2007 and is expected
to be completed by end-2008/early 2009.
India’s exports during the years 2005 and 2006 amounted
to Rs. 368.72 crores and 384.10 crores respectively while
the India’s imports amounted to Rs. 4.48 crores and Rs.
5.53 crores respectively.
Myanmar: India-Myanmar relations strengthened during
the year through a number of bilateral visits at various
levels. The Minister of Culture and Tourism Ambika Soni
visited Myanmar on 14 October 2007 to attend the state
funeral of late Prime Minister General Soe Win. Earlier,
in September 2007, Minister of Petroleum and Natural
Gas Murali Deora visited Nay Pyi Taw for the signing of

Iran: Regular contacts with the Government of Iran have
been maintained through high-level exchanges and
regular institutional mechanisms such as the Joint
Commission and annual Foreign Office Consultations /
Strategic Dialogue. The impetus provided by high-level
discussions contributed to further bilateral cooperation
in energy, trade and commerce, investment, culture and
iv

Introduction and Synopsis

Production Sharing Contracts (PSC) between ONGC
Videsh Limited with Myanmar Oil and Gas Enterprise
for three deep-sea blocks. From Myanmar side there was
visit of Lt. General Thiha Thura Tin Aung Myint Oo,
Quarter Master General and Member SPDC visited India
in April 2007 and Myanmar Foreign Minister U Nyan
Win visited India in January 2008. Interaction at the level
of Prime Minister and External Affairs Minister also
continued on the sidelines of international meetings. Work
on cross-border infrastructure projects, including the
resurfacing of the Tamu-Kalewa-Kalemyo road and
negotiations on the Kaladan Multi-Modal Transit
Transport Project, which are aimed at both benefiting the
North-east region of India as well as improving bilateral
trade, continued. India is also considering the
development of Rhi-Tidim, Rhi-Falam roads in Myanmar
for the development of second border trade point between
India and Myanmar at Zokhawthar (Mizoram)- Rhi
(Myanmar). On the economic front Myanmar’s exports
to India during 2006-07 amounted to Rs. 2934 crores and
India’s exports to Myanmar amounted to Rs. 640 crores.
India continued to extend support to the process of
national reconciliation and political reform within
Myanmar.

rail links along the India-Nepal border was high on
Governments’ priority.
Pakistan: The Composite Dialogue and the Joint
Commission continued to strengthen and deepen bilateral
engagement although the pace of progress in IndiaPakistan relations slowed considerably due to the domestic
political turbulence in Pakistan. The dialogue process
which began in 2004, is premised on the commitment
given by the Pakistan President on 6 January 2004 not to
permit any territory under Pakistan’s control to be used
to support terrorism in any manner. During the year, the
dialogue process resulted in the signing of the Agreement
on “Reducing the Risk from Accidents Relating to Nuclear
Weapons”, an agreement to allow either country’s trucks
to cross at Wagah/Attari Border up to designated points
on the other side, and completion of joint survey of Sir
Creek and exchange of maps showing respective positions
of either country. Transport links established in the
previous rounds of the dialogue continued to operate
successfully, facilitating the movement of people and
boosting bilateral trade. The robust growth in bilateral
trade is illustrated by the fact that total trade turnover
increased from Rs. 3846.45 crores in 2005-06 to
Rs.7563.49 crores in 2006-07. This high rate of growth is
being maintained in 2007-08 also. In the period from April
to October 2007 total trade was valued at Rs. 4598.46
crores.

Nepal: India continued to support Nepal’s transition to a
democratic, stable, peaceful and prosperous State. India
maintained close consultations with the Government of
Nepal and the major political parties with a view to support
the early introduction of the new constitutional order
through Constituent Assembly elections scheduled on 10
April, 2008.

High-level bilateral visits added momentum to the
dialogue process. Minister of External Affairs Pranab
Mukherjee visited Pakistan on 13-14 January 2007. The
Prime Minister of Pakistan Shaukat Aziz visited New Delhi
to attend the SAARC Summit on 04 April 2007. The
former Foreign Minister of Pakistan Khurshid Mahmood
Kasuri visited New Delhi on 20-21 February 2007 to cochair India-Pakistan Joint Commission meeting and
Foreign Minister Inamul Haque on 7-8 December 2007
to attend the SAARC Council of Ministers.

The bilateral relationship strengthened further and was
characterized by extensive interaction and high-level
visits. The highlights were the visit of Nepalese Prime
Minister G.P. Koirala and Foreign Minister Mrs. Sahana
Pradhan to India in April, 2007 to participate in the
SAARC Summit. Foreign Minister Mrs. Pradhan also
visited India in December, 2007 to participate in the
SAARC Council of Ministers Meeting.

Humanitarian issues concerning prisoners and fishermen
continued to need high priority and attention. The
formation of a Judicial Committee on Prisoners and the
visit of relatives of Missing Defence Personnel to Pakistan
are the important steps in this regard.

The Government contributed to the development efforts
of Government of Nepal by undertaking development
projects in the areas of infrastructure, education, health,
rural and community development. Strengthening of
border infrastructure including development of integrated
check-posts and construction of cross-border road and

India continues to have serious concerns on the
infrastructure of terrorism in Pakistan and its cross-border
v

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

and other implications for us. The Joint Anti-Terrorism
Mechanism, which was formed after the decision taken
to that effect at Summit meeting in Havana in September
2006, held two meetings in 2007-08. This mechanism
could be a useful instrument if implemented effectively.

During this period we further strengthened our bilateral
defence relations with Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand and
Vietnam through exchange of visits, training exchanges,
ship visits and cooperation between defence industries of
India and countries of Southeast Asia. Cooperation in
countering terrorism and organized crimes was
strengthened through bilateral frameworks established
with South-east Asian countries.

Sri Lanka: India-Sri Lanka relations continued to be close
in political, economic and cultural spheres. President
Mahinda Rajapaksa visited New Delhi twice: in April 2007
for the SAARC Summit and in October 2007 for the
Hindustan Times Leadership Summit. Foreign Minister
Rohitha Bogollagama visited India several times, lastly in
December 2007 for the SAARC Council of Ministers
Meeting in New Delhi. From India, Minister for Food and
Agriculture Sharad Pawar visited Sri Lanka in May 2007
and Finance Minister P. Chidambaram in November 2007
to address the annual lecture at the Lakshman Kadirgamar
Institute of International Relations and Strategic Studies.
In the interaction which took place during these visits,
India expressed its conviction that there is no military
solution to the ethnic problem in Sri Lanka and the only
way out is a negotiated, political settlement acceptable
to all communities in Sri Lanka. Bilateral trade amounted
to Rs. 6,400 crores for the period April-September 2007
as against Rs. 5,200 crores during the same period in 2006
and negotiations progressed on a Comprehensive
Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA). India was the
4th largest investor in Sri Lanka in the year 2007. India
continued to provide assistance to Sri Lanka in the field
of human resource development. Progress was made on
setting up of 500 MW coal-based power plant by NTPC
in Trincomalee, rehabilitation of Colombo-Matara railway
by RITES and IRCON and construction of 150-bed
hospital at Dickoya in upcountry Sri Lanka.

In accordance with our commitment to South-South
Cooperation, India has also been offering soft credits and
grants to Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam. Lines of Credit
of US$ 45 million for Vietnam, US$ 17 million for Laos
and US$ 35 million for Cambodia were approved during
the year.
In the cultural sphere, we made efforts to strengthen the
soft linkages between India and countries of South-east
Asia. This aspect of our diplomacy was pursued through
cultural exchanges, restoration of temples in Cambodia
and Laos by the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI)
and through the proposal to establish an international
university at Nalanda through an intergovernmental
agreement. The proposed university will be a centre for
classical and contemporary studies and will aspire to bring
together scholars and students from the entire South-east
Asian and East Asian region.

East Asia
India-Japan relations have undergone a significant and
qualitative shift in recent years, propelled by successful
regular summit-level exchanges. The Joint India-Japan
Strategic and Global Partnership established during our
Prime Minister’s visit to Japan in 2006 provides both the
vision for chartering the future course of the relations
and also a detailed action plan in that direction. The
Strategic and Global Partnership is based on five pillars
of cooperation viz., Political, Defence and Security
Cooperation; Comprehensive Economic Partnership;
Science and Technology Initiative; People to People
exchanges and Cooperation in Regional/Multilateral fora.
Japanese Prime Minister Abe’s official visit to India in
August 2007 helped chart out a road map for further
strengthening this partnership with the signing of the Road
Map for New Dimensions to the Strategic and Global
Partnership. One important component of the Road Map
is to broaden the strategic dialogue at all levels, to

South-East Asia and the Pacific
India’s relations with South East Asian countries including
Australia, New Zealand and South Pacific countries
continued to strengthen further in 2007-08. India’s LookEast Policy, which seeks to establish convergence with
South-east Asian countries, showed continued progress in
its implementation. Significant events during 2007-08
included the State Visits of the President of the Philippines
and the Prime Ministers of Thailand, Vietnam and
Cambodia. These visits led to the signing of several
agreements which strengthened the institutional framework
for closer relations with countries of South-east Asia.
vi

Introduction and Synopsis

qualitatively upgrade exchanges in the security and
defence fields, and to upgrade economic engagement.

visited Armenia apart from several official level visits.
Parliamentary visits, trade delegations, cultural festivals,
seminars and development cooperation programmes and
projects were undertaken to strengthen bilateral relations.
The fifteenth anniversaries of the establishment of India’s
diplomatic relations with Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus,
Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan, Ukraine and Uzbekistan were marked
through events with respective countries. India, as an
Observer state, participated in the Heads of State and
Heads of Government meetings of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization in August and November 2007
respectively.

Relations between India and Republic of Korea have
become more intense and diversified. At the political level,
these relations are excellent and devoid of any irritants.
The increase in the high-level visits, strengthening of
commercial ties, and contacts in the field of art and culture
have provided impetus to India-Korea bilateral ties.
Economic engagement has acquired a prominent position
in bilateral relations. ROK has emerged as an important
country for investments into India. Growing defence and
security ties and cooperation in regional and multilateral
fora on common issues of interests are important aspects
of dynamic bilateral relations.

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

India’s traditionally friendly and cordial relations with
Mongolia have steadily improved over the years. India
continued to provide technical and economic cooperation
to Mongolia in higher education, agriculture, information
and Communication Technology and human resource
development.

In order to further strengthen its close and friendly
relations with the countries of the Gulf region, India
maintained the pace of its interactions in all fields. The
year was marked by the visits of the Crown Prince of
Bahrain in March 2007, Vice President and Prime Minister
of the UAE and Ruler of Dubai in March 2007 and of the
Deputy Prime Minister for the Council of Ministers of
the Sultanate of Oman in December 2007. Joint
Commission/Committee Meetings were held with
Bahrain, UAE and Yemen. India reiterated its desire to
enhance cooperation with Iraq during the meeting of the
bilateral Joint Commission held in May 2007 and hopes
that peace and stability would soon return to it. An IndoGCC Industrial Conference was held in May 2007 in
Mumbai. A number of Agreements and MoUs were signed
to strengthen the institutional framework for bilateral
cooperation with the countries of the region, who are
important economic partners, a major source for oil and
gas imports and have a common interest in promoting
peace and stability in the region. The region is home to
over 4 million Indian expatriates, and several measures
were initiated to promote their welfare.

Eurasia
India maintained and further developed its strategic
partnership with Russia during the year. The Prime
Minister visited Moscow in November 2007 for the annual
Summit meeting with the President of the Russian
Federation. There was exchange of high-level visits to
promote cooperation in respective spheres, including
those of the Ministers of External Affairs, Defence,
Commerce and Industry and Petroleum and Natural Gas
from the Indian side and Head of Federal Space Agency
and Acting Secretary of the Russian Security Council from
the Russian side. Bilateral agreements were signed in
diverse fields, particularly defence, economic cooperation
and science and technology. Joint naval and airborne
exercises were held in April and September 2007
respectively. The year marked the 60th anniversary of the
establishment of diplomatic relations between India and
the Russian Federation. India participated in India-RussiaChina trilateral Foreign Ministers dialogue process.

India continued to consolidate its traditionally close and
multifaceted relationship with countries of West Asia and
North Africa. The momentum generated by the visit of
the King and Queen of Jordan to India in 2006 was
capitalized upon to give further substance to bilateral
relations. Our close ties with Egypt continued to be
nurtured with bilateral visits from both sides. India
emerged as the third largest trading partner of Egypt in
2007. In Algeria a Parliamentary Friendship Group with

India engaged with Eurasian countries at various levels
to widen and deepen its cooperation with them. In
particular, the President of Belarus visited India, the
Minister of State for Commerce visited Azerbaijan and
Uzbekistan and the Minister of State for Agriculture
vii

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

India was formed and a Parliamentary delegation from
Algeria visited India in December 2007. On the economic
front Indian companies continued to successfully expand
their activities in the region, particularly in Algeria,
Jordan, Sudan and Libya. Together, Indian companies
secured contracts worth over US$ 1 billion in the region
in 2007. Trade with the region also continued to grow at
a healthy rate.
India reiterated its support for a negotiated solution to
the Palestinian issue resulting in a sovereign, independent,
viable and united State of Palestine within secure and
recognised borders living side by side at peace with Israel
as endorsed in the Quartet Roadmap and UNSC
Resolution 1397 and 1515. India joined the efforts of the
international community to seek a just solution to the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people for a homeland
of their own. India reiterated its commitment to the
Palestinian cause at the Annapolis peace conference in
November 2007 and pledged US$ 5 million more for
Palestine for development projects as well as training of
400 Palestinian officials under the ITEC programme at
the subsequent donor’s conference in Paris in December
2007.

Africa
India further intensified its traditionally warm and cordial
links with the countries of Africa. During the visit of Prime
Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh to Nigeria in October
2007, it was agreed to establish a Strategic Partnership
between India and Nigeria that would cover bilateral
political, economic, trade, security, cultural, education,
science and technology and international dimensions.
India also received several high-level visitors from the
countries of the region including the Ethiopian Prime
Minister, Meles Zenawi and the President of the Union of
Comoros, Mohamad Sambi. Regular exchange of
Ministerial level visits resulted in new agreements in
agreed areas of cooperation. Parliamentary exchanges took
place particularly in the context of training courses offered
by the Bureau of Parliamentary Studies and Training.
Relief assistance and capacity building including through
small development projects was provided under the
assistance programme of the Ministry.
India deepened its ties with the region at not only the
bilateral level but also at a regional and institutional level.

A major step forward was the decision to hold the IndiaAfrica Summit/Forum on 8 April 2008. India’s
engagement with African Union (AU) continued to
intensify with the Minister for External Affairs, Pranab
Mukherjee, meeting with AU Chairperson Alpha Oumar
Konare during his visit to Ethiopia in July 2007. The IndiaAU Joint Working Group met for two rounds of discussions
including with African Permanent Representatives during
the second round. The President of ECOWAS
Commission called on Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan
Singh during his visit to Nigeria in October 2007 and
expressed his desire for further intensifying cooperation
between India and ECOWAS. India also continued to
engage in dialogues with other sub-regional groupings such
as COMESA, SADC, EAC, and SACU.
The period saw increased Indian public and private sector
investment in the continent and enhanced participation
by Indian companies in multilaterally funded
infrastructure projects in Africa. Anand Sharma, Minister
of State for External Affairs led the Indian delegation for
the regional project partnership conclaves which were
held in Johannesburg, Cape Town, Kampala and Maputo.
The regional conclave for West Africa was held by CII in
Abidjan. The conclaves were successful with businesses
from both regions striking significant partnerships and also
gave spur to Indian companies seeking to build their
brands in Africa. The Ministry is supporting the next PanAfrican Conclave scheduled to be held in New Delhi from
19-21 March 2008. Lines of Credit were extended for
specific infrastructure development projects.
The TEAM-9 Initiative, a techno-economic cooperation
venture between India and 9 countries of West Africa,
continues to provide an effective impetus to deepen India’s
relations with several important countries of West Africa.
ECOWAS countries began to avail of a US$ 250 million
line of credit extended by India to the ECOWAS Bank
for Investment and Development and projects worth US$
113.5 million, ranging from health and agriculture sectors
to rural electrification, were approved. The impact of these
initiatives on our relationship with countries of West
Africa region was evident in the several Ministerial level
visits that India received.
The work for implementation of the Pan-African enetwork project continued. The pilot project for teleeducation and tele-medicine was inaugurated by External
viii

Introduction and Synopsis

Affairs Minister Pranab Mukherjee in Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia on 4 July 2007. The construction of the hub in
Dakar (Senegal), which was chosen as the site for
establishment, was completed. TCIL has already signed
MoUs for participation in the project with 28 countries
in Africa. Survey work through TCIL teams in various
regions is underway.

intensified and diversified in fields such as energy, science
and technology and culture. Summit-level interactions
have taken place with UK, France, Italy, Netherlands,
Germany and Portugal. There has been extensive
interaction with EU member states at Ministerial and
official levels besides growing exchanges of
Parliamentarians and civil society dialogues. Efforts have
also been made to diversify and deepen our traditionally
warm, friendly and close relations with the countries of
the Nordic as well as Central and Eastern Europe. Trade
with most of these countries is increasing at a fast pace,
moving away from traditional commodities to engineering
goods and value-added items. Investments from India are
also increasing. Nordic countries are also beginning to
view the Indian stock market and financial instruments
as safe and remunerative investments for their large
investible funds, and have commenced investing in India.
The relatively high growth rates in the former East Europe,
coupled with the new possibilities arising from a dynamic
and economically vibrant India is further boosting
economic activity between India and these parts of Europe
to mutual benefit.

Europe
The member States of the EU are important to India
individually as well as collectively. The European Union,
which has always been an economic powerhouse, has
evolved as a political entity growing eastwards and
encompassing 27 countries. The EU Reform Treaty was
signed by the Heads of State or Government of the 27
Member States in Lisbon on 13 December 2007. Called
the Treaty of Lisbon, it aims to provide the EU with
modern institutions and optimised working methods. The
Schengen area too grew in December 2007 by including
9 of the 12 New Member countries; the rest three of the
New Member countries, viz., Cyprus, Bulgaria and
Romania are likely to join later.
India’s relations with Europe have grown exponentially
covering all areas of interaction. The EU is India’s largest
trading partner and bilateral trade crossed Rs. 270,000
crores in 2006. India and EU are also important
investment partners with significant two-way flows. Total
FDI inflow from the EU to India is US$ 10.86 billion (24%
of the total FDI inflows from August 1991 to February
2007). Indian investment has also been growing steadily
in UK, Germany and Italy.

The Americas
The India-US agenda over the last twelve months reflects
the transformed nature of the bilateral engagement – with
several bilateral dialogues based on government and
private sector initiatives reflecting the understandings of
July 2005 and March 2006. The wide range of issues under
discussion include health, education, agriculture, defence,
energy and science and technology and global issues of
common concern such as combating terrorism, WMD
proliferation, disaster relief and pandemics.

India and Europe have worked for development of
common approaches to addressing new and emerging
global challenges. The President of India visited
Strasbourg, France in April 2007 and addressed the
European Parliament. This was the first ever visit and
address by an Indian President to the European
Parliament. The EU was associated with SAARC as an
Observer and attended the 14th SAARC Summit held in
New Delhi from 1-4 April 2007. India’s External Affairs
Minister participated for the first time in the ASEM
Foreign Ministers Meeting in Germany in May 2007. The
8th India-EU Annual Summit took place in New Delhi on
30 November 2007.

The finalisation of the text of an India-US bilateral
cooperation agreement on civil nuclear cooperation to
implement the understandings of July 2005 and March
2006 was a significant landmark in India-US cooperation
– paving the way for civil nuclear cooperation and trade
between India and the West and other members of the
Nuclear Suppliers Group. Government initiated talks in
December 2007 with the International Atomic Energy
Agency for the conclusion of an India-specific safeguards
agreement. These steps, along with an unconditional
exemption from the Nuclear Suppliers Group, once
completed, would enable the US Government to seek

India’s engagement with individual countries in Europe
ix

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

United Nations and International
Organisations

approval of the US Congress before signature, entry into
force and implementation of the bilateral agreement on
civil nuclear cooperation by both sides.

India has always attached considerable significance to
multilateral diplomacy, and plays an important part in
international organisations. India has traditionally been
an active and constructive participant in the activities of
the United Nations and its affiliated international
organisations. India’s interests and the areas of her focus
cover a wide spectrum which includes reform of the UN
system, tackling international terrorism, peacekeeping
operations, international human rights issues,
environmental conservation and a fair and just
international economic order. India strives to a principled
approach to these global issues firmly based on its vision
of a more equitable and peaceful international order that
gives due emphasis to the legitimate interests of the
developing world.

The bilateral agenda in 2007 diversified and scaled up
India-US cooperation prioritizing high technology
commerce, defence, science and technology, space, clean
and efficient energy, education – always building on the
broad base of bilateral trade and economic linkages that
support India’s domestic initiatives and perspective plans
in several critical sectors.
With Canada, the agenda with the new Conservative
Government prioritized the common objectives of
increasing bilateral trade and investment, co-operation
in science and technology including bio-technology,
education, agriculture, counter-terrorism, civil nuclear
safety, energy efficiency and environment. Political, official
and business-level visits and contacts were frequent as
both sides identified and pursued potential areas of
enhanced cooperation on the bilateral as well as
multilateral plane.

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh led the Indian
delegation to the Commonwealth Heads of Government
Meeting (CHOGM) in Kampala (Uganda) from 23-25
November 2007. External Affairs Minister Pranab
Mukherjee attended the pre-CHOGM Commonwealth
Foreign Ministers meeting on 21-22 November 2007.
Minister of State for External Affairs Anand Sharma
represented India at a ‘Youth Dialogue’ and a ‘Sports
Breakfast’ which were chaired by the President of Uganda.
India’s candidate Kamalesh Sharma was selected as the
next Secretary General of the Commonwealth during the
Kampala CHOGM.

Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC)
Relations between India and the countries of Latin
America continued to progress. Several high-level
incoming and outgoing visits gave impetus to ongoing
interaction with these countries. These included the visits
of President Luis Inacio Lula da Silva of Brazil in June
2007 and of President Felipe Calderon Hinojosa of Mexico
in September 2007. Foreign Ministers of Cuba, Guatemala,
El Salvador and Brazil also visited India. Visits from India
to this region included those to Cuba, Dominican
Republic, Guatemala, Colombia and Ecuador. In keeping
with our initiatives to reach out to new markets, Indian
trade missions and commercial delegations to LAC region
were facilitated. Indian business majors established
operations in the oil and gas sector in Trinidad and Tobago,
Mexico, Brazil, Colombia and Cuba, and iron ore sector
in Bolivia. Similarly companies in the IT and
pharmaceutical sectors became active in several Latin
American Countries. LAC countries are responding to
these developments and new resident missions are being
opened in Delhi by Guatemala, Costa Rica, Nicaragua
and El Salvador. India has announced its intention to open
a new mission in Guatemala.

The External Affairs Minister led the Indian delegation
to the General Debate of the 62nd UNGA Session from
23 September to 2 October 2007. His statement at the
General Debate covered a number of major issues
including India’s position on the issue of climate change,
need for a comprehensive reform of the international
financial architecture to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), Doha round of trade
negotiations and comprehensive reform of the UN. He
also announced a further pledge of US$10 million as
Government of India’s further contribution to the UN
Democracy Fund. Further, the External Affairs Minister
hosted the Ministerial meeting of South Asian Association
for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) and participated in
the Ministerial meetings of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM), Asia Cooperation Dialogue, India-Brazil-South
x

Introduction and Synopsis

Africa initiative and Brazil-Russia-India-China (BRIC),
besides having a number of other meetings.

Development of North Eastern Region, Mani Shankar
Aiyar, unveiled a bust of Mahatma Gandhi at the
UNESCAP premises in Bangkok at a special ceremony to
mark the first International Day of Non-Violence on the
birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi on 2 October 2007.

On 15 June 2007, the United Nations General Assembly
unanimously adopted a resolution, introduced by Anand
Sharma, Minister of State for External Affairs, on
‘International Day of Non-Violence’ with the cosponsorship of 142 countries to annually observe and
celebrate Mahatma Gandhi’s birthday, October 2, as the
International Day of Non-Violence. The first International
Day of Non-Violence was observed at the UN on 2
October 2007 when Sonia Gandhi, Member of Parliament
and Chairperson of the United Progressive Alliance
(UPA) addressed an informal plenary meeting of the UN
General Assembly, which was attended by a large number
of dignitaries from across the world. Other activities
organized to mark the occasion included a Round Table
at which eminent personalities exchanged views on
Mahatma Gandhi’s ideals and philosophy, a photographic
exhibition, screening of a film on Mahatma Gandhi and a
special cancellation issued by the UN Postal
Administration (UNPA) for use by the UNPA during
October 2007.

India signed and ratified the UN Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities on 1 October 2007.
Climate change issues have come to occupy center stage
on the international agenda. India has been interacting
closely with key countries around the world and
participating in meetings and conferences on climate
change for practical, pragmatic solutions for the benefit
of the entire humankind. The Ministry has been
proactively involved in the international negotiations and
discussions on climate change. This has included the
UNFCCC, negotiations including the annual conference
held in Bali in December 2007, the Major Economies
Meeting process, the UN High Level Event in September
2007 and other meetings/debates at the UN and G8-O5
driven processes. India has also hosted the 2nd Ministerial
Meeting of the Asia-Pacific Partnership for Clean
Development and Climate in October 2007.

India continued its active and constructive engagement
in the reform process at the UN. Despite substantive
implementation of the UN reform agenda that emerged
from the Outcome Document of the World Summit in
2005, such reform will inevitably remain incomplete
without comprehensive reform and expansion of the
Security Council, and revitalization of the General
Assembly. Elements and ideas on the reform of the
Security Council have been discussed for well over a
decade, through numerous reports and interminable
consultations. It is now time for inter-governmental
negotiations to commence in order to make the Security
Council more democratic, representative and responsive.
India, with partners from Africa, Latin America and Asia,
tabled a resolution on 11 September 2007, spelling out
the principles on which reform ought to be based if it has
to be meaningful.

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh participated in the
G8-O5 Meeting in Heiligendamm, Germany in June 2007
where his intervention on climate change was widely
acclaimed. He clearly outlined India’s position on climate
change noting that strategies should include mitigation
and adaptation with fair burden sharing and measures to
realise sustainable patterns of consumption and
production. He emphasised the importance of taking into
account where the primary responsibility for the present
levels of GHG concentration rests and not perpetuation
of poverty among the developing countries. No strategy
should foreclose for developing countries the possibilities
of accelerated social and economic development. The
principle of common and differentiated responsibility and
respective capability is very important. The time is not
ripe for developing countries to take quantitative targets,
as these would be counter-productive on their
development processes. He also said that India was
determined that its per capita GHG emissions are not
going to exceed those of developed countries even while
pursuing policies of development and economic growth.

The Minister of State for Industry, Dr. Ashwini Kumar,
led the Indian delegation to the 63rd session marking the
60th anniversary of United Nations Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP) in
Almaty, Kazakhstan, from 17-23 May 2007. The Minister
of Panchayati Raj, Youth Affairs and Sports and

In order to evolve measures to mitigate the risk posed by
xi

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

of the Regional Task Force to implement the SAARC
Convention on Trafficking in Women and Children and
a Conference on Micro Financing and Women Economic
Empowerment in SAARC (26-27 July 2007). In all the
meetings, concrete projects were identified. The draft
Agreement on the SAARC Development Fund (SDF) was
finalized on 29 November 2007. There has been significant
progress in negotiations on the text of the Agreement on
Protection and Promotion of Investments that is now
ready to be finalized. The two Agreements are likely to
be signed during the next Summit to be held in Sri Lanka
in 2008.

disasters, the Delhi Declaration on Disaster Risk
Reduction in Asia 2007 was adopted at the Second Asian
Ministerial Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction in New
Delhi in November 2007. An Indian delegation also
participated in the first meeting of the Global Platform
for Disaster Risk Reduction in Geneva in June 2007.
In the UNGA discussions on the coordination of
humanitarian assistance, India piloted, on behalf of the
Group of 77, a resolution tabled annually on ‘International
Cooperation in Humanitarian Assistance for Natural
Disasters, from Relief to Development’.
With a large diaspora spread all over the world, issues
relating to migration were actively pursued by India in
international fora. India participated in the First Meeting
of the Global Forum on Migration and Development
(GFMD) held in Brussels in July 2007.

Work has started on the establishment of the South Asian
University as well as on a pilot project connecting one/
two hospitals in each of the SAARC countries with 3-4
Super Specialty hospitals in India. With regard to the
issues identified during the Retreat (Water; Energy; Food
and Environment), India is proposing a project on solar
rural electrification for 300 houses in a country; capacity
building in rainwater harvesting, preservation of forests
and agri-business; and sharing of Indian protocol of
optimally utilizing rhizobium bacteria for increased
nitrogen fixation for high yielding pulses. People-to-people
linkages with other SAARC member states have been
strengthened through culture, trade and tourism to ensure
that the developmental benefits are enjoyed by all of
SAARC’s population.

Multilateral Economic Relations
India hosted the 14th SAARC Summit in New Delhi on
3-4 April 2007 assuming the Chairmanship of SAARC.
It was the smoothest, least contentious Summit. For the
first time, SAARC expanded its membership to include
Afghanistan as the eighth member and China, Japan,
Republic of Korea, the United States of America and the
European Union as five Observers. Since then Iran has
also been welcomed as the Sixth Observer of SAARC.
Member states urged SAARC to move from a declaratory
to an implementation phase. Two important Agreements
on the establishment of the South Asian University and
the SAARC Food Bank were signed. The SAARC
countries agreed to work together on a roadmap, inter
alia, for poverty alleviation, food security, trade and
transport, education, culture and counter-terrorism. The
SAARC Leaders also agreed to make tangible progress
on the four issues of Water (including flood control);
Energy; Food and Environment.

India also continued its active engagement with several
other groupings such as ASEAN, EAS, MGC, BIMSTEC,
IOR-ARC, IBSA, G-15, G-8, OECD/APEC, WIPO,
ACD, ARF, ASEM, BRIC, in order to increase its
integration with the global economy and the evolving
global political and security architecture. Prime Minister
led the Indian delegation to the 6th India-ASEAN Summit,
the East Asia Summit and also the second IBSA Summit
held in Pretoria in October 2007. Prime Minister
participated in a meeting of the outreach countries of the
G-8 Summit held in Germany on 8 June 2007.

Dynamism has set in the various SAARC processes after
India assumed the Chairmanship of SAARC, principally
due to our conscious effort to discharge our role in a nonreciprocal manner. India hosted Ministerial Meetings in
the crucial areas of transport (30-31 August 2007), finance
(14-15 September 2007), and security (25-26 October
2007). On social issues, and to implement the Social
Charter, India hosted the National Coordination
Committee Meeting (6-7 September 2007), first Meeting

Making tangible progress on various commitments made
by the Prime Minister during the ASEAN Summit, India
hosted 125 Buddhist pilgrims including journalists to visit
India on Buddhist circuit from CLMV (Cambodia, Laos,
Myanmar, Vietnam) countries. Further, 100 students
from 10 ASEAN member countries visited on a week long
educational trip in December 2007. The annual special
xii

Introduction and Synopsis

training course for ASEAN diplomats has been conducted
in August 2007.

Indian Technical and Economic
Cooperatiion (ITEC) Programme and
Development Partnership (DP)
The Technical Cooperation programme with its emphasis
on capacity building, transfer of technology and sharing
of the Indian developmental experience formed an
important element of India’s interaction with countries
in the developing world. Over 4,700 participants from
156 ITEC-partner countries took part in the training
programmes in the civilian and defence field conducted
under ITEC (Indian Technical and Economic Programme)
and SCAAP (Special Commonwealth Assistance for
Africa Programme) on a bilateral basis. Multilateral and
regional dimensions were reflected in special programmes
conducted in cooperation with organisations such as the
WTO and the Commonwealth. Indian experts were
deputed to advise and assist in diverse areas such as
Information Technology, Auditing, Agriculture and
Defence. Many projects were undertaken during the year
in the fields of Archaeological Conservation, Tourism and
Hospitality, Information Technology and Small and
Medium Enterprises in different parts of the developing
world. The humanitarian programme of offering relief and
solidarity to disaster hit areas continued with the delivery
of supplies and medicines.

Investment and Technology Promotion
(ITP)
Economic diplomacy continued to be a serious area of
focus in recognition of its importance as a means of
achieving broader foreign policy objectives. The Ministry,
through the ITP Division, participated in various policy
meetings of Foreign Investment Promotion Board, Reserve
Bank of India, Board of Trade as well as other policy
meetings concerning reforms and liberalisation of the
economy and simplifying of investment procedures. At
the same time, the capacity to provide support and advice
to Indian Government and private entities seeking to
establish business and investment enterprises abroad was
enhanced through various means, including promotional
activities and concessional Lines of Credit.
A new Energy Security Unit was established in the
Ministry in September 2007 and appended to the ITP

Division to support India’s international engagement
through appropriate and sustained diplomatic
interventions. The Unit will also support the efforts of
our corporate entities, both in public and private sectors,
in acquiring energy assets overseas, in transfer of new and
emerging technologies to India and in building strategic
partnerships with foreign companies.

Policy Planning and Research
The PPR Division maintained close interaction with
institutions and individuals specializing in policy research
and analyses on themes having a bearing on India’s foreign
policy and international relations and provided financial
assistance for holding a number of seminars, conferences
and research studies with a view to deriving invaluable
inputs for the Ministry’s foreign policy planning,
formulation and implementation. A database of experts
and institutions specializing in policy research and analysis
has also been developed by the PPR Division and is
updated on regular basis. The notable studies financed
by the Ministry included a study on Disarmament and
Non-Proliferation done by a Task Force set up by the
Ministry; a two-year study by ICRIER on “The National
Interest Project”, which includes foreign policy measures
required to achieve 8-10% economic growth, and a study
on Nepal by Centre for Public Affairs.
The Division continued to issue the Monthly Summary
for the Cabinet and publish the Annual Report of the
Ministry. It also reviewed the functioning of Business
Centres set up in some of the Indian Missions and Posts
abroad as also content, scope and frequency of reporting
by the Missions. Further, the Division also handled work
related to examination of maps depicting India’s external
boundaries in coordination with the Survey of India. A
Boundary Cell has been established to provide technical
support to Territorial Divisions in the Ministry on
international boundary related matters. It has started
building data base for boundary strip maps covering the
external boundary of India.

Protocol
India’s increasing engagement with the international
community has resulted in a large number of visits to India
by foreign dignitaries. There were 78 visits at the level of
Head of State/Vice President/Head of Government/
Foreign Minister during the period April-December 2007.
xiii

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

Foreign Resident Diplomatic Missions in Delhi have
increased from 116 in 2003 to 132 in 2007. Foreign
Representatives in diplomatic Missions in Delhi are also
growing in size with 80 posts added in 2007. During the
year 2007, Germany opened a Consulate in Bangalore and
China in Kolkata; permission was given to Turkey to open
a Consulate in Mumbai, to Lithuania to open one in New
Delhi, and to Japan to open one in Bangalore. Besides,
18 countries were granted permission to appoint Honorary
Consul Generals in New Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai,
Bangalore and Chennai. The Protocol Division handled
28 credentials ceremonies, official entertainment, and
numerous other functions during 2007. Streamlining of
protocol norms and standards continued to be a focus of
attention. The service tax exemption framework was
implemented on the basis of reciprocity for entitled foreign
missions, diplomats, and consulate officials.

Consular, Passport and Visa Services
The Ministry took a number of measures like
decentralization and online applications to make the
passport issuance system simpler and speedier for the
convenience of the public. Computerization of Passport
and Visa issuance system was completed in Missions/Posts
at Bahrain, Toronto, Kuala Lumpur, Birmingham, Jeddah,
Colombo, Kandy and Vancouver and work is underway
in Houston, Chicago, San Francisco, Washington,
Moscow and Doha. Thirteen Missions/Posts abroad have
already outsourced visa application collection work. The
Ministry has also successfully implemented the project
for centralized printing of Machine Readable Passports
(MRPs) in respect of 111 Indian Missions/Posts abroad.
A pilot project for issue of e-passports in the diplomatic
and official category of passports has been initiated and is
expected to be completed by the middle of 2008. Based
on the experience gained from this pilot project, it is
proposed to start issuance of e-passports in the ordinary
category.
Visa-waiver Agreements for the holders of Diplomatic and
Official passports were signed with Croatia, Cyprus,
Ecuador, Japan, Philippines and Serbia. These Agreements
will enter into force shortly.
Extradition Treaties were signed with Portugal, Belarus
and Mexico in 2007. The Ministry started implementation
of Apostille Convention in August 2007 for attestation

of documents. Under the Hague Convention of October
1961, public documents apostilled by the Ministry are
acceptable in 92 Member Countries.

Administration
To enhance Indian diplomatic presence abroad, two Posts,
namely, Consulate General of India, Juba, Sudan and
Consulate General of India, Guangzhou, China were
opened in October 2007. At Headquarters, steps were
taken to achieve greater decentralization of decision
making and streamlining of rules. Despite a severe
shortage in human resources on account of reduction of
posts, Ministry fully implemented the austerity measures
of the Government with regard to abolition of posts.
Gender equality has been a key element of the Ministry’s
overall policy and equal opportunities are provided to
women officers in the Ministry. Ministry has also identified
posts suitable for appointment of persons with disability,
including in the Indian Foreign Service. In all, the Ministry
has 37 persons with disability in various grades and cadres.
Two Branch Secretariats, one each at Hyderabad and
Chennai, were set up mainly to liaise with the State
Governments, Consulates, Passport Offices etc. located
in these cities. The Development Partnership Division of
the Ministry was merged with the Technical Cooperation
Division.
Among projects in India, construction work for Jawaharlal
Nehru Bhavan, the future Headquarters of the Ministry
of External Affairs, Chanakyapuri Residential Complex
for officers of the Ministry of External Affairs, and a Transit
Accommodation project are in progress.
Implementation of Official Language Policy of the
Government of India has always been accorded high
priority by the Ministry of External Affairs. All important
documents meant to be placed before the Parliament are
prepared bilingually. Training in Hindi forms an integral
part of the training programmes of Foreign Service
Institute in the Ministry. Our Missions implement a wellformulated scheme for propagation of Hindi abroad by
providing teaching materials, financial assistance and
scholarships for foreign students to study Hindi. Regional
Hindi Conferences were organized in Budapest from 2426 October 2007 and Seoul from 9-11 November 2007
The Eighth World Hindi Conference was organized by
xiv

Introduction and Synopsis

the Ministry from 13-15 July 2007 in New York in
association with Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, New York. Over
850 delegates from different countries attended the
Conference.

increasing foreign press corps based in India and made all
the media related arrangements for incoming and outgoing
visits at the level of Heads of States, Heads of
Governments and Foreign Ministers.

In recognition of the importance of the Right to
Information Act 2005, a separate Right to Information
(RTI) Division functions in the Ministry. A Joint Secretary
level officer has been designated as the Central Public
Information Officer (CPIO) and an Additional Secretary
has been designated as the Appellate Authority. In
addition, separate Appellate Authorities and CPIOs have
been designated in the CPV Division, ICCR and ICWA.
It has been the Ministry’s endeavour to expeditiously
provide information to Indian citizens in accordance with
the provisions of the Right to Information Act 2005.

Public Diplomacy

Coordination
The Coordination Division assisted the Inter-State
Council Secretariat to organize the 4th International
Conference on Federalism at New Delhi from 5-7
November 2007. The conference was attended by a large
number of foreign and Indian dignitaries. The Division
also assisted the Lok Sabha Secretariat in the organising
the 53rd Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference held
at New Delhi from 21-30 September 2007, and the
Ministry of Home Affairs in organizing the second Asian
Ministerial Level Disaster Reduction Conference at New
Delhi on 7-8 November 2007.
The Division issued new guidelines on expeditious
processing of political clearances for various visits, and
expeditious grant of visas for foreign research scholars,
and foreign participants of international conferences,
seminars and workshops held in India.

External Publicity
The External Publicity Division continued to articulate
the position of the Government of India on various foreign
policy issues in international and domestic media. This
was done through press conferences, regular press briefings
and dissemination of statements through effective use of
the MEA website and improved electronic
communications.
External Publicity Division also continued to run a wideranging familiarization programme for international
journalists. It continued to facilitate the work of the ever

The mandate of the Public Diplomacy Division, created
in May 2006, includes inter-alia, outreach activities inside
and outside India, as also audio visual and print publicity.
The Division organised various activities to fulfil these
objectives.
The External Affairs Minister Pranab Mukherjee
participated in an interactive session on India’s Look East
Policy in Shillong on 16 June 2007 and followed it with
his participation in a national conference in Guwahati
from 7-9 October 2007 on challenges of sub-regional
cooperation in the context of the Look East Policy. A
briefing programme for Indian origin Parliamentarians from
Europe, the UK and the US was organized from 24-29
October 2007. The Division commissioned 17
documentary films on India to promote and project India’s
image abroad. Additionally films were specially
commissioned to mark the first International Nonviolence Day and the 8th World Hindi Conference and
were exhibited internationally. The Division also organized
an outreach seminar on Indian Foreign Policy in
association with Utkal University, Bhubaneswar in January
2008.

Foreign Service Institute (FSI)
The new building of the Foreign Service Institute was
formally inaugurated on 14 November 2007 by the
Minister of External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee who also
unveiled a bust of Jawaharlal Nehru at the Foreign Service
Institute. The Foreign Service Institute conducted training
programmes for IFS Probationers, Diplomatic
Correspondents, Cabinet Secretariat Officers and other
officers of the Ministry of External Affairs. Two Professional
Courses for Foreign Diplomats and a Special Course for
ASEAN Diplomats were conducted by the Institute during
the year. The Institute continued to maintain institutional
linkages with its counterparts in other countries.

Cultural Relations
The Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) was
formally set up in 1950, with the primary objective of
xv

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

establishing, reviving and strengthening cultural relations
and mutual understanding between India and other
countries.

several countries covering all the continents of the world
and hosted over twenty-five foreign cultural groups from
different countries.

ICCR’s objectives have continued to witness significant
expansion, both qualitatively and quantitatively, in line
with the momentum and dynamism acquired in recent
years. The Council set up two new Centres abroad at
Kabul and Kathmandu as well as two new offices at Pune
and Varanasi to meet the increasing demands on its
mandate.

Indian Council of World Affairs

The year long Festival of India in Japan was a major
success. It concluded on 10 December 2007. The footprint
of this Festival was all of South East Asia and multiple
cultural troupes visited almost all the countries in the
region. Preparations are underway to hold the year of
Russia in India in 2008 and Year of India in Russia in
2009.
The Council organised the first SAARC Cultural Festival
in December 2007. This was the first event of its kind
and consisted of several components such as fusion music,
food, fashion, textile and handicrafts, folklore, exchange
of students, etc.
The Council organised cultural events and brought out
special publication on the occasion of 8th World Hindi
Conference at New York. An Exhibition at the UN
Headquarters at New York, on the occasion of the
observance of the first International Day of Non-violence
on October 2, was also organised by ICCR.
The Council offered over 1800 scholarship slots to
students from 90 countries including 500 slots to Afghan
students. It sponsored over 60 cultural delegations to

The Indian Council of World Affairs was set up in 1943
and taken over by the Central Government in September
2000. During the period April-November 2007, the Indian
Council of World Affairs organized a number of events
such as lectures, seminars, bilateral strategic dialogues and
background briefings. ICWA also completed two research
projects and brought out three issues of ICWA’s magazine
‘India Quarterly”. During this period, the ICWA signed
Memoranda of Understanding with counterpart
organizations in China and Nigeria.

Research and Information System for
Developing Countries (RIS)
RIS, as an autonomous policy think-tank, conducted
policy research on international economic issues and
provided analytical support in preparations for major
Summit meetings and other important negotiations, such
as negotiations on comprehensive economic partnership
between India and Korea and Track-II Study Group of
Comprehensive Economic Partnership East Asia
(CEPEA). It continued to hold policy dialogue on the
relevance and the way forward for an Asian Economic
Community in collaboration with leading policy thinktanks in Asia, and has networked with policy think-tanks
in other countries to bring policy coherence and capacity
building on international economic issues and
development cooperation.

xvi

India’s Neighbours

Afghanistan

1

Relations (ICCR), Dr Sayed Mahdi, accompanied by
Director General of ICCR, visited Afghanistan in
September 2007. During this visit, Afghanistan’s Minister
of Information and Culture and Vice President of ICCR
jointly inaugurated the India Cultural Center (ICC). At
the invitation of Afghanistan’s National Security Advisor,
India’s National Security Advisor M.K Narayanan visited
Kabul from 30 September-1 October 2007.

T

he deterioration in the internal security situation in
Afghanistan on account of continuing attacks by the
Taliban has been a matter of principal concern for all of
Afghanistan’s friends and allies. There was a significant
increase in suicide and Improvised Explosive Device (IED)
attacks, very adversely affecting normal life in many parts
of the country. A UN study in September 2007 has
documented that there has been a seven fold increase in
the number of suicide attacks since 2001. The Taliban’s
continued attacks, on both military and civilian targets,
posed a grave threat to developmental activities and the
overall governance process. The rising levels of opium
cultivation was another source of concern, particularly
given the linkages between illicit narcotics trade and
international and cross-border terrorism.

The Foreign Minister of Afghanistan, Dr. Rangin Dadfar
Spanta, attended the SAARC Council of Ministers
meeting in New Delhi in December 2007. At the sidelines
of the SAARC meeting, he held a bilateral meeting with
Minister of External Affairs in which issues on the bilateral
agenda were reviewed.
India’s Assistance to Afghanistan
India remained at the forefront of the international effort
in Afghanistan to aid and assist its government and people
in the process of national reconstruction, and establishing
a stable, democratic, and pluralistic polity. The External
Affairs Minister participated in a high level meeting on
Afghanistan in September 2007 in New York convened
by the UN Secretary-General (UNSG) and jointly cochaired by the UNSG and the President of Afghanistan.
Shriprakash Jaiswal, Minister of State in the Ministry of
Home Affairs led the Indian delegation for participating
in a Rule of Law Conference on Afghanistan in Rome in
July 2007.

Bilateral Relations
Close consultations between India and Afghanistan on
bilateral, regional as also the developmental assistance
programme in Afghanistan continued. President Hamid
Karzai led a high powered delegation to attend the 14th
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
(SAARC) Summit in New Delhi in April 2007. At the
14th SAARC Summit, Afghanistan was formally admitted
as the eighth member of SAARC. During his visit,
President Karzai also met Prime Minister Manmohan
Singh to discuss bilateral relations and Afghanistan’s role
in strengthening the regional cooperation process. On 3
April 2007, a MoU was signed for establishment of the
India-Afghanistan Foundation in New Delhi.

Despite security threats and attacks including IED blasts
and grenade attacks on its Consulates in Herat and
Jalalabad, attacks on Indian companies and on its
personnel in different projects, India maintained its
commitment to the reconstruction and rebuilding of
Afghanistan. The attacks on our establishments,
personnel and projects remained a matter of great concern.
In a terrorist attack on Zaranj-Delaram Road Project
personnel on 3 January 2008, 2 Indian and 11 Afghan
security personnel were killed and several others
injured.

Minister for Water Resources, Saifudin Soz and Deputy
Chairperson of Rajya Sabha K. Rahman Khan, attended
the funeral of His Majesty late King Zahir Shah on 24
July 2007. As a special mark of respect the national flag
was half masted at Government buildings in the Capital
and in Missions and Posts abroad.
The Vice President of Indian Council for Cultural
1

Annual Report 2007-2008

involvement of premier Indian institutes from the nongovernmental and corporate sector such as setting up of
a Women’s Vocational Training Centre at Bagh-e-Zanana
in Kabul by Self Employed Women’s Association (SEWA)
and the Skills Development Project of Confederation of
Indian Industries (CII) were finalized.

Several projects were completed and handed over to the
Afghan government including 5 toilet-cum-sanitation
complexes in Kabul, the rehabilitated Amir Ghazi and
Quargah Reservoir dams, supply of equipment and
supervision of execution of power transmission project in
Faryab province, solar electrification of 100 villages,
expansion of TV coverage in 22 provinces of Afghanistan,
digging of 26 tube wells in six provinces (9 in Herat, 1 in
Jawzjan, 2 in Badgis, 3 in Faryab, 6 in Balkh and 5 in
Baghlan) etc.

As part of India’s assistance programme, several teams
from India visited Afghanistan during the year, including
those from Ministry of Human Resource Development
and Ministry of Rural Development for operationalisation
of the MoUs on Education and Rural Development; from
National Council for Educational Research & Training
for providing technical support for curriculum
development; and from National Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, New Delhi for assistance in setting up of a
Afghanistan National Academy of Agricultural Sciences.

The school feeding programme by distribution of protein
fortified biscuits to 1.2 million school children daily in 31
provinces in Afghanistan, implemented through the World
Food Programme progressed satisfactorily. Designs and
plans were finalized for the new Parliament building in
Kabul. The project will commence by mid 2008. Tenders
have been floated for its construction. Notwithstanding
logistical difficulties and numerous terrorist attacks, work
on all major infrastructural projects including the 218 Km
road from Zaranj to Delaram, the Salma dam in Herat
province as well as the 220 KV Transmission Line from
Pul-e-Khumri to Kabul with sub-station in Chimtala
continued satisfactorily.

A Hindi language professor was deputed at the Nangarhar
University for setting up of a Hindi department and a
Sanskrit scholar was deputed to the Kabul University for
establishing a Sanskrit faculty.
As part of the initiative for strengthening cultural ties
with Afghanistan, the India Culture Centre (ICC) was
opened at the Indian Embassy in September 2007. Several
activities including teaching of classical music and yoga
by Indian teachers are being undertaken by the Centre
and it is already attracting several enthusiastic Afghan
students. The implementation of the 500 ICCR
scholarships scheme and 500- slot ITEC training
programme for Afghan students and public officials
proceeded satisfactorily. For the period 2007-08, 453
Afghan students have been sent to study in various
Universities throughout India under the ICCR scheme.

During 2007, India commenced implementation of the
Small Development Projects Scheme in vulnerable
provinces in South and South East Afghanistan in health,
education, agriculture, rural development and vocational
training sectors. Under the Small Development Projects
(SDP) scheme, the first batch of 16 MoUs were signed on
2 April 2007 for various projects costing US$ 1.69 million.
The identified projects cover, inter alia, fields of agriculture
(setting up of demonstrative nurseries), public health
(setting up of basic health clinics) and rural rehabilitation
and development (setting up of water points/bore wells)
covering the provinces of Nangarhar, Khost, Nooristan,
Kunar, Paktia, Badakhshan, Nimroz, Paktika and Zabul.
A Second batch of 11 MoUs was signed on 1 July 2007
for construction of 38 schools in different provinces in
Afghanistan for a total expenditure of US$ 5 million.

Bangladesh

In view of the continued demand for their services, the
tenures of Indian Medical Missions (IMMs) in Kabul,
Kandahar, Jalalabad, Mazar-e-Sharif and Herat were
extended. Our assistance to the Indira Gandhi Institute
for Child Health continued.

India continued to engage with the Caretaker
Government in Bangladesh during the year, while
emphasizing the need for full restoration of democracy
through peaceful, credible, free and fair elections as per
the election roadmap announced by the Caretaker
Government, in which the people of Bangladesh and their
political representatives and leaders are afforded every
lawful opportunity to participate. India also reiterated the
need to protect basic individual rights and due process of
law under the Emergency rule in Bangladesh.

Important capacity development projects with the

At the political level, Bangladesh Chief Adviser, Dr
2

President of Afghanistan, Hamid Karzai meeting with the Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh,
on the eve of 14th SAARC Summit, in New Delhi on 2 April 2007.

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh taking over the chairmanship of SAARC Summit from the Chief Advisor of Bangladesh,
Dr. Fakhruddin Ahmed, during the inauguration of the 14th SAARC Summit, in New Delhi on 3 April 2007.

3

Annual Report 2007-2008

Fakhruddin Ahmed visited India to attend the 14 th
SAARC Summit in New Delhi from 2-4 April 2007. There
were also several other Ministerial-level visits from
Bangladesh to India in connection with SAARC related
meetings. From India, Minister of State for Commerce,
Jairam Ramesh visited Dhaka on 21-22 July 2007 to discuss
various economic and trade issues and to inaugurate the
India-Bangladesh Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
The Minister of External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee
visited Bangladesh on 1 December 2007 in the aftermath
of the severe cyclone which struck Bangladesh on 15
November 2007. The objective of the visit was to express
India’s solidarity with the people and Government of
Bangladesh and reiterate our readiness to assist in the
relief as well as rehabilitation work in the cyclone affected
areas.

on duty-free exports of eight million pieces of readymade
garments from Bangladesh to India. The bilateral Protocol
on Inland Water Transit and Trade was renewed for about
two years in a meeting in New Delhi on 30 April – 1 May
2007. A bilateral MoU was signed for cooperation in
standards and test certificates between Bureau of Indian
Standards and Bangladesh Standards and Testing
Institution on 26 June 2007 on the margins of FOC in
Dhaka. India has removed the prohibition on investment
into India by citizens of Bangladesh or entity incorporated
in Bangladesh with the prior approval of the FIPB of
Government of India. The meeting of the Joint Working
Group on Customs was held in New Delhi on 25-26 July
2007 and of the Joint Working Group on Trade in Dhaka
on 5-6 November 2007.
In keeping with India’s policy of improving connectivity
in SAARC region, India continued to highlight the need
for revitalizing the transport and trade infrastructure and
connectivity between the two countries. Two trial-runs
of passenger train between Kolkata and Dhaka were held
in July 2007 in preparation for regular train service
between the two cities.

Regular meetings at official-level continued to be held
under the various institutional bilateral mechanisms. The
Foreign Office Consultations (FOC) were held in Dhaka
on 25-26 June 2007. On the issues of security and border
management, the 8th Home Secretary-level talks were held
in New Delhi on 2-3 August 2007. The biannual border
coordination conference was held in Dhaka from 24-29
October 2007. Further, pursuant to a decision taken in
the 3rd Joint Boundary Working Group meeting in Dhaka
on 16-17 July 2006, a first-ever joint visit by delegations
from the two countries to a few enclaves and adverse
possessions in India and Bangladesh took place on 29-30
May 2007 in order to assess ground realities before further
discussions on outstanding issues pertaining to Land
Boundary Agreement of 1974. On the issue of water
resources, the Secretaries of Water Resources of the two
countries held discussions in New Delhi on 7-8 August
2007. A separate technical-level meeting headed by
members of India-Bangladesh Joint Rivers Commission
was held in Dhaka from 25-27 September 2007 to discuss
modalities relating to sharing of Teesta waters. Also, the
36th Joint Committee meeting on sharing of Ganga Waters
was held in Dhaka from 26-29 May 2007.

India continued to reiterate its serious concern at the
activities of Indian Insurgent Groups (IIGs) in Bangladesh.
At the 8th Home Secretary-level talks in New Delhi on 23 August 2007, India pointed out incidents of terrorism
in India with clear links to Bangladesh-based HUJAI and
JMB. India also underscored the need for sustained action
by Bangladesh against elements indulging in cross-border
terrorism. Both countries agreed to designate nodal points
for continuous and regular sharing of real-time and
actionable information in areas of mutual security
concerns.
In keeping with India’s close ties and empathy with the
friendly people of Bangladesh, India provided Bangladesh
bilateral aid and assistance to help it overcome the damage
caused by natural disasters like the mudslide tragedy in
June 2007, floods during July-September 2007 and cyclone
in November 2007. India’s assistance includes cash
assistance of US$ 10 million for the mudslide tragedy in
June 2007 and food aid consisting of essential food items
including rice, wheat and milk powder to Bangladesh of a
total value of nearly Rs 100 crores for the floods and the
recent cyclone. In the aftermath of the recent cyclone in
November 2007 which had caused heavy loss of lives and

On the economic and commercial side, Prime Minister
announced at the 14th SAARC Summit in New Delhi,
India’s decision to allow duty-free access to exports from
LDCs in SAARC region, including Bangladesh, from 1
January 2008 and reduce items on India’s sensitive list
with respect to these countries. As a further gesture, India
signed an MoU on 16 September 2007 with Bangladesh
4

India’s Neighbours

widespread destruction in coastal areas of Bangladesh,
India sent an emergency relief package consisting of
medicines, tents, blankets, ready-to-eat meals and
portable water-purifiers worth US$ 1.5 million by Indian
Air Force aircraft. Further, during the Minister of External
Affair’s visit to Bangladesh on 1 December 2007, it was
announced that India would waive the ban on export of
rice to Bangladesh for an additional 5 lakh tons of rice
and that it would adopt 10 severely affected coastal villages
for comprehensive rehabilitation (at a cost of US$ 2.5
million).

to-people contact and various exchanges took place in
this direction. India-Bhutan Foundation (IBF) met in Paro
in May 2007 to discuss various proposals to improve
people-to-people interaction. There was a visit by a
delegation from Antarashtriya Sahyog Parishad to Bhutan.
Kathak and Rajasthani dance troupes visited and
performed in Haa, Thimphu, Gedu and Phuentsholing.
A 15-member delegation from the Samdrup Jongkhar
chapter of Bhutan-India Friendship Association (BIFA)
chapter participated in the Bohagi Utsav organized by
Bhutan-India Friendship Association. A 23-member
delegation of students from Guwahati University visited
Bhutan in September 2007 and gave dance performances
at the Sherubtse College, Kanglung under the sponsorship
of IBF. A 12-member NCC cadet team also visited Bhutan
in November 2007.

Bhutan
India and Bhutan share close and friendly relations based
on mutual trust, understanding and goodwill. These
relations were further strengthened during the course of
the year with continued cooperation in various sectors
including hydropower.

India continues to be the largest development partner of
Bhutan. Various projects agreed under the 9th plan are
progressing satisfactorily. Bilateral cooperation in the
hydropower sector has been carried forward with
successful commissioning of all the six units of 1020 MW
Tala Hydroelectric Project and signing of an Agreement
on implementation of 1095 MW Punatsangchhu-I
Hydroelectric Project. Punatsangchhu–I Project
Authority (PHPA) has been constituted and its first
meeting was held in Thimphu in October 2007. The work
on preparation of DPRs for Punatsangchhu–II and
Mangdechhu Hydroelectric projects by WAPCOS and
NHPC respectively is on-going and is expected to be
completed as per the schedule. The establishment of one
million tonne Dungsam Cement Project at Nganglam with
the assistance of Government of India has been revived.
Government of India will extend an assistance of Rs 300
crore for the project. To facilitate ‘Collaboration in the
area of Customization/Development and Implementation
of e-Governance Applications’ an MoU was signed
between National Informatics Centre Services
Incorporated (NICSI), Government of India and the
Department of Information Technology, Ministry of
Information and Communications, Royal Government of
Bhutan.

A number of high level visits and bilateral exchanges from
both sides further strengthened and deepened this
relationship. Pranab Mukherjee, External Affairs Minister
visited Bhutan in July 2007. During the visit bilateral
political, economic and other issues of mutual interest
were discussed besides signing of the Agreement between
the Government of India and the Royal Government of
Bhutan on implementation of the largest ever 1095 MW
Punatsangchhu-I Hydroelectric Project. It was agreed that
the project will be funded by Government of India at a
total estimated cost of Rs 3514.81 crore with 40% as grant
and 60% as loan.
Other important visits from India were that of Navin
Chawla, Election Commissioner (June 2007), Naresh
Dayal, Secretary, Health and Family Welfare (August
2007) and Wajahat Habibullah, Chief Information
Commissioner who led a 6-member delegation (October
2007) in connection with various events. From Bhutan,
Prime Minister Lyonpo Khandu Wangchuk (April 2007),
Minister for Labour and Human Resources, Lyonpo Ugyen
Tshering (April 2007), Minister for Home and Cultural
Affairs, Lyonpo Jigmi Y. Thinley (April 2007), Minister
for Information and Communication, Lyonpo Leki Dorji
(August and September 2007) and Lyonpo Nado Rinchen,
Deputy Minister for National Environment Commission
(October 2007) visited India for various SAARC and
other meetings.

India was the leading trade partner of Bhutan. In the
period 2006-07, India imported goods and services worth
Rs 1448 Crores from Bhutan. For the same period our
exports to Bhutan amounted to Rs 1305 Crores. A
Confederation of Indian Industries (CII) team of

The cooperation extended to further strengthen people5

Annual Report 2007-2008

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh, visited China from
13 -15 January 2008. During the visit, the Prime Minister
held official talks with Premier Wen Jiabao and had
separate meetings with Chinese President Hu Jintao and
Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National
People’s Congress, Wu Bangguo. Both sides issued ‘A
Shared Vision for the 21st Century’ between India and
China and also signed ten other documents covering
cooperation in various fields. 1 The Prime Minister
addressed the India-China Economic, Trade and
Investment Summit as well as the Chinese Academy of
Social Sciences during the visit.

businessmen/industrialists visited Bhutan in July 2007 to
explore opportunities for investment and trade. During
the period 2006-07 revenues from export of electricity to
India comprised about 75% of Bhutan’s total revenues.
The Government of India presented over four thousand
Electronic Voting Machines (EVMs) to the Royal
Government of Bhutan. These machines were used
successfully in the mock polls. Officials of the Government
of India deputed by the Election Commission observed
the mock elections in Bhutan in April/May 2007.
Bhutanese media personnel were in India to familiarize
themselves on election coverage. At the request of the
Royal Government of Bhutan, Government of India
facilitated holding of a workshop in Thimphu for senior
bureaucrats in Bhutan on ‘Democratic Constitutional
Monarchy’ with eminent civil servants from India acting
as resource persons.

Both sides reiterated their readiness to take the IndiaChina Strategic and Cooperative Partnership for Peace
and Prosperity to a new level. The Prime Minister
conveyed that relations with China is a high priority for
us. Both sides agreed that India-China relations are of
regional and global significance; the two countries have a
historic opportunity to work together for the common
cause of peace and development in Asia and the world.
India-China relations are not targeted at any country, nor
will it affect their friendship with other countries.
Discussions were constructive and forward looking and
were conducted in an atmosphere of sincerity, warmth
and friendship.

Cooperation in Security and Border Management
continued through the meetings of Group on Border
Security and Management at the Central level (November
2007) and border district coordination meetings at State
governments level between Assam, West Bengal and Royal
Government of Bhutan. (November 2007).

China

The document on the ‘Shared Vision for the 21st Century’
reflects not only the common perceptions of India and
China but also their desire to purposefully cooperate in
the future and to promote global durable peace and
common prosperity on the basis of Panchsheel. The two
sides favoured an open and inclusive international system.
There was considerable similarity of views expressed in
discussions on the situation in the region.

The year under review saw continuity in the momentum
of development of bilateral relations. The activities
associated with the India-China Friendship Through
Tourism Year 2007, regular high-level interactions on the
sidelines of regional and international gatherings and
sustained exchanges in various fields, along with the
addition of newer dialogue mechanisms like the meeting
of the expert-level mechanism on trans-border rivers,
annual defence dialogue and dialogue mechanism on
disarmament and non-proliferation were the highlights
of the year. The two countries have also been furthering
cooperation in regional and multilateral forums on global
issues such as climate change and energy security.
1

The Chinese side invited President Patil to visit China in
2009. We reiterated our invitation for the visit of NPC
Chairman to India in 2008. The invitations were accepted.
It was also agreed that the two Foreign Ministers would
exchange visits in 2008.

The documents include: MoU for Cooperation between the Planning Commission of India and National Development and Reform
Commission of China; MoU on Cooperation between the two Ministries of Railways; MoU between Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty
Alleviation of India and Ministry of Construction, PRC; MoU for Cooperation in Land Resource Management, Land Administration and
Rehabilitation; MoU on Joint Medical Mission to commemorate the Indian Medical Mission to China between Indian Council for Cultural
Relations (ICCR) and the Chinese People’s Association for Friendship with foreign Countries (CPAFFC); MoU for cooperation between
ICCR and CPAFFC; MoU on Cooperation between Geological Survey of India and China Geological Survey in the area of Geo-sciences;
MoU between AYUSH, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, India and State Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine, SATCM,
China covering cooperation in traditional medicine; MoU on mutual cooperation between NABARD and Agricultural Development Bank
of China; and Protocol of Phytosanitary Requirements for the Export of Tobacco Leave from India to China between the General
Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine of China and the Ministry of Agriculture of India.

6

Prime Minister of Bhutan, Lyonpo Khandu Wangchuk being received by the Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh
on his arrival to attend the inaugural session of the 14th SAARC Summit, in New Delhi on 3 April 2007.

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh meeting with the Chinese President, Hu Jintao at
Great Hall of People, in Beijing, China on 15 January 2008.

7

Annual Report 2007-2008

Both sides agreed to continue deepening the mutual
understanding and trust between the armed forces and
welcomed the successful conclusion of the first joint
military training exercise and agreed to hold a second
exercise in India in 2008.

Trade and economic relations have emerged as one of
the most visible indicators of recent positive developments
in India-China relations. According to Chinese statistics,
bilateral trade touched US$ 38.6 billion in 2007.2
Border trade linkages continue to expand. The period of
border trade through Nathula was extended from the
earlier June to September (in 2006) to the period from
May to November this year. Both sides are discussing the
possibility of expanding the basket of tradeable goods
across Nathula.

It was recognized that the Strategic and Cooperative
Partnership should be based on strong, diversified and
mutually beneficial economic ties. It was decided to
increase the bilateral trade target from US$ 40 billion by
2010 to US$ 60 billion. It was agreed that a bilateral
Regional Trading Arrangement will be mutually beneficial.
It was decided that the two Commerce Ministers would
decide on the future steps in this regard. It was decided
to establish a high level Business Leaders Forum to advise
the two Prime Ministers on the future of economic ties.

The second India-China financial dialogue was held in
China on 4 December 2007. Both sides agreed to hold
the third dialogue in India in late 2008 or the first half of
2009.
The highlight of the defence exchanges this year has been
the successful conclusion of the first meeting of IndiaChina Annual Defence Dialogue held in Beijing in
November 2007 and organization of the first ever joint
training exercises between the ground forces of the two
sides in December 2007. Army Chief General J.J. Singh,
also Chairman Chief of Staffs Committee (COSC) visited
China in May.

The two Prime Ministers welcomed the progress made by
the Special Representatives in seeking a framework for
settlement of the boundary question that is fair,
reasonable, mutually acceptable, and based on the
Agreement on Guiding Principles and Political Parameters
signed in April 2005. While the Special Representatives
continue their efforts, both sides reiterated their mutual
commitment to maintaining peace and tranquility in the
border areas.

India welcomed China’s participation as an Observer at
the 14th SAARC Summit held in New Delhi in April. Both
countries have interaction at the Shanghai Cooperation
Organisation where India is an Observer state. India and
China are cooperating in the East Asia Summit process.
Both countries along with Russia are also cooperating in
a trilateral format. The last trilateral meeting was held at
Harbin, China on 24 October.

Prime Minister conveyed India’s appreciation for China’s
assistance in providing flood season data for some transborder rivers. Both leaders agreed to strengthen
cooperation in this area through the Expert Level
Mechanism.
Both sides have identified earthquake engineering, disaster
management, climate change, biotechnology and nano
sciences as priority areas for cooperation to realize the
bilateral Science and Technology Partnership.

The establishment of the new Indian Consulate General
in Guangzhou and the new Chinese Consulate General
in Kolkata are important mileposts in strengthening
institutional linkages between the two sides. The other
major developments in regard to strengthening of
institutional linkages include: the establishment of hotline
between External Affairs Minister and the Chinese
Foreign Minister in February; the convening of the Sixth
India-China Eminent Person’s Group Meeting in Beijing
in September; foreign office consultations etc. There has

The Special Representatives of India and China on the
Boundary Question met for the Tenth Round in New
Delhi and Coonoor from 20-22 April 2007 and for the
Eleventh Round in Beijing from 24-26 September 2007.
During these talks the two Special Representatives
continued their discussions on a framework for the
boundary settlement on the basis of the Agreement on
Political Parameters and Guiding Principles of April 2005.
2

The major India export items are primary and raw materials like iron ore, raw cotton, machinery, copper, soybean residue, organic chemicals
and plastic. Indian imports from China were dominated by relatively higher value added products like electrical machinery, machinery,
organic chemicals, iron and steel etc. According to Department of Commerce Statistics, bilateral trade was Rs. 43661.72 crores during
April-October 2007.

8

India’s Neighbours

congress of China (23-26 May 2007); Shao Qiwei,
Chairman of China National Tourism Administration
(August 2007); Wang Yang, Secretary of the Chongqing
Municipal Party Committee and Chairman of the Standing
Committee of the Chongqing Municipal Party Congress
(September 2007); Wang Zhongyu, Vice Chairman, Tenth
National Committee of the Chinese People’s Political
Consultative Conference (20-24 September 2007); Su
Rong, Executive Vice President of the Central Party
School of the Communist Party of China (November
2007); and Wang Jiarui, Minister of International Liaison
Department of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of China (28 November 2007).

also been an exchange of familiarization visits by groups
of diplomats of the two countries.
Cooperation on trans-border rivers is an important part
of overall engagement with China. India-China Expert
Level Mechanism to discuss interaction and cooperation
on the provision of flood season hydrological data,
emergency management and other issues regarding transborder rivers was operationalised with its first meeting
being held in September 2007.
The issue of global warming and climate change is an
important issue on which India and China have similarities
of views. The two sides have maintained regular
consultations in this.

Hong Kong

Both sides organized the “India-China Year of Friendship
Through Tourism” with a joint logo and agreed to open
tourism offices in each others countries. Another highlight
in promoting people-to-people contacts was the signing
of the Cultural Exchange Programme (CEP) for the years
2007-09 in June. The exchange of 100 member youth
delegations took place in June (when the Indian youth
delegation led by India’s Minister for Youth Affairs &
Sports, Panchayati Raj and Development of the NorthEast Region, Mani Shankar Aiyar visited China) and
November when the Chinese youth delegation led by Hu
Chunhua, First Secretary of the Central Committee of
Communist Youth League of China and Honorary
President of All-China Youth Federation visited India.

Friendly and cooperative interactions with Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic
of China continued. Hong Kong remained an important
trade partner for India. Several delegations in diverse fields
exchanged visits. Hong Kong’s position as an important
international financial centre was harnessed to attract
investment in India.
Financial Secretary of Hong Kong visited India in
December 2007 and had meetings with Finance Minister
and important industry leaders. The visit helped to further
strengthen relations between the financial sectors of the
two sides.
The two sides signed a new understanding on further
expanding the civil aviation links. A bilateral
understanding was reached to augment number of direct
flight connections.

Functional exchanges maintained an encouraging
momentum. The major visits to China include those by
Union Minister for Commerce and Industries (15-16 April
2007); Union Finance Minister (29 - 30 March 2007);
Deputy Chairman of Planning Commission (24-29 April
2007); Union Minister of State for Chemicals and
Fertilizers (May 2007); Chairman of the National
Commission for Enterprises in the Unorganized Sector
(15-17 August 2007); Union Minister of State for Urban
Development (October 2007); and Chief Justice of India
(6- 10 November 2007). The major Chinese delegations
include those led by: . Liu Yandong, Vice Chairperson of
Tenth National Committee of the Chinese People’s
Political Consultative Conference (6-13 January 2007);
Xiao Yang, President of the Supreme People’s Court of
China (2-5 April 2007); Fu Zhihuan, Chairman, Economic
and Financial Committee of the National People’s

Maldives
Bilateral relations between India and Maldives continued
to be close and friendly. The warmth of this relationship
was maintained through high-level exchanges.
President Maumoon Abdul Gayoom visited India to
participate in the SAARC Summit in New Delhi from 24 April 2007. He held discussions with the President and
the Prime Minister. Ahmed Zahir, Speaker of the
Maldivian Parliament (People’s Majlis) visited India on
10 May 2007 to witness the celebrations in
commemoration of the 150th Anniversary of the First War
of Independence held in New Delhi. He visited India again
from 22 – 30 September 2007, leading the Maldivian
9

Annual Report 2007-2008

delegation to attend the 53rd annual Conference of the
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association organized in
New Delhi. Hamdun Hameed, Minister of Planning and
National Development, visited India from 4 – 7 September
2007 to participate in the Regional Consultation on
Review of Asian Development Bank’s long term strategic
framework and the role of Asian Development Fund.
Abdulla Shahid, Minister of Foreign Affairs, visited India
on 29 October 2007 and had discussions with the Prime
Minister and the Minister of External Affairs.

Foreign Secretary Shivshankar Menon visited Maldives
from 27-29 January 2008 to hold bilateral discussions with
Maldivian authorities. He called on President of Maldives.
He also met Foreign Minister of Maldives besides meeting
other senior Government officials.
Minister of State for Commerce, Jairam Ramesh led an
Indian delegation to Maldives from 29-31 January 2008.
During his meetings with Maldivian dignitaries, the
Minister discussed ways and means to enhance bilateral
relations and economic cooperation between India and
the Maldives.

Upon learning of the problems being faced by Maldives
due to tidal surges in Maldives in May 2007, Prime
Minister expressed concern and assured President
Gayoom all possible assistance from India. As a follow up
to these assurances, India extended cash assistance to the
Government of Maldives equivalent to Rs 10 crores.

President of the Republic of Maldives, Maumoon Abdul
Gayoom paid a State Visit to India from 6-12 February
2008. During his visit, President Gayoom met the
President, Vice President, Prime Minister, External Affairs
Minister and Raksha Mantri. An Agreement on
Cooperation in the fields of Science & Technology was
signed on 11 February 2008. Both the countries also agreed
to sign a new MoU on the Indira Gandhi Memorial
Hospital, Male and set up an India-Maldives Foundation.

India strongly condemned the bomb attack which
occurred in Male on 29 September 2007 resulting in injury
to 12 foreign tourists and offered all assistance in
investigation as well as medical assistance to the
Government of Maldives.

The Maldives President also received the Sustainable
Development Leadership Award conferred on him by
TERI on 7 February 2008.

On 8 January 2008, a man wielding a knife made an
attempt on the life of President Gayoom of Maldives.
President Gayoom was unharmed in the incident.
Following the attack, both President of India and the
Prime Minister have sent messages to President Gayoom
condemning the attack.

Myanmar
India-Myanmar relations strengthened during the year
through a number of bilateral visits at various levels. Lt.
General Thiha Thura Tin Aung Myint Oo, Quartermaster
General (QMG) and Member of State Peace and
Development Council (SPDC) of Myanmar visited India
from 20-27 April 2007. QMG called on External Affairs
Minister and Raksha Mantri, in addition to his meetings
with the Quarter Master General and Vice Chief of Army
Staff in Delhi. Maj. General Maung Maung Swe, Minister
for Social Welfare, Relief and Resettlement attended the
2nd Asian Ministerial Conference on Disaster Reduction
from 5-9 November 2007. From India, Minister for Culture
and Tourism Ambika Soni visited Myanmar on 14 October
to attend the state funeral of late Prime Minster, General
Soe Win.

During 2007-08, India continued to provide training
facilities to Maldivian nationals in areas such as defence,
police, medical and technical education, etc under its
bilateral aid programme.
Abdulla Shahid, Foreign Minister of Maldives visited India
in December 2007 to attend the SAARC Council of
Ministers Meeting held in New Delhi. During his visit,
Shahid met the External Affairs Minister and Raksha
Mantri on 6 December 2007.
India-Maldives Joint Coast Guard Exercises Codenamed
“DOSTI-IX” were conducted off Malé from 25-28
December 2007. Vice Admiral R.F. Contractor, AVSM,
N.M. and Director General, Indian Coast Guard visited
Maldives from 25-28 December 2007 to oversee the
conduct of above “DOSTI-IX” exercises. During his visit,
Director General, Indian Coast Guard met Foreign
Minister and Defence Minister of Maldives besides
meeting other senior officials.

On 21 November 2007 Prime Minister met the Prime
Minister of Myanmar, General Thein Sein in Singapore
on the margins of the East Asia Summit held there. Earlier,
on 1 October 2007, External Affairs Minister met Foreign
Minister U Nyan Win of Myanmar in New York on the
10

India’s Neighbours

signed an agreement with Myanmar Economic
Cooperation, on 10 August for supply of 200 MT skimmed
milk powder to Myanmar which was completed in time.
Myanmar received the first lot of five 1350HP YDM-4
locomotives from India out of the total 20 expected to
reach Yangon by mid-2008. A two-member delegation
from EXIM Bank visited Myanmar and signed a US$ 60
million Line of Credit Agreement with Myanmar Foreign
Trade Bank (MFTB) for Thathay Chaung hydropower
project on 29 October 2007.

margins of the UN General Assembly. On the internal
developments in Myanmar, both External Affairs Minister
and Prime Minister conveyed in their meetings that the
national reconciliation and political reform process
initiated by the Myanmar authorities should be broadbased and inclusive including Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and
the various ethnic nationalities and should be carried
forward expeditiously towards a satisfactory conclusion.
Cooperation in the hydrocarbons sector was consolidated
with the signing on 23 September 2007 of Production
Sharing Contracts (PSC) by ONGC Videsh Limited with
Myanmar Oil and Gas Enterprise for three deep-sea blocks
AD-2, AD-3 and AD-9 in the presence of Minster of
Petroleum & Natural Gas Murli Deora, in the Myanmar
capital Nay Pyi Taw. During the visit, Deora also held
bilateral discussion with Myanmar Minister for Energy
Brigadier General Lun Thi on energy cooperation between
two countries.

With the support of the Ministry of Culture of the
Government of the Union of Myanmar, several cultural
events were organized by the Embassy of India in Yangon
including a Bharatanatyam performance by Sreekala
Bharat and a music concert by Indian singer Peenaz
Masani to commemorate the 60 th year of India’s
Independence.
Myanmar has been allotted 100 slots under the ITEC
programme and 42 slots under the Colombo plan for the
year 2007-08. While 28 Myanmar personnel have already
gone for courses under ITEC programme and 40 have
gone under the Colombo Plan till date, the rest of the
slots are under various stages of consideration by Indian
institutions.

A three member delegation led by Lt. General Myat Hein,
Commander-in-Chief (Air) of Myanmar visited India from
2-7 April. At the invitation of Commander-in-Chief
(Navy) Vice Admiral Soe Thein, Chief of Naval Staff
Admiral Sureesh Mehta, PVSM, AVSM, ADC visited
Myanmar from 8-13 May. He also called on Vice Senior
General Maung Aye at Nay Pyi Taw. A three member
delegation led by Secretary, Defence (Finance) V. K.
Mishra visited Myanmar from 9-11 April 2007. A five
member goodwill delegation led by GOC-in-C Lt. General
K. S. Jamwal, AVSM, VSM of Eastern Command, Indian
Army visited Myanmar on 9-14 July 2007. There were
several other exchanges of visits of defence service
personnels as well.
India remains committed to providing assistance to
developmental projects in Myanmar. A number of projects
are under consideration/implementation including the
Kaladan Multi-Modal Transit Transport Project. During
the period, the Border Roads Organisation took up the
task of resurfacing the Tamu-Kalewa-Kalemyo road, which
had earlier been upgraded under Indian assistance.

U Kyaw Thu, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Union
of Myanmar visited India from 11- 14 December 2007, at
the invitation of the Foreign Secretary Shivshankar
Menon for Foreign Office Consultations between India
and Myanmar. Delegation level talks were held on 11
December 2007. During the visit Deputy Minister U Kyaw
Thu also called on the Minister of External Affairs Pranab
Mukherjee. The discussions covered all areas of mutual
interest including bilateral, regional and international
issues and were marked by the friendship and cordiality
that mark relations between India and Myanmar. An MoU
for the establishment of the India-Myanmar Center for
Enhancement of Information Technology Skills
(IMCEITS) at Yangon under Indian assistance was signed
on 12 December 2007.

In the trade and commerce sector, important contacts
were established during the year. NAFED signed an
agreement with Myanmar Economic Cooperation on 14
August, for supply of 2000 MT wheat to Myanmar. This
supply was completed in October 2007. The Gujarat
Cooperative Milk Marketing Federation (Amul) also

The Foreign Minister of Myanmar U Nyan Win visited
India at the invitation of the Minister of External Affairs
from 31 December 2007-4 January 2008. During the visit,
U Nyan Win called on Prime Minister on 2 January 2008.
The Foreign Minister briefed Prime Minister on the recent
internal developments in Myanmar. Our Prime Minister
11

Annual Report 2007-2008

stressed the need for greater urgency in bringing about
political reforms and national reconciliation in Myanmar.
This process has to be broad based to include all sections
of society, including Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and the
various ethnic groups in Myanmar. He also met the
Minister of External Affairs and Vice President on 2
January 2008.

Minister G.P.Koirala and Foreign Minister Sahana Pradhan
visited India in April 2007 to participate in the 14th
SAARC Summit. Bilateral Meetings with the Prime
Minister and the Minister of External Affairs took place
on the sidelines of the SAARC Summit. Foreign Minister
Pradhan visited India again from 6-9 December 2007 to
participate in the SAARC Council of Ministers Meeting.
Foreign Secretary, Shivshankar Menon visited Nepal in
September 2007. Shyam Saran, Special Envoy of Prime
Minister visited Nepal in October 2007.

Nepal
The year witnessed critical developments in Nepal’s
ongoing peace process. However, the institutionalization
of multi-party democracy in Nepal still faces significant
challenges.

The India-Nepal Treaty of Trade and Agreement for
Cooperation to Control Unauthorized Trade were
renewed further for a further period of five years in March
2007. India and Nepal signed an Memorandum of
Understanding in September 2007 to operationalise the
US$ 100 million Line of Credit extended by India for
execution of infrastructure projects in Nepal.

Following the promulgation of interim Constitution in
January 2007, an interim government was formed under
the leadership of Prime Minister G.P. Koirala. The ruling
Seven Party Alliance (SPA) Interim Government was
expanded in April 2007 to include five Ministers from
the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist). The Maoist
Ministers submitted resignations from the Cabinet in
September 2007 as the political parties and the CPN
(Maoist) failed to break the political impasse on the twin
Maoist demands of declaring Nepal a Republic and
adoption of a fully proportional representation system for
the Constituent Assembly (CA) elections. The process
of management of Maoist PLA weapons and combatants,
under the supervision of the United Nations Mission in
Nepal (UNMIN), made progress. On 5 October 2007,
the Interim Government formally asked the Election
Commission to suspend the Constituent Assembly
elections scheduled on 22 November 2007. The
postponement of CA elections caused disappointment
among the people of Nepal and the international
community, including India.

Bilateral meetings dealing with various aspects of our
bilateral cooperation such as border management and
security, boundary matters, trade and commerce, transit,
water resources and economic cooperation took place.
Bilateral trade continued to increase. However, the growth
in bilateral trade appeared to have slowed, in view of the
uncertain political situation in Nepal. As per provisional
estimates, bilateral trade grew by 7.9% in 2006-07 as
compared to 12.4% in 2005-06 of Nepali fiscal year
(beginning July 15). By the end of the Nepalese fiscal year
2005-06, bilateral trade with India of US$ 2.31 billion
accounted for 63.2% of Nepal’s total external trade. India’s
share in Nepal’s imports stood at 61.7%. India, on the
other hand, absorbed about 67.6% of Nepal’s exports.
India continued to contribute to the development efforts
of Government of Nepal by undertaking development
projects in the areas of infrastructure, health, rural and
community development, education under the Small
Development Project Scheme that already has more than
220 projects implemented or under implementation. Two
big projects viz. Bir Hospital Expansion at the cost of Rs
65 crores and Manmohan Adhikari Polytechnic at the
cost of Rs 20 crores were under implementation.

India’s approach has been to continue to extend all
possible assistance as requested by the Government of
Nepal to support multi-party democracy in Nepal which
is essential for peace and fostering development of Nepal’s
economy. India maintained close consultations with the
Government of Nepal and the major political parties with
a view to support the early introduction of the new
constitutional order through CA elections. India has
stressed the need to enable the people of Nepal to choose
their own future and the manner in which they should be
governed through a free and fair election process.

India has provided considerable assistance to the
Government of Nepal in terms of vehicles, generators,
and communication equipment sets etc. in the ongoing
peace process.

The year witnessed several high-level exchanges. Prime
12

Vice President of India, Hamid Ansari meeting with U. Nyan Win, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Union of Myanmar,
in New Delhi on 2 January 2008.

Foreign Minister of Nepal, Sahana Pradhan meeting External Affairs Minister, Pranab Mukherjee
on the sidelines of 14th SAARC Summit, 3 April 2007.

13

Annual Report 2007-2008

The tragic assassination of former Prime Minister Benazir
Bhutto on 27 December 2007 was strongly condemned
by the Government of India. The assassination was a
setback to the forces of moderation in Pakistan. The
spread of extremist violence and terrorism and the danger
that poses to political stability in Pakistan is a matter of
grave concern. The growing strength of extremist forces
in Pakistan has serious security implications for India.

Strengthening of border infrastructure along the IndiaNepal border was high on Government’s priority. Several
new projects launched in consultation with the
Government of Nepal to improve and upgrade border
infrastructure, development of integrated check-posts and
road and rail connectivity between the two sides of the
border made further progress. Once implemented, these
projects would not only facilitate trade and transit but
would also contribute to efficient management of the
border.

Composite Dialogue
The Composite Dialogue covering eight subjects namely
Peace and Security including Confidence Building
Measures (CBMs); Jammu & Kashmir; Terrorism and
Drug trafficking; Friendly Exchanges; Economic and
Commercial Cooperation; Tulbul Navigation Project; Sir
Creek and Siachen was initiated in 2004 to deepen and
expand the bilateral relations. The fourth round of the
Composite Dialogue commenced with the meeting of the
Foreign Secretaries in March 2007 and Secretary level
talks were completed on all the eight subjects during the
course of the calendar year 2007. At the commencement
of the fourth round, an Agreement on ‘Reducing the Risk
from Accidents relating to Nuclear Weapons’ was signed
on 21 February 2007. Both countries also used this
opportunity to underscore that incidents like the terrorist
attack on the Samjhauta Express would not be allowed
to derail the dialogue process. Discussions in the
Composite Dialogue were positive and constructive.

India-Nepal cooperation in the area of human resources
development, training and capacity building of Nepali
institutions was strengthened further. Besides the doubling
of scholarships/seats offered in India as well as in Nepal,
training programmes were organized for the Nepali Police
personnel, Local Development Officers, Finance Officials
and Journalists as per their specific needs. Important
Nepalese delegations visiting India include visit of Nepal
Supreme Court delegation led by Kedar Giri, Acting Chief
Justice of Nepal to study implementation of IT in Indian
judiciary, visit of Public Service Commission to study the
Indian system of recruitment in public services, visit by
Election Commission of Nepal for discussions with its
Indian counterpart and to study the use of Electronic
Voting Machines. Professionals and officials of the
Government employees of Nepal were invited for training
programmes in different sectors under the ITEC and the
Colombo Plan.

In the Sir Creek talks held on 6-7 August 2007 both sides
exchanged maps/charts showing their respective positions
on the delineation of the boundary in the Sir Creek and
delimitation of the maritime boundary. A Joint Survey of
Sir Creek and adjoining areas had been conducted in
January 2007 to verify the outermost points of the
coastline of both countries with regard to the equidistance
method. At the Home Secretary level talks on 3-4 July
2007, the text of a Bilateral Consular Access agreement
was discussed in detail. Our concerns regarding cross
border terrorism and hostile propaganda were also
reiterated in this meeting. At the Commerce Secretary
talks on 31 July - 1 August 2007 it was agreed to facilitate
cement export from Pakistan and export of tea from India
by rail. A number of other measures to enhance bilateral
trade were also agreed upon. The transport links
established in the previous rounds of the dialogue
continued to operate successfully, facilitating the
movement of people and boosting bilateral trade.

With a view to strengthen and expand cultural relations,
an Indian Cultural Centre was opened in Katmandu in
August 2007.

Pakistan
The Composite Dialogue Process and the India-Pakistan
Joint Commission provide the institutional basis for IndiaPakistan dialogue and engagement. There were a number
of meetings under these two umbrellas during the period
under review as also high level meetings at the level of
Prime Minister and Minister of External Affairs. Progress
in bilateral relations was maintained. However, the
domestic political turbulence in Pakistan and the
consequential prolongation of the electoral process had
led to a slowing down in the pace of the institutional
dialogue. India continues to have serious and continuing
concerns on the infrastructure of terrorism in Pakistan
and its cross border and other implications for us.
14

W.J.M. Lokubandara, Speaker, Parliament of Sri Lanka calls on Somnath Chatterjee, Speaker in Vigyan Bhawan on
26 September 2007. The meeting took place in the sidelines of the 53rd Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference
being held in New Delhi.

Pakistan Foreign Minister, Khurshid Mehmood Kasuri shaking hands with the
Union Minister of External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee, in New Delhi on 21 February 2007.

15

Annual Report 2007-2008

Proposals made by India to further enhance people to
people contact by establishing transport links between
Kargil and Skardu and Jammu and Sialkot await
acceptance by Government of Pakistan.

about its nationals in jails in India. During the visit of the
Minister of External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee to Pakistan
on 13 -14 January 2007, it was agreed to establish a
Committee on Prisoners comprising retired judges of the
superior judiciary to visit jails in each country and propose
steps to ensure humane treatment and expeditious release
of prisoners who have completed their prison terms. The
committee has since been formed comprising four judges
from each country and is expected to meet shortly. The
status of each other’s citizens held prisoners in the two
countries was discussed in detail at the Home Secretary
level talks held on 3-4 July 2007. Both sides had agreed
that steps needed to be taken to reconcile the number of
prisoners in either country to facilitate their early release
on completion of necessary formalities.

Joint Commission
The Joint Commission was revived after a gap of 16 years
in October 2005 when its fourth meeting was held. The
fifth meeting of the Joint Commission was held on 21
February 2007 in New Delhi under which Technical Level
Working Groups on Agriculture, Health, Science and
Technology, Information, Education, I.T. and
Telecommunications, Environment and Tourism met. The
Joint Commission is chaired by the External Affairs
Minister of India and the Foreign Minister of Pakistan.
High Level Visits
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh and Pakistan Prime
Minister Shaukat Aziz held a meeting in New Delhi at
the sidelines of the South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation (SAARC) Summit on 4 April 2007. A wide
range of bilateral issues including trade, energy, banking,
air connectivity and other issues were discussed. Prime
Minister Aziz assured Dr. Singh that Pakistan would take
early action to return fishing boats seized from Indian
fishermen to their owners. The two leaders also agreed to
review the status of each other’s citizens held prisoners in
either country.

The matter of Indian Prisoners of War in Pakistan jails
has remained an issue in bilateral relations with Pakistan.
The Government of India has been consistently raising
this matter with the Government of Pakistan. During the
visit of the External Affairs Minister to Pakistan in January
2007, President Pervez Musharraf agreed to accept a
delegation comprising relatives of Missing Indian Defence
personnel to visit jails in Pakistan. A group comprising
13 members of families of missing Defence personnel
visited 10 prisons in Pakistan from 1-14 June 2007. The
outcome of the visit was inconclusive in the sense that it
has not been possible to shed light on the fate of missing
Indian Defence personnel.

Minister of Foreign Affairs of Pakistan, Khurshid
Mahmood Kasuri visited New Delhi on 20-21 February
2007 to co-chair, with the Minister of External Affairs,
Pranab Mukherjee, the fifth meeting of the India-Pakistan
Joint Commission. The visit took place in the backdrop
of terrorist attack on the Samjhauta Express on 18
February 2007. The Joint Commission examined the
possibilities of cooperation in the areas of Education,
Information, IT and Telecom, Health, Agriculture,
Tourism, Science and Technology, and Environment.

Joint Anti-Terrorism Mechanism
At the meeting between Prime Minister of India, Dr.
Manmohan Singh and President of Pakistan, General
Pervez Musharraf in Havana, Cuba on 16 September 2006,
it was agreed to constitute a Joint Anti-Terrorism
Mechanism (JATM). The first meeting of JATM was held
on 6-7 March 2007 where it was agreed that specific
information will be exchanged through the Mechanism
for (i) Helping investigations on either side related to
terrorist acts and (ii) Prevention of violence and terrorist
acts in the two countries. The second meeting of the
JATM was held in New Delhi on 22 October 2007. The
two sides reviewed the follow up steps taken on the
information shared during the first meeting of the JATM
and in the intervening period. Both sides shared new
information on terrorist incidents including those which
have occurred since the last meeting. They agreed to
continue to work to identify measures, exchange specific

Inamul Haque, Caretaker Foreign Minister of Pakistan
visited New Delhi on 7-8 December 2007 for the meeting
of SAARC Council of Ministers. At the margins of the
SAARC meeting Minister of External Affairs held a
bilateral meeting with him where issues on the dialogue
framework were discussed.
Humanitarian Issues
A significant number of Indian prisoners, fishermen and
boats are in Pakistani custody. Pakistan too has concerns
16

India’s Neighbours

information and assist in investigations. Government of
India attaches importance to this mechanism and believes
it could be a useful instrument if implemented effectively.

Other Important Developments
The Neutral Expert (NE) Prof. Raymond Lafitte,
appointed by World Bank in May 2005 to consider
Pakistan’s objections to the Baglihar project gave his
verdict on 12 February 2007. The verdict upheld India’s
overall design of the project.

Commerce and Trade
Promotion of commercial interaction remains an essential
component of India’s policy of engagement with Pakistan.
Total bilateral trade stood at US$ 1.66 billion in the
financial year 2006-07 as compared to US$ 859.33 million
in 2005-06. In 2006-07 India’s export to Pakistan was
valued at US$ 1.34 billion and India’s import at US$ 0
.32 billion. In 2007-08 (April-July 2007) total bilateral
trade stood at US$ 616.55 million out of which India’s
export component valued at US$ 535.91 million and
imports from Pakistan valued at US$ 80.64 million. India’s
exports to Pakistan continue to be on basis of a positive
list as Pakistan has neither granted Most Favoured Nation
(MFN) status nor gave mandatory tariff concessions as
required under the South Asia Free Trade Agreement
(SAFTA) to India.

Compensation has been disbursed to the survivors of a
number of relatives of the Samjhauta Express terrorist
attack. Following the accident on 18 February 2007 the
Government had declared a compensation of Rs 10,00,000
each, to the legal heirs of the Pakistani nationals who
were victims of the attack.

Sri Lanka
India-Sri Lanka relations continued to be further
strengthened with the expansion of linkages, particularly
in the economic and cultural fields. The period saw
exchange of several visits at the highest political level
between the two countries. President Mahinda Rajapaksa
visited New Delhi for the SAAARC Summit held in Delhi
on 3 - 4 April 2007. He visited India again on 13-14
October 2007 for attending the Hindustan Times
Leadership Summit. During the visit President Rajapaksa
met Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh and UPA
Chairperson Sonia Gandhi. Prime Minister also met
President Rajapaksa on the sidelines of the
Commonwealth Heads of Government Meet (CHOGM)
on 24 November 2007 in Kampala, Uganda.

As agreed by Prime Minister of India and his Pakistani
counterpart during their meeting on 4 April 2007 in the
sidelines of SAARC Summit in New Delhi, the export of
cement from Pakistan was facilitated. Thirteen cement
manufacturers from Pakistan have been granted license
to export their cement to India under Foreign
Manufacturers Certification Scheme.
In an important development, both countries agreed in
August 2007 to allow each other’s trucks to cross at
Wagha/Attari border up to designated points on either
side and the agreement is being implemented with effect
from 1 October 2007. Efforts are underway to start the
Srinagar–Muzaffarabad truck service across the Line of
Control (LoC) for trade in agreed items. Important
outstanding issues on the trade and economic cooperation
agenda include full and effective implementation by
Pakistan of its commitments under SAFTA and provision
of transit for purposes of trade through its territory to
Afghanistan.

Foreign Minister Rohitha Bogollagama visited India on 4
July 2007 and met Minister of External Affairs, Pranab
Mukherjee. Minister for Food and Agriculture Sharad
Pawar visited Sri Lanka from 23-25 May 2007 on the
invitation of President of Sri Lanka. Minister of State for
Labour and Employment Oscar Fernandes visited Sri
Lanka on 21 August 2007 to attend an International
Labour Organisation (ILO) high-level symposium titled
‘An International Legal Initiative to Strengthen National
Responses to HIV and AIDS at the Workplace’. Finance
Minister P. Chidambaram visited Sri Lanka on 11
November 2007 to address the annual lecture at the
Lakshman Kadirgamar Institute of International Relations
and Strategic Studies. Sri Lankan Foreign Minister
Rohitha Bogollagama attended the 29th Session of the
SAARC Council of Ministers held in New Delhi on 7-8
December 2007. In the interaction which took place
during these visits, India expressed its conviction that

An MoU between the Securities and Exchange Board of
India (SEBI) and Securities and Exchange Commission
Pakistan (SECP) was signed on 28 January 2008 on the
sidelines of the second Annual Meeting of the South Asian
Securities Regulators Forum (SASRAF) to facilitate the
sharing of information between two agencies.
17

Annual Report 2007-2008

aviation has contributed in increasing tourism and people
to people contact between the two countries.

there is no military solution to the ethnic problem in Sri
Lanka and the only way out is a negotiated, political
settlement acceptable to all communities in Sri Lanka.

India continued to provide development assistance to Sri
Lanka . India provided financial assistance to set up 20
Nenasalas (computer centers). India is undertaking a
project in the Eastern province of Sri Lanka to provide
assistance to the fishermen who were affected by the
ethnic conflict in that region. They are being provided
with fishing boats, nets, cooling room and trucks with
cold storage facility. For the benefit of the people of Indian
origin who are living in the tea estates and other plantation
areas in Sri Lanka, India undertook many projects to
improve the medical facilities and the educational
requirements for their children.

The bilateral economic and commercial ties continued
to expand during the year. India is the biggest source of
import for Sri Lanka and is the 3rd largest destination for
Sri Lankan exports. The momentum generated by the
India-Sri Lanka Free Trade Agreement (ISLFTA) has
continued as reflected in the sustained and rapid rise in
bilateral trade turnover over the years. Bilateral trade
amounted to US$ 1.6 billion for the period AprilSeptember 2007 as against US$ 1.3 billion during the same
period in 2006. The two sides carried forward their
negotiations on a Comprehensive Economic Partnership
Agreement (CEPA). The 11th round of discussions on
CEPA was held in Colombo from 2-4 January 2008.
According to the latest figures, India is the 4th largest
investor in Sri Lanka in the year 2007. The major Indian
investors include Indian Oil Corporation, ICICI Bank,
SBI, TATA, CEAT, Nicholas Piramal and VSNL.

India also continued to provide assistance to Sri Lanka in
the field of human resource development. A scheme for
awarding Mahatma Gandhi Scholarships to 100 students
from Sri Lanka, started in 2006, was repeated this year.
These scholarships are in addition to various other
scholarships provided by India to meritorious Sri Lankan
students. Joint Working Committee on Education met in
Colombo on 11-13 December 2007.

Cooperation between India and Sri Lanka in Civil
Aviation and Tourism is an important aspect of bilateral
relationship. The Sri Lankan national carrier, Sri Lankan
Airlines now operates 100 flights per week to various
destinations in India. Indian carriers also increased their
frequencies to Sri Lanka. The cooperation in the civil

On the cultural side the regular activities of the Indian
Cultural Centre included visits by eminent persons from
the world of art and culture and cultural troupes from
India.

18

South East Asia and the Pacific

Australia

2

sector continued to expand. The fifth meeting of IndiaAustralia Joint Working Group on Energy and Minerals
took place in July 2007 in Canberra. M/s Reliance
Industries Ltd. was given an exploration license off
Western Australia, and M/s Santos of Australia obtained
two exploration blocks in the Bay of Bengal under NELP
VI.

I

ndia-Australia bilateral relations continued to develop
further in all areas. Several Minister-level visits took
place during the year.
Minister for Steel, Chemicals and Fertilizers, Ram
Vilas Paswan, led a delegation to Australia from 2429 June 2007.

Relations in the field of defence continued to grow. Besides
the visit of Australian Defence Minister, Chief of
Australian Defence Force, ACM Angus Houston, visited
India in May 2007, and Australian Naval Chief Vice
Admiral Russ Shalders visited India in August 2007.

Minister for Textiles, Shankersinh Vaghela visited
Australia from 2-5 July 2007.
Minister of Health and Family Welfare, Dr. A.
Ramdoss visited Australia from 20-27 July 2007 to
attend the 3rd Ministerial Meeting on HIV/AIDS in
Sydney.

India emerged as the second largest source of skilled
personnel and also the second largest source of overseas
students for Australia.

Minister of State for Agriculture, Consumer Affairs,
Food and Public Distribution, Dr. Akhilesh Prasad
Singh visited Australia from 6-8 July 2007.

Brunei Darussalam

Minister of State for Finance, Pawan Kumar Bansal
visited Australia in September 2007 to inaugurate
the Bank of Baroda branch in Sydney.

Bilateral relations between India and Brunei Darussalam
continued to be cordial and friendly. Important areas of
interactions were political, economic and commercial,
information technology and defence.

Other visits during the year included Speaker of Haryana
Legislative Assembly Dr. R. S. Kadian, in April 2007; a
delegation of Empowered Committee of State Finance
Ministers in May 2007 to study the Goods and Services
Tax (GST) system in Australia; Lt. Governor of
Puducherry, Mukut Mithi in May 2007; Commandant of
National Defence College, Vice Admiral Sanjeev Bhasin,
in October 2007.

A delegation from the Brunei Investment Agency visited
Delhi and Mumbai on 2-3 August 2007.

Cambodia
A fresh impetus was provided to India’s relations with
Cambodia by the State Visit of the Cambodian Prime
Minister, Hun Sen to India from 8-10 December 2007.
During the visit, seven Agreements / MoUs relating to
Transfer of Sentenced Persons, Credit Line, Defence
Cooperation, Water Resource Management, Agricultural
Development, Oil and Gas sector and Foreign Office
Consultations were signed. A fresh line of credit of US$
35.2 million on concessional terms was offered to
Cambodia.

From Australia, Defence Minister, Brendan Nelson, visited
India from 10-13 July 2007. An Agreement on Protection
of Exchanged Classified Information was signed during
the visit.
India-Australia trade was A$ 11.4 billion in 2006-07 (JulyJune), an increase of 32.4% over the previous year. India
and Australia agreed to undertake a feasibility study for a
Free Trade Agreement in August 2007.

Earlier, Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister, Hor
Namhong paid an official visit to India from 17-19 May
2007. An MoU on the establishment of an English

India-Australia cooperation in the mining and energy
19

Annual Report 2007-2008

Language Training Centre was signed. The Centre was
subsequently operationalized in the prestigious Royal
Academy of Cambodia in Phnom Penh.

Third India-Indonesia Joint Commission Meeting on 18
June 2007. The Joint Commission which was co-chaired
by Indonesian Minister of Foreign Affairs, Nur Hassan
Wirajuda, agreed to cooperate in a number of areas. The
two sides also agreed on Points of Action for
implementation of the New Strategic Partnership which
was announced at Summit Level during President, Susilo
Bambang Yudhoyono’s State visit to India in 2005.

A four-member team from the Ministry of Home Affairs
visited Cambodia in November 2007 for the first meeting
of the Coordination Committee under the Agreement to
Combat International Terrorism, Organized Crime and
Illicit Drug Trafficking.

An MoU for setting up a Vocational Training Centre for
the construction sector in Aceh was also signed during
the visit.

Defence cooperation acquired a new momentum. Visits
from India by Director General Military Intelligence and
a 17-member Army Higher Command Course Study Team
took place. The Indian government gifted parachutes and
medicines to the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces
(RCAF).

The newly elected Governor of Aceh, Dr. Irwandi Yusuf
led a delegation to Delhi, Goa and Hyderabad from 1926 August 2007 with a view to learn from India’s
experience in rebuilding state institutions.

Fiji
Former President of India, Dr. A. P. J. Abdul Kalam visited
Jakarta on 19-20 November 2007 to deliver a keynote
address at the invitation of the Indonesian Centre of
Sciences (LIPI).

India continued its engagement with the interim
Government of the Republic of Fiji Islands led by the
Interim Prime Minister, Commodore Josaia Voreqe
Bainimarama. The high level consultations between the
two Governments focused upon the need of an early return
of democracy for the stability and economic development
of Fiji, as well as to promote peace and harmony amongst
major communities in Fiji.

From the Indonesian side, the Minister of Social Affairs,
Bachtiar Chamsyah, visited Delhi to participate in the
2nd Asian Ministerial Meeting on Disaster Risk Reduction
on 6-7 November 2007. Minister of Health, Dr. Siti
Fadilah Supari participated in the Ministerial Conference
on Avian and Pandemic Influenza held in New Delhi on
4-5 December 2007.

Interim Minister for Foreign Affairs and External Trade,
Ratu Epeli Nailatikau visited New Delhi from 4-6 March
2007. The Interim Minister for Finance, National
Planning and Sugar Industry, Mahendra Chaudhry visited
New Delhi from 10-20 May 2007.The Acting Chief Justice
of Fiji, Anthony Gates, visited India from 21-26 May 2007.

On the defence side, the first meeting of the Joint Defence
Cooperation Committee (JDCC) was held in Jakarta from
12-14 June 2007. The Inaugural Navy-to-Navy Staff Talks
were held on 4-5 April 2007 in New Delhi to discuss ways
of strengthening the bilateral Navy-to-Navy relationship.
This was followed by the visit of Admiral Slamet
Soebijanto to India from 10-13 April 2007. The 10th cycle
of the month-long bi-annual India-Indonesia Coordinated
Patrol off the Andaman Sea was held in September 2007.

India and Fiji Islands held 2nd round of Foreign Office
Consultations in New Delhi on 23 July 2007.
Government of India has donated US$ 100,000 to the
Kidney Foundation of Fiji for procurement of equipment
for the setting up of a Dialysis Center in Fiji. India has
also donated F$ 76,000/- to the Government of Fiji to
help Fiji’s flood victims. Grant-in-aid of US$ 100,000/each has also been offered to Fiji in October 2006 and
October 2007 for sustainable development.

Six Defence officers from India are undergoing training
in Indonesia. Five Indonesian Armed Forces officers were
also sent for training at various Indian institutions such
as Defence Services Staff College (DSSC), Wellington,
Army War College, Mhow and Armed Forces Technical
College, Bangalore, during the year.

Indonesia
The year saw further consolidation of bilateral relations
with Indonesia. There were several Ministerial and official
level visits from both the sides including a visit of the
Minister of External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee for the

On economic and commercial front, during the Third
India-Indonesia Joint Commission Meeting, both sides
agreed on an action plan for diversification of the trade
20

President of India, Pratibha Devisingh Patil and the Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh, at the ceremonial reception of the
President of Phillippines, Gloria Macapagal Arroyo, in New Delhi on 5 October 2007.

Prime Minister of the Royal Government of Cambodia, Samdech Hun Sen meeting with
M. Hamid Ansari, Vice President of India, in New Delhi on 8 December 2007.

21

Annual Report 2007-2008

Programme in July 2007 under the bilateral ICT
Cooperation Programme between India and Lao PDR.
India also established Lao-India Centre of English
Language Training at the National University of Laos
under India-ASEAN cooperation framework. The
Government of India gave a grant of US$ 100,000 to the
Ministry of Health of Lao PDR to buy medical equipment
for dealing with Avian Influenza.

basket while facilitating expansion of trade and investment
with a view to achieve two-way trade worth US$ 10 billion
by the year 2010. The meeting also identified new fields
of bilateral co-operation ranging from special economic
zones and alternative energy sources to legal assistance,
biotechnology, space related applications, tele-education
and tele-health.
A delegation consisting of officials from Ministry of
Agriculture and representatives from the meat export
industry visited Indonesia on 29-30 October 2007 to
discuss lifting of the existing ban on import of Indian meat
to Indonesia.

India signed an MoU with Lao PDR for the Archaeological
Survey of India to undertake restoration of Wat Phou
which is UNESCO World Heritage site and is a Hindu
temple pre-dating Angkor Wat.

The First meeting of India-Indonesia Joint Study Group
to study the feasibility of setting up a Comprehensive
Economic Co-operation Agreement with Indonesia was
held in Jakarta on 30-31 October 2007.

Malaysia
The year 2007 marked the 50th anniversary of establishing
diplomatic relations between India and Malaysia. Bilateral
relations have gathered momentum in various sectors of
our interaction with Malaysia as both sides followed up
on the decisions taken at the Fourth India-Malaysia Joint
Commission Meeting held in New Delhi in February 2007.

The Tata Power Company Ltd. (TPCL) signed an
agreement for the purchase of 30% stake in leading
Indonesian coal mines PT Kaltim Prima Coal (KPC) and
PT Arutmin Indonesia for US$ 1.3 billion. The Bank of
India acquired a 76% stake in Indonesia’s Bank Swadeshi
for US$ 5.24 Million. The TVS motors launched twowheeler manufacturing operations (US$ 80 million
investment) in Karawang, Jakarta in July 2007.

Commercial relations continued to build on the strength
shown in 2006 as during the first seven months of 2007
bilateral trade reached US$ 4.1 billion, an increase of
nearly 16% over the same period in 2006.
On the economic front, India and Malaysia adopted the
Joint Study Group Report on 11 August 2007, signed by
Indian Commerce Secretary and his Malaysian
counterpart which paves the way for an India-Malaysia
Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement
(CECA).

Bilateral trade during the period from January-June 2007
rose by 52.4%, (as compared to the same period in 2006)
to reach US$ 3,116 million. Indian imports from Indonesia
increased by 77.6% to reach US$ 2,269 million while our
exports registered a growth of 10.4% to reach US$ 847
million.

Several cooperation projects under the overall ambit of
development partnership between India and Lao PDR,
both through bilateral and ASEAN related fora, witnessed
further progress during the year.

A bilateral Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on
Air Services was signed by Secretary, Civil Aviation and
the Secretary General in the Malaysian Ministry of
Transport on 13 July 2007, endorsing the “multiple
designation” provision, whereby both sides could designate
any number of airlines as they wish to operate on IndiaMalaysia route. The MoU also significantly liberalized the
capacity entitlement for both the sides. The operations
of Air India Express, the budget subsidiary airlines of Air
India, commenced its operations on Chennai-Kuala
Lumpur sector with effect from 28 October 2007.

India sanctioned a Line of Credit of US$ 17.34 million
for an agricultural and irrigation project in Lao PDR. 30
Lao nationals attended Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha
University for Master of Computer Applications (MCA)

Indian investments into Malaysia have gathered further
momentum. Reliance Industries Limited acquired Hualon
Corporation in September 2007; Ballarpur Industries
Limited (the Thapar Group) acquired the Sabah Forest

Jawaharlal Nehru Indian Cultural Centre, Jakarta and
Indian Cultural Centre, Bali continued to play an active
role in promotion of cultural exchanges and
understanding.

Lao PDR

22

South East Asia and the Pacific

Industries in April 2007 and Larsen and Toubro acquired
Tamco Corporate Holdings in October 2007. In
September 2007, Satyam unveiled its new state-of theart 500 seat Global solutions Centre (GSC) in Cyberjaya
as part of its ambitious plans to expand its Malaysian
operations into developing its largest software hub outside
India.

HQ of Ministry of Defence (Navy) visited Malaysia in
connection with meeting on the “Enhancement of Safety
of Navigation and Environmental Protection of the Straits
of Malacca and Singapore” from 12 -15 Mar 2007.

During the year, there have been several ministerial visits
from Malaysia to India. The Minister of Higher Education,
Dato’ Mustapa Mohamed visited Mysore in June 2007 to
attend the graduation ceremony of over 100 Malaysian
students and lecturers trained by Infosys in applications
of Information Technology in the corporate sector. Dato’
Seri S. Samy Vellu, Minister of Works visited Kerala on 23 July 2007, during which an MoU was signed between
the State Government and the Government of Malaysia
for the establishment of a new Industrial Promotion
Centre in Kinalur, Kozhikode. The Minister of
International Trade and industry, Dato’ Seri Rafidah Aziz
led a high level business delegation to New Delhi, Mumbai
and Chennai on a Trade and Investment Mission from 25
November-1 December 2007. The Governor of the
Central Bank of Malaysia, Bank Negara, Tan Sri Dr. Zeti
Akhtar Aziz visited India in November 2007, during which
two separate MoUs were concluded with Indian Railways
and the Indian Institute of Banking and Finance (IIBF)
respectively.

A 50-strong road expedition (Cape Town-Kuala Lumpur)
team from Malaysian Ministry of Defence, headed by the
Malaysian Deputy Minister of Defence, travelled through
India (Wagah Border – Moreh) from 20-26 August 2007.
The team was provided full support and assistance by
Indian Armed Forces enroute.

From the Malaysian side a group of 53 officers from
Malaysian Armed Forces Staff Course (MAFSC) visited
India from 24 June- July 2007.

The KILO-class submarine, INS Sindhurakshak, the
frigate INS Kulish and 10 member Surya Kiran aerobatic
team will be participating at LIMA in December 2007.
A draft MoU on Security and Welfare of Indian workers
was finalized on 28 June 2007.
To commemorate the 50 th anniversary of diplomatic
relations, a number of high profile cultural events were
organized in various parts of Malaysia.

New Zealand
On 2 October 2007, Mayor of Wellington, Kerry
Prendergast and Governor General, Anand Satyanand
jointly unveiled the statute of Mahatma in the gardens in
front of the main Railway station in Wellington. This was
the first statue of a foreigner to be unveiled in New
Zealand.

Our defence relations with Malaysia were further
strengthened with India agreeing to train Royal Malaysia
Air Force personnel. The Second Annual Navy-to-Navy
Staff talks in Kuala Lumpur from 23-27 April 2007.

The New Zealand Trade Minister, Phil Goff visited India
from 19-23 April 2007. At the end of his visit, he said
that agreement in principle to commence a study into
the implications of a free trade agreement between India
and New Zealand was a useful outcome of discussions
with his Indian counterpart, Kamal Nath. During 2007,
Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister Michael
Cullen, visited India. The New Zealand Labour Minister,
Trever Mallard and the Youth Affairs and Sports Minister,
Nanaia Mahuta also visited India to attend multilateral
Conferences and held meetings with their counterparts.

Some of the important visits to Malaysia in the field of
defence included: a group of 10 officers of Higher Air
Command Course from College of Air Warfare,
Secunderabad visited Malaysia as a part of foreign country
tour from 15-18 April 2007. Lt Gen Thomas Mathew,
AVSM, AG visited Kuala Lumpur to represent Chairman
Chiefs of Staff Committee (COSC) at the Kuala Lumpur
International Tattoo (KLIT) Event on 8 September 2007.
A group of 16 officers comprising Directing Staff and
student officers of 36th Higher Command Course of Army
War College Mhow visited Malaysia as a part of foreign
country tour on 11-12 September 2007. Commodore
Rajeev Sawhney, Executive Director, National Maritime
Foundation and Cdr Sandeep Tandon, JDNO, Integrated

The Minister of Panchayati Raj, Sports and Youth Affairs,
Mani Shankar Aiyar visited New Zealand from 25-29
March 2007 to participate in the Commonwealth
Conference on Local Government in Auckland.
23

Annual Report 2007-2008

The Minister of Textiles, Shankersinh Vaghela visited New
Zealand from 5-8 July 2007.

Agreement on the Establishment of a Joint
Commission on Bilateral Cooperation

Joint Trade Committee and Joint Business Council
meetings were held in New Zealand from 24-26 October
2007.

Joint Declaration for Cooperation to Combat
International Terrorism
Memorandum of Agreement on Exemption of Visa
Requirements for Diplomatic Passport holders

Papua New Guinea

Memorandum of Agreement on Enhanced
Cooperation in the Field of Renewable Energy.

India’s relations with Papua New Guinea have been
growing steadily. Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and
Vanuatu have extended support for India’s candidature
to various international organizations such as UN Board
of Auditors (Asian Seat), Non Permanent Seat of United
Nations Security Council (UNSC) from Asian Region,
World Meteorological Organization and Commonwealth
Secretary General.

Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on
Cooperation between the Foreign Service Institutes
of India and the Philippines.
MoU between the Exim Bank of India and the
Government of Philippines on the extension of a
US$ 15 million Letter of Credit (LoC) to the
Philippines.

Under the ITEC Programme, Government of India has
approved grant of financial assistance of Rs. 10 lakhs to
Papua New Guinea for setting up of an HIV/AIDS
resource Centre.

MoU between the State Trading Corporation of
India Ltd. and the Philippines International Trading
Corporation.
MoU on Cooperation in the Field of Health and
Medicine.

As part of Government of India’s Regional Assistance
Initiatives for Pacific Island countries, a grant-in-aid of
US$ 100,000 had been approved for Fiji and Nauru for
supply of equipment and materials for social and economic
programmes and for sustainable development.

Minister of External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee led the
Indian delegation to the ASEAN Ministerial Meeting
(AMM)/Post Ministerial Conferences (PMC)/ASEAN
Regional Forum (ARF) Ministerial Meetings in August
2007.

India extended an assistance of US$ 100,000 for relief
and rehabilitation of the Tsunami victims.

Three naval ships of the Eastern Fleet of the Indian Navy,
namely INS Jyoti, INS Rana and INS Kuthar visited
Manila from 5-9 May 2007 on a “Goodwill Visit”.

A major oil company, Oil Search Ltd. and Indian company,
Oswal Projects signed an MoU for the supply of natural
gas to the world’s largest ammonia and urea fertiliser plant
in Port Moresby. Another Indian company is in the
processing of setting up a coconut oil extraction plant in
Port Moresby.

The Philippines Bureau of Immigration has removed
Indian nationals, along with Chinese nationals, from the
Bureau’s list of high risk/ restricted category for issuance
of visa. This has been done in view of the rising Indian
investment in the Philippines, especially in the IT sector
as well as to attract the growing Indian outbound travelers
for tourism.

Philippines
Bilateral relations between India and the Philippines have
acquired new directions and momentum following the
State visit of President Kalam in February 2006, visit of
Prime Minister in January 2007 for the ASEAN – India
and East Asia Summits and the State visit of Philippines
President, Gloria Macapagal Arroyo to India from 4-6
October 2007. The following Declarations / Agreement /
MoUs were signed during the visit:

In the last two years there has been a sharp increase in
Indian students joining the private pilot training schools
in the Philippines to obtain commercial pilot license. The
number of Indian students in local medical colleges has
also increased significantly in the last two years.

Singapore

Joint Declaration on a Framework of Bilateral
Cooperation

The year 2007-08 witnessed a number of new initiatives
to further strengthen the existing friendly relations
24

Minister of External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee with Prime Minister of Singapore Lee Hsein Loong
during his visit, 20 June 2007.

Minister of State for External Affairs, E. Ahamed calling on King George Topou V., Kingdom of Tonga
during his visit in connection with the Pacific Dialogue Forum meeting, 19 October 2007.

25

Annual Report 2007-2008

were to exchange and share best practices used in both
the countries as well as to explore collaboration
opportunities.

between India and Singapore. The establishment of a Joint
Ministerial Committee led by the Foreign Ministers to
monitor the progress of bilateral relations was noteworthy.
An agreement on this was signed on 19 June 2007 during
the visit of the Minister of External Affairs, Pranab
Mukherjee to Singapore from 18-20 June 2007. The two
countries have also agreed to set up a bilateral Security
Round Table which would provide forum for the security
agencies of the two countries to discuss issues of mutual
interest. Additionally, it has also been agreed to establish
a Track II Strategic Dialogue which will provide an
opportunity for senior figures with policy making
experiences to discuss bilateral and international issues
of mutual interest.

The first East Asia Energy Ministers’ Meeting (EMM) was
held on 23 August 2007 in Singapore. Secretary
(Petroleum and Natural Gas) represented India at the
Meeting.
Some of the important visits were:
Singapore Minister for Transport and Second
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Raymond Lim visited
India in April 2007. The Minister was accompanied
by a 20-member delegation. During the Minister’s
visit to Chennai, Air India and Singapore Airport
Terminal Services (SATS) signed an MoU in
Chennai on 2 May 2007.

The signing of MoU between the two countries which
would facilitate conducting of bilateral exercises and joint
training for the Air forces of the two countries was also a
significant development. Similar MoU for the Armies of
the two countries is in the process of finalization.

Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister, Dr. Y.S. Rajasekhara
Reddy along with a high level delegation visited
Singapore from 11-13 May 2007. During the visit,
he inaugurated a Road Show/Seminar on
Investment Opportunities in Andhra Pradesh
organized by the Singapore-Indian Chamber of
Commerce and Industry (SICCI).

Economic relations between the two countries also
showed steady progress. The first review of CECA was
successfully concluded on 1 October 2007. The two
countries have also agreed to establish an India-Singapore
CEO Forum to advice the two governments and identify
priority areas for cooperation. Further, to assist Indian
companies in Singapore and encourage them to articulate
shared concerns, Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)India Business Forum was launched on 20 June 2007
during the visit of the Minister of External Affairs to
Singapore.

An Empowered Committee of State Finance
Ministers accompanied by senior Central/State
government officials, from West Bengal, Rajasthan,
Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Delhi
and Orissa visited Singapore from 21-23 May 2007
to study implementation of GST in Singapore.
The Defence Minister, A.K. Antony visited
Singapore from 31 May–2 June 2007 to participate
in the annual Shangri-La Dialogue.

A new forum to represent Indian companies in Singapore
- akin to a chamber of commerce - was launched on 20
June 2007 by the Minister of External Affairs, Pranab
Mukherjee. The new India Business Forum (IBF) affiliated
to the CII, aims to represent the rapidly growing number
of Indian companies - estimated at around 2,600 - that
have established operations in Singapore.

The Minister of State for Education and Manpower
in Singapore, Gan Kim Yong visited India from 2931 August 2007.

Singapore’s proposal to set up the Singapore-India
Economic Zone is also progressing. M/s Ascendas led
consortium of companies has already received, in
principle, approval for their SEZ proposal in Tamil Nadu.

The Singaporean Minister of State for Trade and
Industry, S Iswaran visited Chennai, Puducherry and
Mumbai from 24-27 September 2007. The Minister
was leading an infrastructure mission to India to
attend the Federation of Indian Chambers of
Commerce and Industry (FICCI) Real Estate
Summit at Mumbai on 27 September 2007.

The CII organised an education-focused reverse mission
from South India to Singapore on 23-24 April 2007. The
delegates were from the higher education institutions in
South India. The key objectives of the reverse mission

The Singaporean Defence Minister, Teo Chee Hean
visited India from 14 -18 October 2007 in
connection with the bilateral artillery exercise at
Deolali.
26

South East Asia and the Pacific

organized at Asian Civilizations Museum. After the
conclusion of 3rd East Asia Summit and ASEAN Summit,
Singapore Prime Minister, Lee Hsien Loong and his wife
hosted a Reception and Viewing of the above Exhibition
on 21 November 2007. Singapore Prime Minister and
Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh addressed the
gathering which consisted of all the Heads of States/
Governments from the EAS and EU along with their
spouses.

Singapore Minister Mentor, Lee Kuan Yew visited
India in October 2007. He again visited India in
December 2007 in connection with the Citi AsiaPacific Business Leaders’ Summit Singapore.
Foreign Minister, George Yeo visited India in
November 2007.
Dr. Montek Singh Ahluwalia, Deputy Chairman of
Planning Commission visited Singapore from 15-17
November 2007.

Thailand

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh paid a twoday visit to Singapore on 20-21 November 2007 to
attend the 3rd East Asia Summit and the 6th IndiaASEAN Summit.

The 60th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic
relations between India and Thailand was celebrated in
2007. The bilateral relationship progressed well during
the year.

The second annual Defence Working Group (DWG)
meeting was held at Singapore on 3-4 May 2007. The
visit by our Naval Chief to Singapore for IMDEX in May
2007 was the other important high level interactions
during this period. The Indian Navy and Republic of
Singapore Navy (RSN), for the first-ever time, also
participated in a multilateral exercise, Malabar 07-02, with
the US Navy, Japanese Navy and Royal Australian Navy
(RAN) from 4-8 September 2007 in the Bay of Bengal.
The Armoured and Artillery trainings were also
conducted at Babina and Deolali in February-April 2007
and October-November 2007, respectively. The SINDEX
series of exercises between the two air forces was also
conducted in November-December 2007 at Kalaikunda.

The highlight of the year was the State visit of Prime
Minister Surayud Chulanont to India from 25-27 June
2007. An MoU on Enhancement of Cooperation in the
Field of Renewable Energy and the Cultural Exchange
Programme for the years 2007-09 were signed during the
visit.
Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn visited India twice
during the year. Her first visit, which included New Delhi,
Anand, Ooty, Mysore and Kolkata was from 5-10 March
2007. She again visited New Delhi on 8-9 August 2007
to inaugurate an exhibition of photographs taken by her
during earlier visits to India, on the occasion of the 60th
anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations
between the two countries.

The fourth annual Defence Policy Dialogue (DPD), cochaired by the Defence Secretaries of India and Singapore
was held at New Delhi, from 8-10 October 2007. A longterm MoU for Air Force bilateral exercises in India, along
with the requisite financial protocol, has also been signed
on 9 October 2007, by the two Defence Secretaries, during
the fourth Defence Policy Dialogue.

Krirk-krai Jirapaet, Minister of Commerce visited India
on 11-12 April 2007 at the head of a business delegation.
On a separate visit later in the year, he visited the North
Eastern States of India from 22-25 June 2007.
Sawanit Kongsiri, Deputy Foreign Minister led a 22member delegation of Thai businessmen to India for a
Road Show from 28 June-4 July 2007.

An Indian officer has also been seconded to the newly
formed Information Sharing Centre (ISC) of the Regional
Cooperation Against Armed Piracy (ReCAAP) from May
2007.

Thailand’s Deputy Prime Minister and Industry Minister
Kosit Panpiemras led a delegation of senior officials and
business executives to India from 28 August–4 September
2007.

On the cultural front, proposal for setting up Nalanda
International University has received support from
Singapore government. Nalanda Mentor Group, headed
by Prof. Amartya Sen, which had been set up by
Government of India, held its first meeting in Singapore
in July 2007. A major exhibition “On the Nalanda Trail:
Buddhism in India, China and Southeast Asia” was

The Minister of External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee
visited Thailand from 13-16 September 2007 for the Fifth
Meeting of the India-Thailand Joint Commission.
The Minister for Panchayati Raj, Youth Affairs and Sports
27

Annual Report 2007-2008

Khamronsin from the Royal Thai Navy participated in
this exercise.

and Development of the North Eastern Region, Mani
Shankar Aiyar visited Thailand from 22-24 March 2007
to promote the Third North East Business Summit that
was held in New Delhi on 10-11 April 2007. Later in the
year the Minister again visited Thailand from 31 October–
5 November 2007.

Fifteen members each from the Indian Air Force and the
Royal Thai Air Force visited each other’s countries under
the IAF-RTAF Mid-Junior level officers exchange visit
from 19-25 August 2007. A nine aircraft aerobatic display
by the Suryakiran Aerobatic Team was held in Bangkok
on 12 December 2007.

Bilateral trade increased from US$ 2286.89 million in
2005-06 to US$ 3189.96 million in 2006-07, an increase
of 39.49%. India’s exports increased from US$ 1075.31
million to US$ 1444.35 million, an increase of 34.32%.
India’s imports from Thailand increased from US$ 1211.58
million to US$ 1745.61 million, an increase of 44.08%.

There was substantial cooperation between India and
Thailand in the field of defence training. A group of 14
cadets from the Chulalongkorn Royal Military Academy
(CRMA) visited India from 22-29 October 2007 under
the ongoing programme of cooperation with the Indian
Military Academy. A National Defence College
Delegation led by Maj Gen G D Bakshi SM VSM, Senior
Directing Staff (Army) with 14 course members visited
Thailand from 20-25 May 2007.

A number of meetings of the Trade Negotiating
Committee of the India-Thailand FTA were held during
the year. Considerable progress was made with regard to
the FTA in Goods. Discussions have also been initiated
on the FTA in Services and the Agreement on
Investments.

A number of Indian cultural events were organized in
Thailand during the course of the year. Sreekala Bharath
gave a Bharatha Natyam recital at a reception hosted by
the Thai Ministry of Foreign Affairs on 3 August 2007 to
mark the 60 th anniversary of the establishment of
diplomatic relations between the two countries. Following
are some of the programmes organized to commemorate
the 60th anniversary of establishment of India-Thailand
diplomatic relations:

The first round of negotiations for the review of the Double
Taxation Avoidance Convention (DTAC) between India
and Thailand of 1985 took place in Bangkok from 16-20
July 2007.
Defence Cooperation between India and Thailand has
been growing steadily over the past few years. The year
witnessed a number of visits from either side.
The Indian Army-Royal Thai Army combined Counter
Terrorism exercise ‘MAITREE 07-1’ was held at SRC
Ramgarh, Ranchi, India from 7-19 September 2007.
Admiral Satirapan Keynon, Commander-in-Chief Royal
Thai Navy visited India from 25-28 March 2007. Two
rounds of Indo-Thai Coordinated Patrol (CORPAT) were
held during the year. The Fourth cycle of CORPAT was
held from 2-4 April 2007. One ship and one Dornier
aircraft from the Indian Navy and HTMS Khamronsin
and one Dornier from the Royal Thai Navy participated
in the patrol. This was followed by the Fifth cycle of
CORPAT, which was held from 31 October-7 November
2007. INS Trinkat and one Dornier aircraft from the
Indian Navy and HTMS Phuket and one Dornier from
the Royal Thai Navy participated in the patrol.

An International Conference entitled “Thailand
and India Relations: Partnership for Peace and
Prosperity” was held on 1 August 2007 at
Thammasat University by the India Studies Centre;
A contemporary art exhibition entitled “Images of
India” was held in Bangkok on 14 September 2007;
A cultural programme “India’s Musical Heritage –
A Tribute to the Great Poet Saints” was held in
Bangkok on 25 August 2007.

Vietnam
The year 2007 was a landmark year in bilateral relations
with Vietnam. The high point was the visit of Vietnam’s
Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung to India from 4-6 July
2007. The two Prime Ministers signed a Joint Declaration
elevating the bilateral relationship to a “strategic
partnership”.

On the request of Royal Thai Navy the PASSEX exercise
was held between Indian Navy and Royal Thai Navy ships
on 22 May 2007. INS Rana and INSS Ranjit from the
Indian Navy and HTMS Chaophraya and HTMS

An Indian Parliamentary delegation led by the Speaker
of the Lok Sabha Somnath Chatterjee visited Vietnam
28

South East Asia and the Pacific

from 23-27 March 2007. The Indian parliamentary
delegation’s visit at this level was after a gap of over two
decades.

Corporation (GERUCO) for setting up a hot strip mill in
Vietnam with 2 million tons per annum capacity.
Vice Minister of Trade and Industry of Vietnam, Nguyen
Thanh Bien accompanied by 22 enterprises visited India
from 12-29 November 2007 to participate in the India
International Trade Fair in New Delhi.

Prime Minister of Vietnam, Nguyen Tan Dung paid a State
Visit to India from 4-6 July 2007. The fifth meeting of the
India-Vietnam Joint Business Council was also held in
New Delhi during the visit. The two Prime Ministers
signed a Joint Declaration on Strategic Partnership
between India and Vietnam. The following agreements
were also signed during the visit viz. : (i) MoU on
Cooperation in the Field of Fisheries and Aquaculture
(ii) MoU between the Department of Atomic Energy,
India and the Ministry of Science and Technology,
Vietnam (iii) Work Plan in the Field of Agriculture 200709 (iv) Cultural Exchange Programme between India and
Vietnam for the years 2007-10 (v) MoU for Establishing
a Centre of English Language Training in Danang City,
Vietnam (vi) MoU on Exchange of Properties and Land
for the Respective Diplomatic Missions of India and
Vietnam (vii) Educational Exchange Programme (viii)
MoU on Cooperation between Vietnam Steel Corporation
and Tata Steel Ltd. A concessional line of credit of US$
45 million for Vietnam was also announced by India.

Defence exchanges continued during the year. Colonel
General Nguyen Huy Hieu visited India for the third
meeting of India-Vietnam Security Dialogue held in New
Delhi on 28-29 November 2007. Two Indian Navy ships,
namely INS Mysore and INS Ranjit visited Ho Chi Minh
City on a goodwill visit from 7-11 May 2007. A Coast
Guard ship ICGS Sagar visited Ho Chi Minh City from
12-14 May 2007. A group of 17 Officers from Higher
Command Course of Army War College led by Maj Gen
RK Loomba visited Vietnam from 2-6 September 2007.
A contingent of 20 members from Vietnam People’s Army
participated in the World Military Games held in
Hyderabad in October 2007. A group of 32 Officers from
Higher Defence Management Course of College of
Defence Management visited Vietnam from 11-14
November 2007.
A series of activities were held in both countries to mark
the 35th anniversary of establishment of full diplomatic
relations. Messages of felicitation were exchanged between
the two sides at the levels of President, Prime Minister
and Foreign Minister. A commemorative function was
organized by the Embassy of India in Hanoi on 5 January
2007. A seminar titled “India’s emergence and prospects
for Vietnam-India relations” on 19 June 2007 at the
Institute for South East Asian Studies of the Vietnam
Academy of Social Sciences was organised.

Home Minister, Shivraj V. Patil visited Vietnam from 810 October 2007 and held discussions with the Minister
of Public Security of Vietnam, Le Hong Anh. The two
Ministers signed an agreement on Mutual Legal Assistance
in Criminal Matters. A draft MoU on cooperation between
the Ministry of Home Affairs of India and the Ministry of
Public Security of Vietnam was also initialed. The Minister
also unveiled a bust of former Prime Minister of India,
Indira Gandhi in a park named after her in Hanoi.
TATA Steel signed with Vietnam Steel Corporation
(VSC) in Hanoi on 29 May 2007 an agreement for setting
up an integrated steel mill in Vietnam. The proposed steel
complex with an estimated capacity of 4.5 million tons
per year and expected investment of US$ 3.5 billion will
be built after completion of a feasibility study. Tata Steel
will also have a stake of 30% in the Thach Khe Iron Ore
Joint Stock Company which will undertake mining.
Subsequently on 31 October 2007, a MoU underscoring
the partnership was signed between Tata Steel and VSC
in Ha Noi for setting up a cold rolled steel plant in Vung
Ang Industrial Zone in Ha Tinh province. Essar Steel had
earlier signed on 12 February 2007 a Joint Venture
agreement with VSC and Vietnam General Rubber

Pacific Islands Forum
India attended the 5 th Post-Forum Dialogue (PFD)
Partners’ Meeting between India and the Pacific Islands
Forum in Tonga on 18-19 October 2007 after the
conclusion of the 38 th Pacific Island Forum Summit
Meeting there. At the Plenary Session held on 18 October
2007, the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Tonga as the
Forum Chair briefed the leaders of the delegations of PFD
Partners about the deliberations of the Pacific Leaders’
Summit Meeting and the Forum Communiqué. Separate
discussions were also held on climate change, energy,
fisheries, tourism and health.
29

Annual Report 2007-2008

The following assistance package announced by the
Minister of State, E. Ahamed at the Plenary was well
received:

An offer of continued training opportunities (67
scholarships for 2007-08) to all Pacific Island
countries under India’s ITEC program.

Grant-in-aid of US$ 100,000 each for 14 eligible
Pacific Island countries for the supply of equipment
and materials for social and economic programmes
and for sustainable development.

The grant of one scholarship for undergraduate or
post graduate studies to each Pacific Island Country.
The Consultative Meeting between India and the Pacific
Islands Forum Secretariat was held on 19 October 2007.
The Minister of State for External Affairs, E. Ahamed
also held bilateral meetings with leaders of delegations
from Fiji, Tonga, Tuvalu, Kiribati, Vanuatu, UK, PNG,
Samoa and Solomon Islands in Tonga and discussed
matters of mutual interest.

A ‘Workshop on Sustainable Development’ for
officials of Pacific Island countries to be organized
by the Tata Energy Research Institute in Suva.
A course for diplomats of the Pacific Island
Countries in the Foreign Service Institute in New
Delhi.

30

East Asia

Japan

3

The Japanese Foreign Minister, Taro Aso visited India on
3 April 2007 for the SAARC summit; Agriculture, Forestry
and Fisheries Minister, Toshikatsu Matsuoka visited India
from 12-16 April 2007 to attend the WTO G-6 meeting;
and Minister of Land, Infrastructure and Transport,
Fuyushiba visited in April-May 2007. The Minister of
Economy, Trade and Industry, Akira Amari visited India
in June-July 2007 for the first Ministerial level Policy
Dialogue and the 2nd meeting of the Energy Dialogue. The
Japanese Defence Minister, Koike visited New Delhi on
23-24 August 2007. Vice President of the Democratic
Party of Japan Katsuya Okada led a delegation to India in
January 2008. Finance Minister Nukaga visited New Delhi
in January 2008.

I

ndia-Japan relations have undergone a significant and
qualitative shift in recent years, propelled by the
successful regular summit level exchanges. Prime Minister
Koizumi and Prime Minister Abe visited India in April
2005 and August 2007 respectively. Prime Minister, Dr.
Manmohan Singh visited Japan in December 2006. The
Joint Statement signed during Prime Minister’s visit in
2006 established an India-Japan Strategic and Global
Partnership that provides both the vision for chartering
the future course of the relations and also a detailed action
plan in that direction. The India-Japan “Strategic and
Global Partnership” is based on five pillars of cooperation
viz., Political; Defence and Security Cooperation;
Comprehensive Economic Partnership; Science and
Technology Initiative; People to People Exchanges and
Cooperation in Regional and Multilateral fora.

Minister of External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee visited
Japan on 22-23 March 2007 for the first Strategic Dialogue
with the Japanese Foreign Minister. He also called on
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, and had meetings with
Defence Minister Kyuma, Chief Cabinet Secretary
Shiozaki, Minister for Economy, Trade and Industry
(METI), Amari and Minister for Land, Infrastructure and
Transport (MLIT), Fuyushiba. Prime Minister, Shinzo Abe
and other Japanese interlocutors underscored the
importance of India and Japan working together on
regional issues and at international forums.

Prime Minister of Japan, Shinzo Abe paid an official visit
to India from 21-23 August 2007. The two Prime Ministers
agreed that India-Japan Strategic and Global Partnership
has the largest potential for growth. In recognition of the
congruence of interests, both Prime Ministers signed a
Joint Statement on the Roadmap for New Dimensions to
the Strategic and Global Partnership. They agreed to
broaden the strategic dialogue at all levels, to qualitatively
upgrade exchanges in the security and defence fields, to
set a trade target of US$ 20 billion by 2010, to conclude a
Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement as soon
as possible and to initiate a working group on possible
collaboration in establishing a new Indian Institute of
Technology (IIT). A separate joint statement on
enhancement of energy security and environmental
protection was also signed. In his speech to Parliament,
Prime Minister Abe said that Japan will continue offering
Official Development Assistance to India. He was
accompanied by a large business delegation and several
Presidents of leading universities.

Other high-level delegations from India included visits
to Japan by Minister of Textiles (4-6 April 2007),
Commerce and Industries Minister (23-25 May 2007),
Minister of State for Textiles (22-25 July 2007), Minister
of State for Industry (25-28 July 2007), Minister for Water
Resources (5-8 August 2007), Minister Tourism and
Culture (12-14 September 2007), Minister Urban
Development (28-31 October 2007), National Security
Adviser (6-7 August 2007), Chief Minister of Gujarat (1621 April 2007). In addition, there were also visits by the
Foreign Secretary, Commerce Secretary, Defence
Secretary, Air Chief Marshal and Director General of the
Coast Guard. The sharp jump in high-level exchanges has
also been accompanied by more broad based exchanges

The upswing in relations has been accompanied by a
number of ministerial, official and business visits in 2007.
31

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

rounds of talks have been held so far. Both sides have
agreed to complete negotiations in a two-year time frame.

of business delegations, parliamentary delegations and
interactions between provincial and local governments
of both countries.

The proposal for the development of Delhi-Mumbai
Industrial Corridor (DMIC) was agreed during the visit
of Prime Minister to Japan in December 2006. The
alignment of the 1483 km DMIC is via Ahmedabad,
Palampura, Phulera, Rewari and Dadri. A Joint Task Force
(JTF), co-chaired by the Secretary, Department of
Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP) and Japanese Vice
Minister, Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI)
has submitted an initial Concept Paper. During Prime
Minister Abe’s visit the two sides confirmed that they
would work together closely for the establishment of the
Project Development Fund for DMIC in order to
commence preparation of Detailed Project Reports
(DPR). The fourth meeting of JTF was held in New Delhi
in November 2007.

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh met the new
Japanese Prime Minister Yasuo Fukuda on the sidelines
of the East Asia Summit in Singapore on 21 November
2007.
A High Level Strategic Economic Dialogue has been
established in order to develop an overarching dialogue
mechanism on all economic issues. The first meeting, cochaired by Finance Secretary and Deputy Foreign Minister
Kohno, was held in New Delhi on 18 July 2007. It was
agreed during Prime Minister Abe’s visit to institutionalize
this dialogue.
Bilateral economic relations have vast potential for
growth. During Prime Minister Abe’s visit, it was agreed
to work towards a trade target of US$ 20 billion by the
year 2010. After a period of stagnation, recent trade figures
indicate healthy growth in bilateral trade. Two-way trade
in 2006-07, according to our Ministry of Commerce and
Industry statistics, was US$ 7458 million (exports at US$
2863 and imports at US$ 4595 million), an increase of
14% over previous year.

Japan has conveyed its readiness to assist in the Dedicated
Freight Corridors project through ODA/STEP loan
assistance. Japan International Cooperation Agency
(JICA) study has been completed in October 2007. The
two freight corridors will run on Mumbai-Delhi (Western
Corridor) and Delhi-Howrah (Eastern Corridors) routes.
Japanese side reaffirmed its willingness to consider
financial support for the project during Prime Minister
Abe’s visit. Details are being discussed between the two
sides.

Japan presently ranks fifth largest in cumulative foreign
direct investment flows into India. Japanese companies
have made actual investment of US$ 2.58 billion between
1991 and May 2007, excluding FDI inflows received for
acquisition of existing shares, Reserve Bank of India’s NRI
Schemes, stock swapped and advance pending issue of
shares. Most direct Japanese investment in India is in
manufacturing industries, focused on the domestic market.

The bilateral Consultative Mechanism for High
Technology met twice in the year in May 2007 and
November 2007 with the objective to implement the
understanding reached during Prime Minister Abe’s visit
to make further progress in facilitating two-way high
technology trade and to address matters relating to their
respective export control systems.

For the last four years, India has been the largest recipient
of Japanese Official Development Assistance (ODA) (
India received Rs 6,900 crores equivalent to ¥ 185 billion
in 2006-07 which is 23% of Japan’s global ODA). It was
agreed, during Prime Minister Abe’s visit, that ODA
would continue to play an increasing role in areas
including infrastructure development, environment,
energy, poverty reduction and social sector development.

India-Japan Energy Dialogue, co-chaired by Deputy
Chairman, Planning Commission of India and the Minister
of the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry of Japan,
met twice in the year, in April 2007 and July 2007. The
objective of the Dialogue is to promote cooperation in
the energy sector in a comprehensive manner.

The two sides have also initiated negotiations for a
Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement
(CEPA) beginning January/February 2007. This dialogue
is led by the Commerce Secretary from the Indian side
and Deputy Foreign Minister from the Japanese side. Five

Defence and security has emerged as an important area
of bilateral relations. A calendar of events for 2007 was
finalized for promoting exchanges and cooperation in an
institutionalized framework. The annual Defence Policy
Dialogue at Secretary-level was held in April 2007. Indian
32

East Asia

to share experience in Information and Communication
Technology (ICT), government innovation, human
resource development and other areas in the economic
field and the subsequent proposal for holding a special
training programme for SAARC countries under Republic
of Korea’s Cooperative Project to SAARC.

Naval Ships visited Japan for goodwill exercises (April
2007). India’s Chief of Air Staff and the Chief of Army
Staff visited Japan in January and April 2007 respectively.
A delegation from the Japan National Institute of Defence
Studies led by its President visited India in August 2007.
Japanese Defence Minister, Y. Koike visited India on 2425 August 2007. India and Japan have also established a
Comprehensive Security Dialogue (CSD) and Military to
Military talks.

The Minister of National Defence of Republic of Korea,
Kim Jang Soo, who visited India from 29-31 May 2007,
reiterated willingness to explore joint research, production
and marketing of defence equipment.

Science and Technology cooperation is emerging as a key
element of the strategic partnership. Under the Science
and Technology Initiative, the two sides are working on
launching joint Research and Development Programme
in areas such as nanotechnology, life science and
information and communication technology; and
collaboration in the area of scientific deep sea drilling. A
Letter of Intent was signed in July 2007 in Tokyo, which
would permit us to construct a “beam line” at a Japanese
facility, KEK in Tsukuba at our own cost, for experiments
in high-energy physics.

There are twinning arrangements between the Gyeonggi
province and Maharashtra state and between the cities
of Incheon Metropolitan city and Kolkata and Seoul and
Delhi.
The fifth session of the India-ROK Joint Commission was
held in Seoul from 16-18 September 2007. The Minister
of External Affairs and his counterpart co-chaired the
meeting. The Minister of External Affairs also called on
the President of the Republic of Korea, Speaker of the
National Assembly, and met with the Minister of National
Defence. India and ROK have also initiated mechanism
of holding Foreign Policy Security Dialogue, which is a
comprehensive dialogue covering the whole gamut of
bilateral relations and regional and international security
issues.

The Festival of Japan in India was inaugurated on 13
February 2007 in New Delhi. Year 2007 was designated
as the “India-Japan Tourism Exchange Year”. The Joint
Statement on Tourism Exchange has set a target of
300,000 visitors between the two countries by 2010 and
500,000 by 2015.

Bilateral trade between India and ROK has shown
impressive growth in recent years. It increased to US$
9.17 billion in 2006. During the year 2007 it has reached
US$ 11.22 billion, surpassing the target that was set for
the year 2010. In 2007 (upto November 2007) it reached
US$ 10.2 billion, a target that we had set for year 2010.
ROK is ranked 9th in the Foreign Direct Investment and
is a major investment partner. Bilateral economic
engagement is likely to get a major impetus after the two
sides conclude a bilateral Comprehensive Economic
Partnership Agreement (CEPA), negotiations on which
have reached an advanced stage. ROK has the distinction
of being the first OECD country to commence
negotiations on CEPA with India.

The first-ever India-Japan dialogue of Vice-chancellor/
President on Academic exchange among higher
educational institutions of the two countries was convened
during Prime Minister Abe’s visit in August 2007. It was
decided that the two sides would initiate a Working Group
to study and explore possible collaboration in setting up a
new IIT.

Republic of Korea (ROK)
Relations between India and Republic of Korea have
become more intense and diversified in the recent years.
At the political level, these relations are excellent and
devoid of any irritants. The increase in the high level visits,
strengthening of commercial ties, contacts in the field of
art and culture have provided impetus to India-Korea
bilateral ties.

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
(DPRK)
The relations between India and DPRK continued to be
cordial with a focus on humanitarian and human resource
development assistance. Culture, sports and education
exchanges continued to make progress.

th

At the 14 SAARC Summit in New Delhi on 3-4 April
2007, Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Song Min
Soon was present as an Observer. He expressed interest
33

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

The two sides continued their bilateral exchanges with
Vice Foreign Minister, Kim Young Il visiting India in May
2007 to hold Foreign Office Consultations with Secretary
(East). Discussions involved reviewing bilateral relations
and steps for future cooperation.

Aerospace Power Seminar as well as the Aero India 2007
show at Bangalore in February 2007.
The 3rd India-Mongolia Joint Military Exercise took place
in Mongolia from 26 August-6 September 2007. A group
of 46 army officers participated in this Exercise. Deputy
Defence Minister and Chief of Armed Forces of Mongolia
and DGMO, Lt. Gen. Mohan Pande attended the opening
event.

India continued to provide human resource development
and other forms of assistance to DPRK. Another
consignment of 2000 metric tonnes of rice was sent to
DPRK in.January 2008. We had earlier sent 2000 metrictonnes of rice as humanitarian assistance in February 2006.
We have also agreed to assist with revival of agriculture
and are in the process of supplying farm equipment and
seeds to the Korea-India Friendship Farm.

The regular interactions between the National Security
Councils (NSCs) of India and Mongolia continued during
the year. A five-member delegation from National Security
Council of India led by Chairman JIC, Dr S D Pradhan
held the second round of dialogue between the two NSCs
in Ulaanbaatar in July-August 2007. Executive Secretary
Mongolian NSC, P. Sundev visited India from 18-22
November 2007.

Indian cultural troupes made a strong presence at the April
Spring Friendship Art Festival held in Pyongyang from
10-18 April 2007. DPRK sent a 171-strong contingent to
participate in the 4th International Military Sports Council
(CISM), Military World Games, held from 14-21 October
2007 at Hyderabad.

In the field of education, the Rajiv Gandhi Vocational
Training Centre and the Atal Bihari Vajpayee Centre for
Excellence in Information and Communications
Technology which were set up with Indian assistance in
1992 and 2002 respectively have been functioning well.
The Indian Cultural Centre, located in the Rajiv Gandhi
Vocational Training Centre, has also made significant
contributions in strengthening cultural relations between
India and Mongolia.

Our assistance for development of human resources in
DPRK continued to expand. We increased the training
slots for technical training under our ITEC programme
from 13 to 18.
India and DPRK have continued cooperation at UN
bodies and other international organizations.

The India-Mongolia Joint School was inaugurated in 2003
under an MoU signed in 2002. The MoU has been
extended for five more years, up to 2012, through
exchange of letters. An Impact Assessment Team led by
S.C. Kunthia, Joint Secretary, Department of Secondary
and Higher Secondary Education, Ministry of Human
Resource Development, visited Mongolia from 5-12
December 2007 to study the school’s performance and
consider the question of upgrading the school to a full
fledged English medium High School under CBSE
curriculum.

Mongolia
India’s traditionally friendly and cordial relations with
Mongolia have steadily improved over the years, following
the decision to elevate it to a “new level of partnership”
when Mongolian Prime Minister, Engkhbayar visited India
in 2004. India continued to provide technical and
economic cooperation to Mongolia in higher education,
agriculture, information and communication technology
and human resource development.
India-Mongolia cooperation in the field of defence
progressed well during the year. Minister of National
Defence of Mongolia, M. Sonompil led a five-member
Mongolian delegation to the 9 th Asian Security
Conference organized by Institute for Defence Studies and
Analyses (IDSA) on 9-10 February 2007. The Mongolian
Minister met the Minister of Defence and also visited the
Aero India 2007 held in Bangalore from 3-11 February
2007. Chief of the Mongolian Air Force and Air Defence,
General Ts. Byambajav attended the International

India provided 30 scholarships to Mongolian nationals
under Cultural Exchange Programme (CEP) and the
General Cultural Scholarship Scheme (GCSS) for
pursuing higher studies in India.
Mongolia utilized 50 Indian Technical and Economic
Cooperation (ITEC) training slots during 2006-2007 – a
100% utilization – in 11 disciplines including English
language, hotel management, small scale business,
34

East Asia

computer hardware and software, management
development programme, textile, etc.

Central Institute for Research on Goats, Mathura. The
three-month course began in November 2007.

A “Special Training course on Semen & Embryo Transfer
of Goats” was organized under ITEC in which three
scientists from Mongolia were imparted training at the

India has agreed to provide 5000 metric-tonnes of Rice
and 5000 metric-tonnes of sugar as emergency food
assistance to Mongolia.

35

4

Eurasia

I

in Narcotics, Psychotropic Substances and their
Precursors; (iv) Agreement between the Indian Space
Research Organization and the Federal Space Agency of
the Russian Federation in the Field of Joint Moon
Exploration.

ndia continued to maintain friendly and cordial
relations with the countries of this region during the
year. India strengthened its engagement with individual
countries through exchange of visits, meetings, including
Inter-Governmental Commissions, Foreign Office
Consultations and Working Groups, signing of agreements
of cooperation in diverse fields, visits of trade and scientific
delegations, participation in exhibitions and cultural
exchanges. The year marked the 60th anniversary of the
establishment of diplomatic relations between India and
the Russian Federation and completion of fifteen years of
the establishment of diplomatic relations between India
and Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine and
Uzbekistan. A Conference of the Heads of Indian Missions
in Eurasia Division countries was held in New Delhi from
3-5 December 2007 to discuss various areas of interest
between the Ministry and the Missions. As an Observer
state in the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, India
participated in the meetings of its Councils of Heads of
State and Government.

The Prime Minister of the Russian Federation, Viktor
Zubkov, accompanied by a large business delegation,
visited India on 12-13 February 2008. He participated in
the Second India-Russia Forum on Trade and Investment
and inaugurated the ‘Year of Russia’ in India in 2008 which
will witness year long programme of events in diverse fields
including culture, trade and economy, and science and
technology.
Other high level visits during the year included the
following:
Minister of Textiles, Shankersinh Vaghela visited
Moscow in April 2007.
Minister of Commerce and Industry, Kamal Nath
visited St. Petersburg to participate in the St.
Petersburg Economic Forum on 9-10 June 2007.

Russia

Special Envoy of the Prime Minister, Shyam Saran
visited Moscow on 13 - 14 August 2007.

The strategic partnership between India and Russia was
further consolidated during the year through exchange
of high-level visits and signing of documents, particularly
in the fields of defence, space, science and technology,
economic cooperation, counter-narcotics and culture. The
Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh paid an official visit
to Moscow on 11 - 12 November 2007 and held
delegation-level talks with the President of Russia,
Vladimir Putin. He also met the Prime Minister of Russia,
Viktor Zubkov and attended a business meeting with
senior Indian and Russian trade and industry
representatives. The following documents were signed
during the visit: (i) Agreement on Cooperation in
Development and Production of Multi-Role Transport
Aircraft; (ii) Letters of Exchange (on utilization of Rupee
debt funds for Russian investments in India); (iii)
Agreement on Cooperation to Combat Illicit Trafficking

National Security Adviser, M.K. Narayanan visited
Moscow on 28-29 August 2007.
President of the Indian Council for Cultural
Relations (ICCR), Dr. Karan Singh visited Moscow
from 7-10 October 2007 to discuss cultural
cooperation, particularly preparations for ‘Year of
Russia in India’ in 2008 and ‘Year of India in Russia’
in 2009.
The Minister of External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee
visited Moscow from 11-13 October 2007 to cochair the 13th session of the India-Russia InterGovernmental Commission on Trade, Economic,
Scientific, Technological and Cultural Cooperation
(IRIGC).
Minister of Defence, A.K. Antony visited Moscow
36

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh meeting with the President of the Russian Federation Mr. Vladimir V. Putin,
at a function, in Moscow on 12 November 2007.

Minister of External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee meeting with the President of the Republic of Belarus,
Aleksandr Lukashenko, in New Delhi on 16 April 2007.

37

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

from 17-19 October 2007 to co-chair the 7th session
of the India-Russia Inter- Governmental
Commission on Military-Technical Cooperation.

2007 and counter-terrorism exercise with the joint
participation of the Indian Army, the Indian Air Force
and the Russian Airborne Forces from 11-20 September
2007 in the Pskov region of Russia.

Acting Secretary of the Security Council of Russia,
Gen. Valentin Sobolev visited India from 28
October-1 November 2007.

The five Joint Working Groups under the InterGovernmental Commission on Trade, Economic,
Scientific, Technological and Cultural Cooperation: (i)
Trade and Economy (ii) Energy (iii) Metallurgy and Mining
(iv) Technology and (v) Tourism and Culture discussed
cooperation in their respective fields in Moscow between
August and October 2007. The Joint Task Force on
Mutual Financial Obligations met in Moscow and the SubGroup on Banking met in Jaipur in October 2007. The
Joint Study Group set up in 2006 to find ways and means
to increase bilateral trade and investment and examine
the feasibility of a Comprehensive Economic Cooperation
Agreement finalized its Report during its fourth meeting
in Moscow in July 2007. The two countries agreed to
establish a Joint Task Force to monitor the implementation
of the recommendations of the Joint Study Group.

Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Murli Deora
visited Moscow from 25-27 November 2007.
Besides, the following high level meetings also took place
on the sidelines of multilateral events:
Prime Minister Dr Manmohan Singh briefly met
President Putin at the Summit of G-8 and Outreach
countries in Heiligendamm, Germany from 6-8 June
2007.
The Minister of External Affairs met Russian Foreign
Minister Sergei Lavrov on 1 August 2007 on the
sidelines of the ARF/ASEAN/EAS meeting in
Manila.
The Minister of External Affairs had a bilateral
meeting with the Foreign Minister of Russia, Sergei
Lavrov on 24 October 2007 on the sidelines of the
India-Russia-China Trilateral Foreign Ministers
meeting held in Harbin, China.

The Integrated Long-Term Programme for cooperation in
the field of science and technology (ILTP) completed 20
years of successful work during the year. Joint Council of
the ILTP co-chaired by Chairman of the Scientific
Advisory Council to the Prime Minister, Prof. C. N. R.
Rao met in Moscow from 11-12 October 2007. During
the meeting, three Memorandums of Understanding
(MoUs) on the setting up of joint centres on non-ferrous
and rare metals, biomedical technology, and accelerators
and lasers in India were signed. In August 2007,
Department of Science and Technology of India and the
Russian Foundation of Basic Research, Moscow signed a
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on cooperation
in basic sciences.

Foreign Office Consultations between the Foreign
Secretary and the Russian First Deputy Foreign Minister,
Andrei Denisov took place in Delhi on 9 April 2007. The
following consultations on specific topics also took place
between the Foreign Ministries of India and Russia:
Central Asia and Shanghai Cooperation Organisation
(May 2007, Moscow) and United Nations related issues
(May 2007, Moscow). The Joint Coordination Group
(JCG) of the Security Councils of the two countries met
in Moscow in June 2007 under the chairmanship of S.D.
Pradhan, Chairman of the Joint Intelligence Committee
and V. Nazarov, Deputy Secretary of the Russian Security
Council. Another meeting of the Joint Consultative
Group took place on 30 October 2007 during the visit of
the Acting Secretary of the Security Council of Russia,
Gen. Valentin Sobolev to India.

As part of efforts to enhance bilateral relations, the “Year
of Russia in India” was inaugurated in early 2008. The
year-long programme covers wide-ranging events in the
fields of culture, economy and commerce, science and
technology, arts, etc. which will be followed by the “Year
of India in Russia in 2009”.

During the visit of the Minister of Defence to Russia for
the 7th meeting of the Inter-Governmental Commission
on Military-Technical Cooperation, an agreement on the
joint development and production of prospective multirole fighter aircraft was signed. India and Russia conducted
joint naval exercise in the Sea of Japan from 24-27 April

Armenia
The Minister of State for Agriculture, Kantilal Bhuria led
a delegation to Armenia from 6-7 July 2007 to attend the
First International Armenian Apricot Conference in
Yerevan. He held bilateral talks with the Armenian
38

Eurasia

Minister of Agriculture and discussed establishing a
project for growing Armenian apricot orchards in India.

Belarus participated in the India International Trade Fair
2007 (14-28 November 2007) in New Delhi. National
Day of Belarusian Science in India was held on 14-15
November 2007 and an MoU between the Belarusian
Chamber of Commerce and the Calcutta Chamber of
Commerce on cooperation and mutual understanding was
signed during the event.

Chief Minister, National Capital Territory of Delhi, Shiela
Dikshit visited Armenia from 4-6 September 2007 at the
invitation of the Mayor of Yerevan. The Chief Minister
discussed various areas of cooperation with the Mayor of
Yerevan and called on the Prime Minister of Armenia,
the Chairman of the National Assembly and the Minister
for Education and Science. A Joint Statement was issued
and it was decided to sign Memorandum of Understanding
on cooperation between Delhi and Yerevan.

Georgia
A delegation led by Joint Secretary (FT-CIS), Ministry of
Commerce and Industry visited Tbilisi from 30-31 October
2007 to discuss establishment of a joint working group on
trade and economic cooperation. During the visit, the
two sides agreed to cooperate in banking, agricultural,
pharmaceutical and tourism sectors.

Azerbaijan
A four-member Azerbaijan delegation led by the Deputy
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Azerbaijan, Khalaf Khalafov
visited India from 13-16 March 2007 for Foreign Office
Consultations and held talks with N. Ravi, Secretary
(East), Ministry of External Affairs.

Kazakhstan
Bilateral relations between India and Kazakhstan
progressed steadily. In August 2007, Foreign Office
Consultations were held under the co-chairmanship of
Secretary (East), Ministry of External Affairs, N. Ravi and
the Kazakh Deputy Foreign Minister, Nurlan
B.Yermekbayev. Union Minister of Textiles, Shankarsinh
Vaghela, visited the cities of Almaty, Shymkent and
Astana in Kazakhstan in March 2007 and held meetings
relating to cooperation in textile sector. The Joint Working
Group on Information Technology met in New Delhi in
August 2007. The Indian Embassy in Kazakhstan shifted
from Almaty to Astana with effect from 1 November 2007.

The Minister of State for Commerce, Jairam Ramesh led
a twelve-member delegation to Baku from 10-12 April
2007. An agreement to establish India-Azerbaijan
Intergovernmental Commission on Trade, Economic,
Scientific and Technological Cooperation was signed. The
Minister called on the President of Azerbaijan, Ilham
Aliyev and held meetings with the Minister of Economic
Development, Minister of Industry and Energy, and the
Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs of Azerbaijan.
In collaboration with ICCR, a ten-member traditional
dance and music (vocal and instrumental) troupe visited
India from 16-21 April 2007 and gave performances in
Delhi, Lucknow and Haridwar.

A Parliamentary delegation led by Serik Abdrakhmanov,
Chairman, Committee for International Affairs and
Defence visited India from 10-11 May 2007. The
delegation called on the Speaker Lok Sabha and held
meetings with the Chairman of the Parliamentary
Standing Committee on External Affairs, Laxmi Narayan
Pandey to exchange views on matters of mutual interest.

Belarus
The Foreign Minister of Belarus, Sergei Martynov visited
India on 22-23 February 2007.
The President of Belarus, Aleksandr Lukashenko paid a
State visit to India on 15 - 16 April 2007. Five documents
on cooperation in the fields of culture, science and
technology, extradition, agriculture and Belarus’ accession
to WTO were signed and a Joint Statement was adopted.

Kyrgyz Republic
During the visit as the Leader of the Indian delegation to
the Seventh Summit of Shanghai Cooperation
Organisation, the Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas,
Murli Deora called on the President of the Kyrgyz
Republic, Kurmanbek Bakiev on 15 August 2007. The
Minister also inaugurated the India-Kyrgyz Centre for
Information Technology in Bishkek which was set up with
Indian assistance.

Chief Minister, National Capital Territory of Delhi, Shiela
Dikshit visited Belarus from 7-10 September 2007 at the
invitation of the Mayor of Minsk to attend the 940th
anniversary celebrations of the city of Minsk.
39

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

The 4th session of the India-Kyrgyz Inter-Governmental
Commission on trade, economic, scientific and
technological cooperation was held in Bishkek from 1-3
September 2007 under the co-chairmanship of O.P. Arya,
Additional Secretary, Department of Commerce and the
Kyrgyz Minister of Trade and Economy, Japarov Akylbek
Usenbekovich. The Government of India decided to waive
outstanding debts of Kyrgyz Republic amounting to
US$ 1.1 million as a special gesture.

hydrocarbon resources, Baimurat Muradov to discuss
bilateral cooperation in the hydrocarbon sector. An Indian
delegation comprising parliamentarians and prominent
scholars, including Member of Parliament, Nirmala
Deshpande participated in a seminar entitled Ruhnama
in Ashgabat in September 2007.
A high-level delegation led by Rashid Meredov, Deputy
Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Turkmenistan
visited India from 20-22 January 2008. During the visit,
the Minister of state for External Affairs, E. Ahamed and
Foreign Minister Meredov co-chaired the second session
of the India-Turkmen Inter Governmental Commission,
which reviewed trade, economic, scientific and cultural
relations between the two countries.

The Minister of Interior of Kyrgyz Republic attended the
UN Conference on Disaster Risk Management in New
Delhi in November 2007 and called on the Minister of
Home Affairs, Shivraj Patil.
The Foreign Minister of the Kyrgyz Republic, Adnan
Karabaev paid an official visit to India from 3-6 February
2008 and met the Minister of External Affairs to review
bilateral relations and discuss other issues of mutual
interest.

The delegation met the Minister of External Affairs, the
Prime Minister and the Vice President and held
discussions in the Ministries of Human Resource
Development, Petroleum and Natural Gas, Commerce
and Industry, Science and Technology and Indian Council
for Cultural Relations.

Tajikistan
A delegation led by Secretary (East) in the Ministry of
External Affairs, N. Ravi visited Dushanbe on 6-7 August
2007 for Foreign Office Consultations and discussions on
bilateral cooperation.

Ukraine
India’s relations remained friendly and cordial with
Ukraine, which was occupied with its domestic political
developments, parliamentary elections and government
formation. In October 2007, Secretary, Department of
Science and Technology led a delegation to Kyiv. During
the visit, an Agreement on cooperation in the field of
science and technology was finalized. An official
delegation of the Ministry of Transport of Ukraine visited
India in April 2007 to discuss cooperation between the
two countries in the area of shipping, railways and road
transportation with relevant departments of the
Government of India. The delegation also traveled to
Mumbai to visit the port and meet port authorities.

The 4th Session of India-Tajikistan Inter-Governmental
Commission was held in Dushanbe in October 2007. The
Indian delegation was led by Commerce Secretary G.K.
Pillai and the Tajik delegation by the Minister of Economic
Development and Trade, Gulomjon Bobozoda. A meeting
of the Joint Business Council was also held in conjunction
with the Commission meeting in which around 20
representatives from Indian public/private sector
participated. During the visit, India and Tajikistan finalized
a Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement.
The Minister of State for External Affairs, E. Ahamed
met the Foreign Minister of Tajikistan on the sidelines of
Asia Cooperation Dialogue meeting held in Seoul in
September 2007.

Uzbekistan
The Minister of State for Commerce, Jairam Ramesh
visited Tashkent in April 2007 to co-chair the 7th Session
of India-Uzbek Inter Governmental Commission. The
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance of
Uzbekistan, Abdulla Aripov co-chaired the meeting on
behalf of the Uzbek side.

Turkmenistan
Bilateral relations between India and Turkmenistan
remained warm and cordial. The Minister of Petroleum
and Natural Gas, Murli Deora made a two-hour long
transit halt in Ashgabat on 25 November 2007 and met
the Head of the State Agency on management and use of

A meeting of India-Uzbekistan Joint Working Group on
Counter-Terrorism was held in May 2007. A delegation
40

Eurasia

led by the Director of Entrepreneurship Development
Institute of India, Dinesh Awasthi, visited Tashkent in
March 2007 to hold discussions on setting up an
Entrepreneur Development Centre in Uzbekistan with
Government of India assistance as a follow-up to
commitment made during the visit of the Prime Minister
to Uzbekistan in April 2006.

ranging exchanges on regional and international issues of
mutual interest, the three Ministers decided to strengthen
trilateral economic cooperation. In particular, the three
countries agreed to hold expert level discussions on
agriculture, medicine and public health, and disaster
management and a seminar with the participation of
officials and scholars on the evolution of geopolitical
strategic trends. Subsequently, trilateral business forum
with the participation of about two hundred and fifty
delegates was held in New Delhi on 15 December 2007.
Twenty five to thirty business representative each from
China and Russia participated in the Conference. The
Conference focused on four potential areas of trilateral
cooperation - energy, infrastructure development,
pharmaceuticals and biomedical technology and nanotechnology. It was agreed that trilateral business
Conferences should be held on a biennial basis and that
China would host the next Conference in 2009.

Shanghai Cooperation Organisation
The Seventh Meeting of the Council of Heads of State of
the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) was held
in Bishkek, Kyrgyz Republic on 16 August 2007. Minister
for Petroleum and Natural Gas, Murli Deora led the Indian
delegation to the meeting. The delegation attended the
plenary session of the SCO Heads of State and in his
speech, the Minister reiterated India’s interest in
participating in SCO activities in the areas of energy,
economic development, counter-terrorism and countering
drug trafficking. The Council of the Heads of Government
was held in Tashkent on 2 November 2007 and India was
represented by the Minister of State for External Affairs,
E. Ahamed.

INSTC
The Third Meeting of the Coordination Council and the
Fourth Meeting of Expert Groups of the International
North-South Transport Corridor (INSTC) was held in
Astana, Kazakhstan in November 2007. The Indian
delegation was led by Joint Secretary, Ministry of Shipping.
The meeting discussed the progress in the development
of this Corridor, which facilitates transportation
connectivity between India and Russia and other countries
in Central Asia and Caucasus Regions.

India-Russia-China
India-Russia-China Trilateral Foreign Ministers’ meeting
was held in Harbin (China) on 24 October 2007. It was
the second meeting in 2007 after the previous meeting in
Delhi on 14 February 2007 and gave further direction to
the trilateral dialogue mechanism. Apart from wide-

41

5

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

The Gulf

between the Indian community and the Bahrain Labour
Minister on amnesty related issues. Vayalar Ravi, Minister
of Overseas Indian Affairs visited Bahrain and met the
Bahraini Minister for Labour to discuss the proposed MoU
on Manpower and the impact of the amnesty.

T

he close and friendly ties that characterize the
multifaceted relationship between India and the
countries of the Gulf region were further strengthened
during the year. The presence of the large Indian
expatriate community in the region contributed to this.
Active steps were taken in cooperation with the countries
of the region to promote their welfare especially that of
expatriate workers. Bilateral trade and economic
cooperation grew satisfactorily. India’s interactions in all
fields were considerably enhanced. The year was marked
by the visits of the Crown Prince of Bahrain, and Vice
President and Prime Minister of the United Arab Republic
and Ruler of Dubai in March 2007 and that of the Deputy
Prime Minister for the Council of Ministers of the
Sultanate of Oman in December 2007. An India-Gulf
Cooperation Council (GCC) Industrial Conference was
held in May 2007 in Mumbai.

Three Indian Naval ships INS Delhi, INS Beas and INS
Jyoti paid a goodwill visit to Bahrain from 21-25 August
2007.
The Fourth Meeting of the India-Bahrain Joint Committee
on Economic and Technical Cooperation (JCETC) was
held in Bahrain on 14-15 November 2007. The Indian
delegation was led by E. Ahamed, Minister of State for
External Affairs. The Joint Committee reviewed bilateral
cooperation in all areas of mutual interest. It was agreed
to carry forward the proposals for enhancing economic
engagement made in the Mumbai Declaration adopted
at the Third Indo-GCC Industrial Forum held in Mumbai
in May 2007. The Confederation of Indian Industry and
its Bahraini counterparts drew up a programme for private
sector cooperation.

Bahrain
The Crown Prince of the Kingdom of Bahrain Sheikh
Salman bin Hamad Al Khalifa visited India from 19-22
March 2007 at the invitation of the Vice President of
India. During the visit he called on the President, the
Vice President, and the Prime Minister. The Crown Prince
inaugurated the newly opened Embassy of Bahrain in New
Delhi. A cultural exchange programme and an MoU on
cooperation between Prasar Bharati and Bahrain Radio
and TV Corporation were signed.

Iran
India-Iran relations are based on cooperation in the area
of hydrocarbons, trade, commerce and investment, as also
a shared interest in regional stability. Iran plays an
important role as a transit country for access to Central
Asia and Afghanistan. Thus a contemporary relationship
between India and Iran overlays multi-faceted historical
and civilisational links. Regular contacts with the
Government of Iran are maintained through high level
exchanges as also regular institutional mechanisms such
as the Joint Commission, the Foreign Office Consultations
cum Strategic Dialogue and Consultations between the
National Security Councils of the two countries.

The Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Somnath Chatterjee met
local dignitaries during his transit visit to Bahrain on 19
April 2007. A Bahraini Parliamentary deleglation led by
Khalifa bin Ahamed al Dahrani, Chairman of the Council
of Representatives paid a visit to India during November
28-December 2, 2007.

During the 14th South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation (SAARC) Summit held in New Delhi on 34 April 2007 under the Chairmanship of India, Iran was
granted Observer status with SAARC.

E. Ahamed, Minister of State for External Affairs visited
Bahrain on 8 September 2007 where he met local
dignitaries and participated in an interactive session
42

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

Dr. Mehdi Safari, Deputy Foreign Minister for Asia,
Oceania and Commonwealth of Iran visited India from
6-8 September 2007 to brief Government of India on the
latest developments on Iran’s nuclear issue in the IAEA.
India noted Director General-IAEA’s report of 15
November 2007 on “Implementation of the NPT
Safeguards Agreement and relevant provisions of Security
Council resolutions 1737 (2006) and 1747 (2007)”.

Important Indian goods being exported to Iran are primary
and semi-finished iron and steel, manufacturers of metals,
machinery and instruments, drugs and pharmaceuticals,
processed minerals, inorganic/agro chemicals, tea, yarn
fabric etc. India also exports petroleum products to Iran
in sizeable quantities. India’s imports from Iran include
crude oil, fruits and nuts, pulses, non-ferrous metals,
organic and inorganic chemicals, chemicals metal scrap,
iron and steel, organic chemicals and leather.

Minister of State for External Affairs, E. Ahamed visited
Iran in September 2007 to attend the NAM Conference
on ‘Human Rights and Cultural Diversity’

Several Indian companies are active in Iran, either
through Joint Ventures with Iranian companies or through
investment, in areas of shipping, mining, railways, steel,
ICT, automotives, cement etc.

Mostafa Pour Mohammadi, Interior Minister of Iran
visited India from 6-8 November 2007 to attend the
second Asian Ministerial Conference on Disaster Risk
Reduction in New Delhi.

The fourth round of talks on finalization of the Bilateral
Investment Promotion and Protection Agreement
(BIPPA) was held in New Delhi on 1-2 February 2007.
The third round of negotiation on Double Taxation
Avoidance Agreement (DTAA) was held in Tehran from
11-16 March 2007. There was considerable progress in
resolving most of the outstanding issues with regard to
these agreements.

Minister for Water Resources, Prof. Saif Ud Din Soz visited
Iran to attend 5th General Body Meeting of the Regional
Centre for Urban Water Management, held in Tehran on
24 November 2007.
President of the Guardian Council, Ayatollah Ahmed
Jannati visited India from 24 November-1 December 2007
under ICCR’s Distinguished Visitors’ Programme.

LNG Deal : India has signed an agreement with Iran for
purchasing five million tons of LNG per annum for 25
years from the second half of 2009. This agreement,
however, could not be implemented so far, as the Iranian
side continues to insist on revising the contract price
earlier agreed upon, after which the agreement would be
ratified by the Iranian Parliament. We maintain that the
agreement is legally binding and should be implemented.
Our interest in early resolution of this issue and early
implementation of the contract has been reiterated to the
Government of Iran.

India and Iran hold annual Foreign Office Consultations/
Strategic Dialogue at the level of Foreign Secretary from
India and Deputy Foreign Minister from Iran. The Foreign
Secretary visited Iran on 16-17 December 2007 for the
Fifth FOC/ Strategic Dialogue.
The Minister of Finance and Economic Affairs, Danesh
Jafri visited India from 16-18 January 2008 for ‘CII’s
Partnership Summit 2008’.
The Deputy Head of Cultural Heritage, Tourism and
Handicraft Organisation (CHTHO) of Iran, Dr. Hussain
Jafari visited India from 16-17 January 2008. During the
visit, an MoU on the holding of cultural weeks of India
and Iran in each others’ countries was signed between
ICCR and CHTHO.

Iran-Pakistan-India Gas Pipeline project : Four bilateral
Joint Working Group meetings with Iran, six bilateral with
Pakistan and six trilateral meetings with Iran and Pakistan
have been held so far. In the trilateral meeting in January
2007, a pricing formula was negotiated, to which Pakistan
agreed and we agreed to consider subject to the transit
fee and transportation tariff issue being concluded with
Pakistan. However in the next meeting in May 2007, Iran
presented a fresh set of proposals on a price revision clause,
thus altering the agreed formula. India’s position is that
the issue of transit fee and transportation tariff is first to
be concluded bilaterally with Pakistan on the basis of
which a decision on the gas price issue could be taken.

India-Iran commercial relations are dominated by Indian
import of Iranian crude oil. India’s exports reached US$
1490.75 million in 2006-07 as against US$ 1188.71 million
in 2005-06 (an increase of 25%), imports increased to
US$ 7842.36 million in 2006-07 compared to US$
4822.65 million in 2005-06, registering a 55.26% growth
rate. Total trade turnover registered an increase of 55%
during 2006-07.
43

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

Transit : Iran is essential for the transit of our goods to
Central Asia and Afghanistan. Goods required for our
assistance projects in Afghanistan, which is currently over
US$ 100 million per annum, also require transit through
Iran. India and Iran are cooperating in the development
of an alternative access route to the sea for Afghanistan
through the Chabahar port of Iran. India, Iran, Russia
and other Central Asian countries are also working on
the North South Transit Corridor which would provide
for the transit of our goods through Iran and the Caspian
Sea to Russia and northern Europe.

The Extradition Treaty between India and Kuwait signed
in August 2004 came into force on 7 August 2007. The
Agreement on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal
Matters signed in August 2004 came into force on 15
October 2007. The MoU on Labour, Employment and
Manpower Development signed in April 2007 entered into
force on 16 October 2007 and the Agreement for the
Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of
Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income entered
into force on 17 October 2007 with the provisions of the
Agreement coming into effect on 1 April 2008.

Iraq

Special Kuwait Cell continued its work of identifying the
last remaining claimants for disbursement of
compensation to Indians who had to flee from Kuwait
and Iraq following Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in August 1990.
During the year 2007 the Cell disbursed over US$ 9
million to over 5000 claimants identified the previous year.
The Cell’s mandate will be complete after payment is made
to the remaining 879 claimants.

The 16th Session of the India-Iraq Joint Commission
Meeting for Economic and Technical Cooperation took
place in New Delhi on 22-23 May 2007. The Iraqi
delegation was led by Dr. Hussain Al-Shahristani, Minister
of Oil. The Joint Commission reviewed bilateral
cooperation in all areas of mutual interest. Prime Minister
Dr. Manmohan Singh during his meeting with Minister
Shahristani, reiterated India’s support for the Iraqi people
and for Iraq’s reconstruction.

Oman
The Deputy Prime Minister for the Council of Ministers
of the Sultanate of Oman, Sayyid Fahd Bin Mahmoud
Al Said paid an official visit to India from 12-15
December 2007. He was accompanied by the Minister
Responsible for Foreign Affairs, Ministers of Commerce
and Industry, Oil and Gas, Agriculture, Information and
a team of prominent business persons. During the visit,
four MoUs were signed: i) MoU between National Small
Industries Corporation (NSIC), India and Directorate
General of Small and Medium Enteprises (DGDSME),
Oman, ii) MoU between Indian Institute of
Entrepreneurship (IIE), Guwahati and Directorate
General of Small and Medium Enterprises (DGDSME)
iii) MoU on Higher Education Cooperation and iv) MoU
between Oman Oil Company S.A.O.C. and Krishak
Bharati Cooperative Limited. The high level Omani
business delegation interacted with leading
businesspersons and business houses of India in meetings
organized by CII and FICCI in New Delhi.

Kuwait
E. Ahamed, Minister of State for External Affairs visited
Kuwait on 10 March 2007 and met senior officials of the
Olympic Committee and the Public Authority for Youth
and Sports Affairs. Vayalar Ravi, Minister of Overseas
Indian Affairs visited Kuwait from 7-10 April 2007. An
MoU on Labour, Employment and Manpower
Development between the two countries was signed
during the visit.
The Minister of Commerce and Industry of Kuwait, Falah
Al Hajri, led a delegation to Bangalore in January 2007
to take part in CII’s Partnership Summit 2007.
Indian Naval ship, INS Betwa, paid a goodwill visit to
Kuwait from 14-18 August 2007. On its way out of Kuwait
on 18 August 2007, INS Betwa conducted Passage
Exercises (PASSEX) with the Kuwaiti Naval Ship ‘Garoh’.
Government of Kuwait declared a two-month period of
General Amnesty for residency violators in May-June
2007. As many as 11,689 Indian nationals availed of the
amnesty. The Indian Embassy issued 7411 Emergency
Certificates to enable Indian nationals to avail of the
amnesty.

N. Ravi, Secretary (East) led the Indian delegation to
Muscat for the 5th Meeting of the Strategic Consultative
Group Meeting on 5 May 2007.
Minister of State for External Affairs, E. Ahamed visited
Oman from 2-5 October 2007.
44

Minister of External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee with Sayyid Fahd bin Mahmood Al Said,
Deputy Prime Minister of the Sultanate of Oman during his visit, 13 January 2008.

Minister of State for External Affairs, E. Ahamed, with Mahmoud Abbas, President of Palestine, 29 March 2007.

45

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs, Vayalar Ravi visited
Oman on 26-27 October 2007.

Gas. He also held discussions with Qatari dignitaries on
the subject of supply of LNG to India. Petronet Ltd of
India on 3 July 2007, signed a sale and purchase agreement
in Doha with Rasgas II for the supply of 1.25 mn tonnes
of Liquified Natural Gas (LNG).

Reliance Industries won the exploration rights for a
deepwater oil and gas block in Oman. Oman’s first
telemedicine service in the private sector was inaugurated
with Muscat-based Apollo Medical Centre (AMC) in
league with the Hyderabad-based Apollo Group of
Hospitals.

Saudi Arabia and Haj
Murli Deora, Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas, led
a high level delegation to Riyadh on 1-2 May 2007 to
attend the 2nd Roundtable of Asian Oil Ministers. During
his visit he held a bilateral meeting with the Saudi Minister
of Petroleum.

INS Delhi, INS Beas and INS Jyoti under the command
of Rear Admiral S. K. Sinha, Flag Officer Commanding
of the Western Fleet (FOCWF) visited Port Sultan Qaboos
from 1-4 September 2007. Cadet Training Ship INS
Krishna visited Salalah port on 12 September 2007.

Two Indian Naval Ships, INS Rajput and INS Betwa called
on port of Al-Jubail on a goodwill visit from 21-25 August
2007.

A seven-member Indian Defence delegation led by the
Defence Secretary visited Oman from 1-4 December 2007
to attend the 2nd meeting of the Joint Military Cooperation
Council.

The Special Envoy for West Asia and the Middle East
Peace Process, C.R. Gharekhan, visited Jeddah on 8-9
September 2007 and had discussions with Saudi
dignitaries, think tanks, media and prominent Indians.

Minister for External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee visited
Muscat on 13-14 January 2008. He held wide ranging talks
with the Deputy Prime Minister for the Council of
Ministers and the Minister Responsible for Foreign Affairs.
He also inaugurated the new Chancery-cum-Embassy
Residence Complex of the Indian Embassy.

Economic and Commercial ties were bolstered through
visits to the Kingdom by an agricultural delegation led by
Chairman, APEDA from 7-9 September 2007, a business
delegation organised by Indo-Arab Chamber of Commerce
and Industries from 16-22 November 2007 and a
delegation from Organisation of Plastic Processors of India
(OPPI) from 2-7 September 2007.

Qatar
Minister for Overseas Indian Affairs, Vayalar Ravi visited
Doha in April 2007 and discussed issues concerning the
welfare of Indian workers with local Ministers. Minister
of State for External Affairs E. Ahamed also visited Doha
in September 2007. Defence Secretary accompanied by a
6-member delegation visited Doha in June 2007.

A 12-member Indian youth delegation, led by the Minister
of Education and Youth Affairs of Government of
Puduchery, visited the Kingdom from 24 October-4
November 2007 at the invitation of the General
Presidency of Youth Welfare (GPYF).

Three Indian Naval ships - INS Delhi, INS Beas and INS
Jyoti paid a goodwill visit to Qatar from 15-19 August
2007.

Haj
Minister of State for External Affairs, E. Ahamed visited
Saudi Arabia in May 2007 during which he discussed Haj
related matters and signed the Annual Haj Agreement
for 2007. A delegation from the Haj Committee of India
visited the Kingdom in June 2007 and interacted with
various Saudi agencies related to Haj affairs. Pranab
Mukherjee, Minister of External Affairs, inaugurated the
1st All India Annual Haj Conference in New Delhi on 11
May 2007. The 2nd All India Annual Haj Conference was
held at Hyderabad on 8 September 2007. The system of
registration of Private Tour Operators, which had
commenced from Haj 2003, was continued for Haj 2007

An additional protocol to the Agreement on the
regulation of employment of Indian manpower in Qatar
(1985) was signed on 20 November 2007 during the visit
of the Minister of Labour and Social Affairs of Qatar to
India. This will provide a framework to address issues
concerning Indian workers, especially in the unskilled and
domestic sectors.
Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Murli Deora, led
a high level delegation for a 2-day visit to Doha in October
2007 to participate in the 6th Doha Conference on Natural
46

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

with a view to ensuring better services for the pilgrims by
the private tour operators. A total of 157,000 Indian
pilgrims performed Haj in December 2007, out of which
110,000 visited Saudi Arabia through the Haj Committee
of India. Another 47,000 Indians went through the private
tour operators. A.R. Antulay, Union Minister of Minority
Affairs led a 28-member Haj Goodwill delegation to Saudi
Arabia from 14 December 2007-3 January 2008.

Two Indian Navy ships, INS Rajput and INS Betwa, paid
a goodwill visit in August 2007.

United Arab Emirates

Yemen

The Vice President and Prime Minister of UAE and Ruler
of Dubai Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum
visited India on 25-26 March 2007 at the invitation of
the Prime Minister. He was accompanied by UAE
Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Interior, Labour, Industry and
Economy as well as a high profile business and trade
delegation. A preparatory meeting of the Joint
Commission was held at the official level just prior to the
visit.

The Deputy Minister of Planning and International
Cooperation led the Yemeni Delegation for the 6th Session
of Indo-Yemen Joint Committee Meeting (JCM), in Delhi,
in April 2007. The Indian side at the Joint Commission
Meeting was led by Secretary (East) in the Ministry of
External Affairs. ASSOCHAM organized a special India
Pavilion with a wide representation from Indian companies
at the 3rd Sana’a International Exhibition (SIEX-2007) in
June 2007.

During the visit, five MoUs and Protocols were signed,
namely, i) MoU for technical co-operation in the field of
Standardisation and Metrology; ii) Framework Agreement
for developing industrial relations; iii) Protocol amending
the Agreement for Avoidance of Double Taxation; iv)
MoU for Assistance and Mutual Cooperation between
Emirates Securities and Commodities Authority (ESCA)
and Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI); v)
MoU in the field of accreditation activities.

Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs, Vayalar Ravi,
accompanied by a 3-member delegation visited Sana’a on
20-21 October 2007.

High level bilateral visits during the year from India
include those of the Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs,
Vayalar Ravi, in May and October 2007, Minister of State
for Commerce and Industry, Ashwani Kumar in August
2007. Minister of State (Independent Charge) of Civil
Aviation, Praful Patel attended the Dubai Air Show and
Aerospace exhibition in November 2007 as did Minister
of State for Defence, Pallam Raju along with a 5-member
delegation. From the UAE, visits included those of Maj.
Gen. Saif Abdullah Al Shafar, Under Secretary, Ministry
of Interior to India from 28-30 May 2007 for a meeting
with the Home Secretary to discuss cooperation in security
related matters. Minister of Economy Sheikha Lubna Al
Qasimi led a UAE delegation for the first India-UAE Trade
Policy Forum on 28 May 2007. Foreign Minister Sheikh
Abdullah led the UAE delegation for the Ninth IndiaUAE Joint Commission Meeting held in New Delhi on 56 June 2007. The Minister of External Affairs co-chaired
the meeting.

India – Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)

In June 2007 the UAE Government announced an
amnesty scheme to enable illegally resident persons to
either regularize their stay or to return to their country of
origin. In all, 70,000 Indian workers availed of this
opportunity and returned to India.

A 2-member delegation led by the Yemeni Deputy
Minister for Police Service Sector, visited New Delhi on
7-8 November 2007 to attend the 2nd Asian Ministerial
Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction, organized by the
Ministry of Home Affairs.

The 3rd India GCC Business Conference was held in
Mumbai on 29-30 May 2007. The Conference was cochaired by Minister of Commerce and Industry, Kamal
Nath and Minister of Commerce and Industry of Saudi
Arabia, Dr. Hashim Abdullah Yamani and Minister of
Commerce and Industry of the Sultanate of Oman,
Maqbool bin Ali bin Sultan. It was attended by
representatives of GCC States and the Secretariat,
representatives of FICCI, CII, and Gulf Organization for
Industrial Consulting and the Federation of GCC
Chambers.
The theme of the Conference was “India-GCC
Investment Opportunities” with specific attention on real
estate development, energy, petrochemicals and
infrastructure. Among the important decisions taken at
the Conference were to develop tie-ups in the field of
agricultural production and supply from India to GCC
47

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

countries, encourage early conclusion of the India-GCC
FTA and to set up a holding company with a capital of
around US$ 50 million initially to promote SME joint
ventures.

Algeria amounted to US$ 207 million while Algeria’s
exports to India amounted to US$ 267 million.
Several Indian companies won important contracts in
Algeria. Indian Railway Construction Company (IRCON)
won a US$ 240 million contract for constructing a 108
kms railway line. This was the first major contract won by
an Indian company in Algeria in recent times. IRCON
had executed two similar projects in Algeria in the1980s.
An Indian construction company M/s Era Construction
Group won a US$ 21 million contract for construction of
3000-bed hostel in Tizi Ouzou in Algeria. Another Indian
construction and civil engineering firm Patel Engineering
Ltd secured an order worth US$ 153 million from Algeria’s
national agency for dams. The project is a joint venture
with Aska Insaat Construction Company (a Turkish
company) for designing and construction of a dam. M/s
Transrail Structures Limited based in Nagpur, Maharashtra
won a contract for laying transmission lines with optic
fiber in a section of 110 Kms in Algeria. The project is
worth US$ 20 million.

West Asia and North Africa
Algeria
India-Algeria relations date back to the days of the
Algerian liberation struggle (1954-62) when India
advocated the cause of Algerian independence at the
United Nations and other international fora. Political
relations between the two countries have been exemplary
and Algeria and India have consistently supported each
other on all vital issues of their national concerns.
At the invitation of Algerian Minister of Energy and
Mines, Dr Chakib Khelil, Minister of Petroleum and
Natural Gas, Murli Deora, led a high-level 12-member
energy delegation to Algeria from 20-22 April 2007. The
Indian delegation included, Secretary (Petroleum), CMDs
of ONGC, Indian Oil, GAIL and EIL and other senior
officials. The two Ministers signed Agreed Minutes
reflecting various points discussed during delegation level
meeting. Murli Deora also called on President and Prime
Minister of Algeria. He delivered our Prime Minister’s
letter to the Algerian President.

India also participated in the 40th International Trade Fair
held in Algiers from 2-7 June 2007. Thirteen Indian
companies participated in the fair under the umbrella of
ITPO.

Djibouti
External Affairs Minister Pranab Mukherjee met with
Algerian Foreign Minister Mourad Medelci on the margins
of 62nd UNGA in New York in September 2007. During
the meeting the two sides agreed to expand bilateral
cooperation, focusing in particular on the economic
relationship. There was a similarity of views between the
two Ministers on threat posed to the two countries which
had suffered from terrorism.

Djibouti is keen to improve its bilateral relations with India
especially in the education and health sectors. Djibouti is
the second country to sign the Memorandum of
Understanding with the Telecommunication Consultants
of India Limited for implementation of the Pan African
E-Network Project on Tele-Medicine and Tele-Education.
The Exim Bank extended another line of credit of US$
10 million for the cement plant at Ali Sabieh, thereby
raising India’s stake in the project to US$ 20 million.

A Parliamentary Friendship Group with India was formed
in the Algerian Parliament with 15 members from seven
political parties including the parties of the ruling
presidential alliance. A parliamentary official delegation
visited India in December 2007 to study our system of
functioning of Parliament.
A delegation from Algerian national oil company
Sonatrach attended the “India-Africa Hydrocarbon
Conference and Exhibition” held in New Delhi on 6-7
November 2007.

India’s visibility in the Gulf of Aden and in the Red Sea
has been highlighted by visits of seven naval ships during
the year and the joint exercises undertaken by the Indian
navy with US and French flotilla stationed in Djibouti.
The high point of the visit was the exercise named ‘Varuna’
in October 2007 in which three Indian Western Fleet
vessels INS Beas, Jyoti and Rajput participated. INS
Tarangini, INS Tir and INS Jalashwa also called on
Djibouti port during the year.

During the period January-June 2007, India’s exports to

An exhibition of 50 rare photographs of Mahatma Gandhi
48

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

with captions in French language was organized at
Djibouti, from 15-18 November 2007. A 12-member Bihu
Folk Dance Troupe sponsored by ICCR, New Delhi,
performed in Djibouti on 15 November 2007, in
commemoration of the 30th Anniversary of Djibouti’s
independence and 60 th Anniversary of India’s
independence.

Assistance Treaty, and the Agreement on Exchange of
Sentenced Prisoners were finalised during the visit of a
composite five-member Indian delegation from the
Ministry of Home Affairs, Minsitry of External Affairs and
the Ministry of Law and Justice to Cairo from 26-29 May
2007.
T. Nanda Kumar, Secretary (Food and Public
Distribution), led a delegation to Cairo from 12-14 August
2007 for discussions with Egyptian officials on
coordination on issues concerning the import of wheat.
S. Sundareshan, Additional Secretary, Ministry of
Petroleum and Natural Gas visited Cairo on 5-6 September
2007. A two-member delegation led by Secretary
(Culture) visited Alexandria from 27-29 October 2007
and held talks with officials of the Bibliotheca
Alexandrina.

Egypt
Egypt has traditionally been one of India’s most important
trading partners in the African continent. India emerged
as Egypt’s third largest trading partner behind the US and
Italy and as the largest importer of Egyptian products.
Bilateral trade in 2006 stood at US$ 1.747 billion.
Egyptian Minister for Tourism, Mohammed Zoheir
Garranah, visited India on 18-19 April 2007 to attend
the third meeting of the Joint Working Group on Tourism
in New Delhi on 19 April 2007.

Vice Admiral Sunil K. Damle, Flag Officer Commanderin-Chief Southern Naval Command visited Egypt from
9-13 September 2007. Eighteen officers from the Higher
Command Course, Army War College visited Cairo from
11-13 September 2007.

Minister for Petroleum and Natural Gas, Murli Deora
headed a high-level delegation including Secretary
(Petroleum) and CMDs of ONGC, IOCL, GAIL and EIL
to Egypt from 22-25 April 2007. He also handed over a
letter from Prime Minister to President Hosni Mubarak,
and had discussions with Minister for Petroleum of Egypt,
Sameh Fahmy and Minister for Trade and Industry of
Egypt, Rashid Mohamed Rashid. Minister of Social Justice
and Empowerment, Meira Kumar visited Egypt from 4-8
June 2007.

Egyptian Minister of Health and Population, Hatem el
Gabali paid a private visit to New Delhi from 23-25
October 2007. He called on Minister of Health and Family
Welfare, Anbumani Ramadoss on 24 October 2007 and
discussed possibilities of bilateral cooperation in the health
care and pharmaceutical sectors.

The seventh session of the Foreign Office Consultations
(FOC) was held in New Delhi on 22 June 2007. The
Egyptian delegation was led by Assistant Foreign Minister
for Asian Affairs, Shawky Ismail, and the Indian delegation
by Secretary (East). Ambassador Shawky Ismail called on
Minister of External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee, Minister
of State for External Affairs, E. Ahamed and C.R.
Gharekhan, India’s Special Envoy for West Asia and the
Middle East Peace Process (WA & MEPP). The text of
an Agreement on mutual exemption of visas for
diplomatic, official/service passport holders was finalised
on the margins of the FOC.

Israel

Negotiations were held on the draft Double Taxation
Avoidance Agreement and the new Merchant Shipping
Agreement during visits to Egypt by delegations from the
Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Shipping in May
2007. The texts of Extradition Treaty, the Mutual Legal

Special Envoy of the Government of India for West Asia
and Middle East Peace Process, Chinmaya R. Gharekhan,
visited Israel in February and September 2007. He met
with vice Premier and Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni and
other senior officials.

The year 2007 marked the 15 th Anniversary of
establishment of diplomatic relations between India and
Israel. The multifaceted relations between the two
countries were consolidated through exchange of visits
and delegations in various fields.
Ashwani Kumar, Minister of State for Industry led a
delegation to Israel from 4-7 August 2007. During the
visit he met with Israeli President Shimon Peres, Minister
of Trade, Industry and Labour, Eliyahu Yishai and Minister
of Transport and Road Safety, Shaul Mofaz.

49

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

From Israel, Minister of Transport Shaul Mofaz visited
India in March 2007; National Security Adviser of Israel
Ilan Mizrahi visited India in October 2007. Minister of
Interior of Israel, Meir Sheetrit, visited India to attend
2 nd Asian Ministerial Conference on Disaster Risk
Reduction in New Delhi on 7-8 November 2007.

April 2007 through three service providers. Amidst
continued increase in demand for visas to visit India, the
Embassy in Tel Aviv issued 19,346 visas during the period
April-October 2007. During the same period 51 OCI
registration certificates and 7 PIO cards were issued to
the persons of Indian origin in Israel.

Other official level exchanges during the year included
the sixth round of the talks on Joint Working Group on
counter terrorism, and the third round of dialogue on nonproliferation in March 2007 in New Delhi; port calls by
the two Indian Naval training ships INS Sujata, and INS
Shardul at Haifa, Israel from 23- 27 September 2007.

We continued our active involvment with activities of
the Indian Diaspora and supported various events,
including the 19th Annual Maiboli Sneha Sammelan held
in Lod (Israel) organized by the editorial board of
“Maiboli”, a Marathi quarterly magazine published in
Israel by the Indian Jewish community hailing from
Maharashtra (1 April 2007); evening of Indian-Cochini
folklore held in Nevatim by the Jewish community of
Cochini origin (9 August 2007); anniversary celebrations
of the Indian Jewish Synagogue in Lod (30 July 2007)
and Magen Shalom Synagogue in Ramle (3 September
2007); and inauguration (9 September 2007) of the
“Heritage Museum for Indian Jewry” in Dimona.

According to the Central Bureau of Statistics of Israel,
the bilateral trade figures amounted to US$ 2440.3 million
during the period January-September 2007, an overall
increase of 22.87% as compared to the corresponding
period last year. Business delegations from the States of
Gujarat, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Mizoram and others
visited Israel during 2007.

Jordan

Other significant commercial developments during the
year included the inauguration of a branch of the State
Bank of India in Tel Aviv in June 2007 making it the first
Indian bank to operate in Israel; investments and
acquisitions in the areas of pharmaceuticals, tyres, and
irrigation equipment manufacturing by the Indian
companies in Israel; and large scale investments by Israeli
companies in infrastructure and real estate sectors in India.

The momentum generated in the bilateral relations with
Jordan by the landmark state visit of King Abdullah II
Ibn Al Hussein to India last year was further built upon
with significant developments in 2007.
E. Ahamed, Minister of State for External Affairs visited
Jordan from 26-28 September 2007, and handed over a
letter from President of India to the King of Jordan,
expressing India’s desire to strengthen bilateral relations
with Jordan in all areas. King Abdullah conveyed to the
President, Jordan’s desire to build further on his successful
visit to India last year and his meeting with the Indian
leadership.

To mark the 15 th anniversary of the establishment of
diplomatic relations between India and Israel as well as
the 60th anniversary of India’s independence, Embassy of
India in Tel Aviv, in cooperation with ICCR organized
‘’India Festival’’ from 16-22 August 2007. In addition, a
Film Festival of India was also organized in Tel Aviv from
18-30 August 2007 to mark the occasion.

Kumari Selja, Minister of State (Independent Charge) for
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation visited Amman
on 27-28 October 2007 as Chairperson of the Bureau of
Asia-Pacific Ministers of Housing and Urban
Development to preside over the Second Meeting of the
Bureau.

Four Israeli students availed of scholarships to study in
India under the Indo-Israel Cultural Exchange Programme
(CEP). Five Indian students joined Israeli institutions
under the reciprocal scholarship schemes offered by the
Israeli government. Under the Know India Programme
(KIP) organized by the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs
(MOIA) three Israeli youth of Indian origin participated
from 29 August–15 September 2007.

A delegation from Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)
led by its President participated in the Middle East World
Economic Forum at Dead Sea in May 2007.
From Jordan, Dr. Khaled Al Shreideh, Minister of Energy
and Natural Resources, visited India to participate in the

Outsourcing of visa application services became
operational in Embassy in Tel Aviv with effect from 15
50

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

Second Asian Ministerial Conference on Disaster
Reduction held in New Delhi on 7-8 October 2007.

A new chancery building was purchased on 31 March
2007 for US$ 3.8 million.

Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) sent a
cultural troupe to Jordan to participate in the 25th Jerash
Festival held from 26-29 July 2007. Sharifah Hind Nasser
of Jordanian nobility and a well-known painter exhibited
her paintings under ICCR arranged programme in New
Delhi from 21-28 November 2007. Several Jordanian
students received scholarships for higher education in
India under the Cultural Exchange Programme.

As part of Satyagraha centenary celebrations, Mission
organized an exhibition of Mahatma Gandhi’s
photographs and screening of the feature film “The
Making of the Mahatma” by Shyam Benegal at various
important cities in Lebanon.

Libya
India-Libya bilateral relations strengthened during the
year with the high level visits from both the side. Murli
Deora, Minister for Petroleum and Natural Gas visited
Libya from 30 January-2 February 2007 and called on the
Libyan Leader Colonel Muammar Al-Gaddafi. Pranab
Mukherjee, External Affairs Minister visited Libya on 2627 May 2007 and called on the Libyan Leader Colonel
Muammar Al-Gaddafi. A Bilateral Investment Protection
Agreement and a Cultural-Cooperation Agreement was
signed during the Minister of External Affair’s visit to
Libya in May 2007. Libyan Minister of Asian Affairs
Mohamed Burrani visited India from 22-26 March 2007
for Foreign Office Consultations. An MoU on Political
Consultations was signed in Delhi during the visit..

India’s exports to Jordan maintained the growth curve of
the previous year and showed a further increase of 37%
during the year. Jordan’s exports to India increased by 19%
in the same period. The trade balance, however, continues
to be in Jordan’s favour.
Indian Farmers Fertilizers Cooperative (IFFCO) signed
an agreement on 1 November 2007 with Jordan Phosphate
Mining Company (JPMC) for setting up a US$ 570 million
phosphoric acid plant at Eshidiya in Jordan. Jordan
Investment Board (JIB) identified India as one of the
fourteen countries for inviting investment into Jordan in
the areas of information technology, financial services and
life sciences. A delegation from JIB visited India in
November 2007. Aqaba Special Economic Zone Authority
(ASEZA) sent a delegation to India in June 2007 for
promoting investments in its Special Economic Zone.
Aqaba Development Corporation (ADC) sent a
delegation to India from 18-20 November 2007 to
participate in Citiscape in Mumbai.

10th Session of India-Libya Joint Commission was held in
New Delhi on 12 July 2007. The Libyan side was led by
Minister for Economy, Trade and Investment, Dr. Ali
Abdulaziz Al-Essawi while the Indian side was headed by
Kamal Nath, Minister for Commerce and Industry. The
Minister and his delegation also visited Bangalore for
interacting with IT companies.
Bilateral trade between India and Libya has shown
substantial increase during the 2006-07 compared to the
previous year. Bilateral trade for the year 2006-07 was
US$ 221.09 million as compared to US$ 115.23 during
the previous year.

Lebanon
India and Lebanon continued to enjoy cordial and friendly
relations based on a number of commonalities such as
parliamentary democracy, open and pluralist societies,
non-alignment, commitment to regional and global peace,
free market economy and respect for individual enterprise.
The relationship however, is yet to gather momentum
mainly due to lack of bilateral engagement and the
prevailing political stalemate in Lebanon.

Minister for Petroleum offered 100 training slots in the
oil sector to Libyan personnel. A draft MoU is under
discussion.
Indian companies and Oil Public Sector Undertakings
remain engaged in developmental activities such as oil
and pipelines, housing, construction and infrastructure,
power, computerization and IT training etc. in Libya.
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited has completed a 600
MV Gas Turbine Power project with General Electricity
Company. Oil Videsh Limited has been qualified as an

In response to Lebanese government appeal for
international help towards rehabilitation and
reconstruction of the Palestinian refugee camp Nahr alBared, India has promised assistance to the tune of
US$ 600,000.
51

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

operator in the 4th round of bidding, while Oil India and
Indian Oil Corporation have been qualified as investors.
A joint venture for city gas projects and construction of
pipeline between Libyan Ministry of Electricity, Water and
Gas and Gas Authority of India Limited has been approved
and two sides are negotiating to finalize a MoU. DS
Construction has won two contracts for building 4000
housing units. Under the auspices of India Trade
Promotion Organisation, 22 Indian companies
participated in the Tripoli International Fair held in April
2007 and 13 Indian official/business/commercial
delegations visited Libya.

performed at the World Festival of Sacred Music,
organised in Fez, Morocco on 8 June 2007 and Ustad
Amjad Ali Khan, Sarod maestro gave a performance at
the 29th Asilah International Cultural Festival on 9 August
2007.

Palestine
India remains committed to its unwavering support to the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people for a
homeland of their own and joined all efforts of the
international community to re-start comprehensive
dialogue in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Quartet Roadmap and the Arab Peace
Initiative.

Morocco
Relations between India and Morocco continued to grow
and strengthen in all areas. Dr. Ashwani Kumar, Minister
of State for Industries visited Morocco for participation
in the Symposium on ‘South-South Cooperation in the
fields of energy and industry – challenges and
opportunities’ as Guest of Honour in May 2007. The
Moroccan Industry Minister, during the meeting,
expressed his appreciation of the growing presence of
Indian companies in Morocco and highlighted the
agreement signed by Morocco with Tata Consultancy
Services to establish an offshoring delivery centre and a
project to impart national training and e-governance.

Secretary (East) visited Palestine on 16 May 2007 and
met with President Mahmoud Abbas and Deputy Prime
Minister Dr. Azzam Ahmad. He also held delegation level
meetings with the Deputy Foreign Minister Dr. Ahmed
Soboh on Indian support to the Palestinian institution
building.
Within the framework of India’s commitment to extend
political, material and technical support to Palestine,
Minister of State for External Affairs, E. Ahamed visited
Palestine on 27 – 28 September 2007 and held talks with
the Palestinian Deputy Foreign Minister.

Dean, FSI visited Morocco from 5-8 November 2007 and
held meetings with senior Government functionaries.

Special Envoy to the Middle East Peace Process, C. R.
Gharekhan visited the region twice during February and
September 2007.

The two-way trade between India and Morocco witnessed
noticeable growth and it reached over US$ 711 million
during 2006. During the period January-September 2007,
trade exchanges between India and Morocco amounted
to US$ 606.6 million. Mahindra and Mahindra
commenced its export of utility vehicles to Morocco and
Tata Consultancy Services (TCS) opened their office in
Casablanca. At the 2nd International Agricultural Fair held
in Meknes from 19-24 April 2007, M/s Mediauto,
distributors of Scorpio vehicles produced by M/s Mahindra
and Mahindra, and the local distributors of Kirloskars
displayed utility vehicles and agricultural implements
respectively.

India was invited to attend the Middle East peace
conference in Annapolis held on 27–28 November 2007.
Union Minister of Science and Technology Kapil Sibal
who led the Indian delegation met with President
Mahmoud Abbas on the sidelines of the conference on
27 November 2007.
India attended the International Donors’ Conference on
Palestine in Paris in December 2007. We have pledged
US$ 5 million in the Paris Donors’ for Palestine for
development projects and will be training 400 Palestinian
officials under our ITEC programme.
India has also announced it will fund the construction of
a Boys’ Senior Secondary School, a Cardiac Surgery
Centre, a Software Technology and Industrial Park, Prime
Minister’s Secretariat and a Centre for Indian Studies and
Chair for Indian Studies in the Palestinian territories.

A 14-member Engineering Export Promotion Council
delegation visited Morocco from 20-23 November 2007
for promoting export of engineering products and services.
Vasumathi Badrinathan, Carnatic singer from India
52

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

In October 2007, Water and Power Consultancy Services
(India) Ltd. (WAPCOS), won a consultancy contract
from the World Bank administered Multi Donor Trust
Fund for a US$ 40 million water and electricity supply
project to various cities in South Sudan under the Sudan
Emergency Transport and Infrastructure Development
Project for Ministry of Housing, Land and Public Utilities,
Government of Southern Sudan, Juba.

Processes for construction of Palestinian Embassy in New
Delhi and Boys’ school in Abudees have been initiated.

Sudan
In April 2007, Indian Railway Construction Company
(IRCON) finalized the Technical Agreement for the 170
km Khartoum–Wad Medani standard gauge line funded
with a US$ 150 million Government of India supported
concessional loan from Export-Import Bank of India
(EXIM Bank).

India opened its Consulate General in Juba in October
2007, the first Asian country to do so.

In May 2007, Agriculture Bank of Sudan invited tenders
for tractors under the Indian US$ 100 million EXIM Bank
Line of Credit committed at the April 2005 Oslo Donors
Conference. Purchase of 550 tractors in SKD (semi-knock
down) condition has reportedly been finalized.

In November 2007, a five-member delegation led by
Sudan’s Minister of Energy and Mining Dr. Awad Ahmed
Al Jaz attended the first India-Africa Hydrocarbon
Summit in New Delhi (6-7 November 2007). Minister Al
Jaz delivered a message from Sudanese President Omer
Al Bashir to Prime Minister.

In July 2007 in Khartoum, EXIM Bank and Sudan’s
Ministry of Finance and National Economy signed a US$
52 million Line of Credit, the balance of India’s US$ 100
million Oslo commitment. Also in July 2007, at the
request of elders of the Shilluk community, and with the
endorsement of the Embassy, ONGC Videsh Ltd donated
a powerful generator to Kodok town in Fashdoda County
of Upper Nile State.

In November 2007, a high-powered delegation from North
and South Sudan attended the 4 th International
Conference on Federalism in New Delhi (5-7 November
2007) organised by Inter-State Council Secretariat,
Ministry of Home Affairs with support from the Forum of
Federations in Ottawa.

In August 2007, Sudan’s State Minister for Investment,
El Simaih El Siddig Al Nour led a business delegation to
India to promote Indian investments in Sudan.

A delegation from Tata International Ltd. visited Sudan
in mid-November 2007 to finalize a locomotives contract
with Sudan Railways Corporation under the Indian Oslo
Line of Credit.

In August 2007, Telecommunications Consultants India
Limited (TCIL) and Sudan Master Technology (SMT)
Ltd. signed a US$ 18 million contract for Information
and Communication Technology (ICT) support to SMT’s
operations in Sudan.

Syria
India and Syria have always enjoyed warm and friendly
relations at all levels, more particularly at political level
based on commonalities of old civilizational values,
socialist and secular orientations, membership of NAM
and similarity of perception on many international and
regional issues.

Dispatch of relief materials consisting of tents and
medicines worth US$ 100,000 for flood relief in north
and south Sudan, announced in August 2007, was
completed by year end.

Syrian foreign Minster, Walid Al Muallem visited India
from 13-15 August 2007 to prepare for a visit by Syrian
President Bashar Assad to India.

In August 2007, ONGC sponsored performances by the
Mumbai-based Rang Puhar song and dance ensemble in
Khartoum and Juba on the occasion of Sudan’s Oil Day
(31 August).

Indo-Syrian commercial exchanges have been increasing
at a comfortable pace in the past few years. India stood at
6th place with exports valued at US$ 252.64 million, which
increased further by 7.46% to US$ 271.49 in 2005-06.

In September 2007, Telecommunications Consultants
India Ltd (TCIL) signed an agreement with Sudan’s
Ministry of Science and Technology to update its 2004
feasibility report for a proposed Technology City in
Sudan.

The bilateral trade is in favour of India. Indian exports to
Syria consists largely of man-made yarns and textiles,
machinery and equipment, drugs and fine chemicals,
53

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

transport equipment, jute and jute products, metal
products, plastic and linoleum products, rubber
manufactured products and electronic goods. However,
imports from Syria are limited largely to raw cotton, pulses,
raw wool and phosphates.

company Tunisian-Indian Fertilizer SA (TIFERT S.A.)
was launched for supply of phosphate and phosphoric acid
to India, biddings for which are going on. It is the first
Indian investment in Tunisia. Talks for another IndiaTunisia joint venture project under Skhira-III are in
progress. Besides the above-mentioned two Tunisian
companies, namely GCT and CPG the project involves
three Indian companies viz. the Rashtriya Chemicals and
Fertilizers Ltd (RCF), the Krishak Bharti Cooperative Ltd.
(KRIBHCO) and the Minerals and Metals Trading Co.
(MMTC). A Joint Working Group has already been set
up for the purpose and its first meeting is expected to be
held soon.

Tunisia
Bilateral relations between India and Tunisia remained
friendly and cordial during this period. There has been
good cooperation between India and Tunisia in supporting
each other’s candidates for posts in various international
fora.
Minister of State E. Ahamed led a high level delegation
to co-chair the 10th session of the India-Tunisia Joint
Commission. Both countries signed two Agreements in
the fields of Air Services and Small and Medium Sized
Enterprises. A Cultural Exchange Programme (2007-09)
was also signed during the deliberations.

A four-member Tunisian delegation visited India on 2-3
August 2007 to attend the first meeting of the Joint
Working Group in the Oil and Natural Gas sector.

Arab League
The third round of the India-Arab League bilateral
dialogue was held in New Delhi on 9-10 May 2007. Chief
of the Cabinet of the Arab League Secretary-General,
Hesham Yousef led the Arab League delegation and the
Indian side was headed by Secretary (East). A
Memorandum of Understanding for Cooperation with the
Arab States was initiated.

Bilateral trade received a quantum boost during the
period. During the year 2006-07 bilateral trade between
the two countries was to the tune of US$ 258.85 million
as compared to US$ 183.72 resulting in an increase of
40.89% as compared to 11.53% during 2004-05.
Last year, a US$ 200 million India-Tunisia joint venture

54

Africa (South of Sahara)

6

Eastern and Southern Africa

Home Minister, South Africa (September).

I

Minister of Agriculture and Land Affairs, South
Africa (September-October).

India hosted several high level visits from the region:

Parliamentarians from Zambia, South Africa,
Namibia, Mozambique, Lesotho, Malawi, Swaziland,
Botswana, Tanzania, Uganda, Mauritius and Kenya,
attended the 53rd Commonwealth Parliamentary
Conference, held in New Delhi in September 2007.

ndia’s approach to Eastern and Southern Africa is
conditioned and energized by our historical linkages
and strong political foundations of the past. Our
partnership was consolidated and several new initiatives
were taken to further strengthen our ties at the bilateral,
regional and multilateral including Pan-African levels.

The delegations including Ministerial level from
Union of Comoros, Ethiopia, Malawi, Mozambique,
Namibia, Mauritius, Tanzania, South Africa
participated in First India-Africa Hydrocarbon
Conference and Exhibition in November 2007.

Ethiopian Prime Minister, Meles Zenawi led a large
delegation to attend the Conference on Federalism
at New Delhi from 5-7 November 2007.
President of Union of Comoros, Ahmed Abdallah
Mohamed Sambi visited India to participate in the
4th International Conference on Federalism from 38 November 2007.

Minister for Communications, Science and
Technology, Botswana (October).
Minister of Mines and Energy, Ethiopia (November).

Prime Minister of Mauritius, Dr. Navinchandra
Ramgoolam was the Chief Guest at the sixth Pravasi
Bhartiya Divas to be held in New Delhi on 8-9
January 2008.

Vice Minister for Mineral Resources, Mozambique
(November).
From India:

From Indian side, Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh
visited South Africa in November 2007 and participated
in the 2nd India-Brazil–South Africa (IBSA) Summit.

Minister of State for Agriculture to Uganda (May).

Other important visits to India during the year included:

Minister of External Affairs to Ethiopia (July).

Minister for Higher Education to Zanzibar (United
Republic of Tanzania) (May).

Minister of State for External Affairs , Anand
Sharma to Mozambique (July).

Minister of Agriculture, Eritrea (April).
Minister of Minerals and Energy South Africa
(April).

Chairperson, UPA and Congress President to South
Africa (August).

Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development,
South Africa (April).

Minister of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways
to Mauritius (October).

Foreign Minister, South Africa (July).

Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment to
Mauritius (November).

Minister of Agriculture, Breeding and Fishing,
Madagascar (July).

Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs to Mozambique
(November).

Minister of Agriculture and Food Security, Lesotho
(August).

India is continuously engaged in development of human
resources in the region. Training, deputation of experts
and project assistance under Indian Technical and

Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, Uganda
(September).
55

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

including those relating to setting up of Vocational
Training Centre, setting up of Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises in Comoros were further progressed.

Economic Cooperation (ITEC) programme continued to
be extended to the countries of the region. The Ministry’s
‘Aid to Africa’ programme provides direct assistance to a
number of countries in the form of projects to augment
the resources and by capacity building of these countries.
The Ministry has undertaken “Pan African e-Network”,
an ambitious project to provide e-services with priority
on tele-education and tele-medicine services and
connectivity by satellite and fibre optic network amongst
the Head of States of all 53 African countries. India was
one of the largest contributors to peacekeeping in Africa:
3,500 troops in Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC),
3000 in Southern Sudan and about 600 in Ethiopia and
Eritrea. Trade and investment relationship with individual
countries grew by leaps and bounds. Significant progress
was made in identifying specific projects in the framework
of institutional cooperation with the Regional Economic
Communities. The tradition of organizing pan-African
project partnership conclaves and regional conclaves in
Africa was carried forward. To carry forward our ongoing
multi-sectoral cooperation with Africa at all levels, it was
decided that India will host the India Africa Forum
Summit in New Delhi on 8 April 2008.

Eritrea
The Eritrean Minister of Agriculture, Arefaine Berhe G.
Medhin visited India as a Special Envoy from 5-7 April
2007. He held discussions with Minister of State for
External Affairs, Anand Sharma and the Minister of State
(Agriculture), apart from visiting institutions relating to
Agriculture and Small Scale Industry. Several vessels of
the Indian Navy paid goodwill visits to Eritrea during 2007
including INS Tir and INS Sujata from 13-16 February
2007, INS Shardul, INS Krishna and INS Sujata from 15 September 2007 and the Sailing training ship INS
Tarangini from 3-5 October. These visits were used to
impart training on the maintenance of vessels to personnel
of the Eritrean Navy and to hold joint exercises with
vessels of Eritrean Navy. Workshop equipment and
training handouts were handed over to the Eritrean side.

Ethiopia
Bilateral relations were invigorated with the visit of the
Minister of External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee to Ethiopia
from 3-6 July 2007. During the visit, both sides signed
five agreements, viz. Establishment of Joint Ministerial
Commission, Bilateral Investments Promotion and
Protection Agreement, Cooperation in the field of Science
and Technology, Protocol on Foreign Office Consultations
and Educational Exchange Programme. The Minister of
External Affairs, along with Ethiopian Minister for
Capacity Building, Tefera Waliwa inaugurated the TeleEducation Project at Addis Ababa University and TeleMedicine Project at Black Lion Hospital on 6 July 2007
under the Pan-African E-Network Project of the
Government of India. The Minister of External Affairs
announced a line of credit of US$ 122 million as first
tranche for the development of sugar industry in Ethiopia,
increase of ITEC slots from 25 to 50 and donation of a
CT scan machine to Black Lion Hospital. The Agreement
for the release of first tranche of loan of US$ 122 million
was signed between EXIM Bank of India and Ministry of
Finance of Ethiopia at New Delhi on 4 October 2007.

Botswana
The decisions taken during the visit of President Festus
Mogae to India in December 2006 were followed with
vigour. Botswana supported India as a Permanent Member
of the reformed United Nations Security Council (UNSC).
The Botswana Minister for Communications, Science and
Technology, Pelonomi Venson-Moitoi, visited India in
October 2007 for discussions regarding establishment of
cyber city in Botswana. Minister of Minerals, Energy and
Water Resources of Botswana, P.H.K. Kedikilwe, attended
the International Diamond Conference – ‘Mines to
Market 2007’ in Mumbai on 26-27 April 2007.

Comoros
The President of Union of Comoros, Ahmed Abdallah
Mohamed Sambi visited India from 3-8 November 2007
to participate in the 4th International Conference on
Federalism. On the sidelines of the conference, President
Sambi met the Indian President. During the discussions,
President Sambi extended Comoros’ unequivocal support
for India’s candidature as a permanent member of UNSC.
The President reiterated India’s support for meeting the
developmental needs of Comoros. Bilateral projects

The Ethiopian Prime Minister, Meles Zenawi led a large
delegation to attend the Conference on Federalism at New
Delhi on 5-7 November 2007. He met our Prime Minister
who conveyed his agreement to Ethiopian Prime
56

Prime Minister of Mauritius, Dr. Navinchandra Ramgoolam, calling on the
President of India, Pratibha Devisingh Patil at Rashtrapati Bhavan on 9 January 2008.

Minister of External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee signing agreements with
Ethiopian Foreign Minister, Seyoum Mesfin during his visit to Ethiopia, 5 July 2007.

57

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

Lesotho

Minister’s request for support to develop Centres of
Excellence in higher learning in Ethiopia. Ethiopian Prime
Minister reiterated Ethiopia’s whole hearted support for
India’s claim to permanent membership of UNSC.

The presence of the Indian Army Training Team (IATT)
in Maseru continued to be a symbol of the deep trust and
friendship between India and Lesotho. At the request of
the Government of Lesotho, the IATT’s term was
extended till 2009. National Minerals Development
Corporation (NMDC) commenced work for setting up a
wholly-owned subsidiary in Lesotho. C-DAC completed
a feasibility report on setting up an IT Centre at Lerotholi
Polytechnic to be funded by the Government of India. A
MoU on agricultural cooperation between India and
Lesotho is under discussion. The India-Lesotho Joint
Commission is also being reactivated. Minister of
Agriculture and Food Security of Lesotho, Lesole Mokoma
visited India from 27-30 August 2007. Lesotho Minister
of Local Government, Dr. Pontso M. Sekatle visited India
on 11-12 October 2007. Speaker of the National
Assembly, Ntlhoi alice Motsamai and Chief Justice,
Mahapela Lebohang Lehohla, visited India in December
2007 for the 8th International Conference of Chief Justices
of the World in Lucknow.

India’s investments reached US$ 464 million with 43
companies starting their operations out of 265 companies
registered for investment. M/s Cadila Pharmaceuticals
inaugurated a state-of-the-art pharmaceutical plant near
Addis Ababa at a cost of US$ 100 million for
manufacturing 100 types of formulations.
The total trade between India and Ethiopia for the
Financial year 2006-07 was US$ 125.7 million. The
exports from India to Ethiopia reached US$ 114.4 million
while imports from Ethiopia to India were US$ 11.3
million.

Kenya
Several bilateral visits were exchanged between India and
Kenya during 2007. Visits from India included that of a
delegation led by Babbanrao Pachpute, Minister for
Forests, Government of Maharashtra from 25-28 April
2007 to explore the possibility of cooperation in ecotourism. Minister of State for Human Resource
Development, D. Purandeshwari visited Kenya from 27
May-1 June 2007 to attend the 2nd E-learning Africa
Conference held in Nairobi. From Kenya, a six-member
delegation of the Ministry of Agriculture visited India from
1-5 July 2007 on a study tour of the cotton textiles
industry. A four-member delegation from the police
training academies of Kenya came on a study tour of police
training institutions at New Delhi and Hyderabad from
26-29 November 2007. A 12-member delegation from
Kaimbu Unity Finance Co-operative Union Ltd. visited
Maharashtra to study the cooperative movement and dairy
processing. A four-member delegation of Kenyan Police
visited India from 27 November-1 December 2007.

Madagascar
Minister of Agriculture, Breeding and Fishing of
Madagascar, Marius Ratolojanahary visited India from 2226 July 2007. Discussions focused on bilateral cooperation
including moderanisation and diversification of
agriculture, agro-engineering, seeds technology; agroprocessing, value addition, capacity building and exchange
of experts. India has agreed to install intranet project for
the Malagasy Presidency linking the President’s Office
with other government ministers in Antananarivo.

Malawi
Malawi opened its diplomatic Mission in New Delhi and
named its first High Commissioner to India. Under the
ITEC assistance progress with civilian training slots were
increased from 10 in 2006 to 15 in 2007. Malawi further
reiterated its request for a US$ 30 million Line of Credit
for rural development project. An ICCR sponsored
cultural troupe – the Manipuri Martial Arts troupe –
performed in Malawi in July 2007.

A MoU between Kenya Industrial Research Development
Institute (KIRDI) and Kamtech Associates Pvt. Ltd of
India was signed on 15 October 2007 for implementation
of transfer of Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) to Kenya via KIRDI. The project will
develop 300 ICT entrepreneurs and will cost Kamtech
an estimated US$ 252,000. An Indian company BHARAT
was given a US$ 30 million contract from Kenya Pipeline
Company to establish a Liquid Petroleum Gas (LPG) Plant
in Mombasa.

Mauritius
Minister of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, T.
R. Baalu, visited Mauritius on 15-16 October 2007.
During the visit, he inaugurated the Mauritius Maritime
58

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh with the President of Nigeria, Umaru Musa Yar’Adua,
at a Ceremonial Reception, at Abuja, Nigeria on 15 October 2007.

Minister of State for External Affairs, Anand Sharma meeting with the Foreign Minister of Benin,
Mariam-Aladji Boni Diallo, in New Delhi on 10 May 2007.

59

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

Training Academy. A Joint Working Group was also
established to explore areas of cooperation between the
two countries in the shipping sector.

requirements of Mauritius over the next three years, in
New Delhi on 6 July 2007.
The total bilateral trade between ndia and Mauritius
during the financial year 2006-07 was US$ 751.04 million.
The exports from India to Mauritius were US$ 736.53
million (Rs. 333275.78 lakhs) and imports from Mauritius
to India were US$ 14.51 million (Rs. 6565.80 lakhs).

The Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment, Meira
Kumar visited Mauritius from 2-5 November 2007. During
the visit, a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) in the
field of social defence was signed. The MoU aims at
promoting cooperation between the two countries in the
areas of social welfare, social security and overall
development of the weaker sections of society. Raksha
Rajya Mantri, M.M. Pallam Raju visited Mauritius from
31 October-3 November 2007. Chief Minister of Bihar,
Nitish Kumar, visited Mauritius from 26 July-1 August
2007 as Chief Guest for the “Diaspora Week” organised
by the Global Organisation of People of Indian Origin
(GOPIO). The Mauritian Prime Minister, Navinchandra
Ramgoolam laid the foundation stone of the JSS Academy
of Technical Education College on 26 May 2007. The
Academy is an affiliate of the JSS Mahavidyapeetha,
Mysore.

Mozambique
The momentum gained last year in promotion of bilateral
relations continued in the current year. A 3-member
delegation for the meeting of joint working group led by
Additional Secretary (Coal) visited Mozambique from 27 April 2007 and a ‘Plan of Action’ was signed. Anand
Sharma, Minister of State for External Affairs visited
Mozambique leading a delegation of Indian business
captains to the Regional Conclave of India-Africa Project
Partnership organized by Confederation of Indian Industry
(CII) on 2 July 2007. Mozambican Vice-Minister for
Mineral Resources visited India to attend the India-Africa
Hydrocarbon Conference, held in New Delhi on 6-7
November 2007. An “Internet Kiosk - Learning Station”
was established in Macuba in the Zambezi Province and
another one in Chibuto in the Gaza Province under the
Hole-in-the-Wall project of the Government of India.
Under the US$ 20 million Line of Credit, signed on 10
September 2004 an amount of US$ 14 million has already
been disbursed for Rural Water drilling, Electrification,
Drip Irrigation and Food processing projects. Out of the
US$ 20 million Line of Credit, signed on 17 August 2006,
US$ 3.8 million has been disbursed for rural electrification
project in the Gaza Province. The Indian Foreign Direct
Investment in Mozambique stood at US$10.68 million.
The Government of Mozambique has identified the site
for the installation of the cashew processing plant
manufactured by HMT(I), and gifted by Government of
India. The first ever festival of Indian Films was held in
Nampula city, the Provincial capital of Nampula.

The first meeting of the Executive Board of the World
Hindi Secretariat was held in Mauritius on 24-25 May
2007. The Fourth Consortium Agreement between the
University Grants Commission of India and the Tertiary
Education Commission of Mauritius was signed on 18
April 2007. The Agreement caters for the emerging needs
and challenges of the tertiary education sector in
Mauritius.
In June 2007, a two-member Indian Army team undertook
field visits to advise the Mauritian side on the location
and construction of a small arms and Close Quarter
Battlefield Range. The Indian Naval hydrographic ship
Sarveshak undertook hydrographic surveys off Mauritius
at three sites for the Land Based Oceanic Industry and of
Port Mathurin harbour, Rodrigues during the period 10
March–12 April 2007. The hydrographic charts and data
for the Land Based Oceanic Industry were handed over
to the Mauritian Government in September 2007. The
Indian Coast Guard Ship ‘Samar’ visited Mauritius from
26-29 August 2007 on a goodwill visit. During the visit, a
day-long Joint Training Programme with the National
Coast Guard of Mauritius in marine pollution response
was held on 27 August 2007 off the coast of Mauritius.

The total bilateral trade between India and Mozambique
during the financial year 2006-07 was US$ 220.03 million.
The exports form India to Mozambique were US$ 191.72
million and imports form Mozambique to India were US$
28.31 million.

Namibia

The Mangalore Refineries and Petrochemicals Limited
(MRPL) and the State Trading Corporation of Mauritius
signed a US$ 2 billion contract, for supply of all petroleum

Bilateral relations between India and Namibia continue
to be warm and friendly. Namibia consistently supported
60

Africa (South of Sahara)

South Africa

India in the UN, Commonwealth and other regional and
international fora; and significantly continues to support
India’s candidature for permanent membership to an
expanded UNSC. Several high-level visits were exchanged
between the two countries. Speaker of the Andhra
Pradesh Legislative Assembly and Commonwealth
Parliamentary Association (CPA) Executive Committee
member, K.R. Suresh Reddy, visited Namibia on 2-3
February 2007. A Joint Parliamentary delegation of both
Houses of the Namibian Parliament led by Asser Kapere,
Chairman of the National Council and member of the
Executive Committee of the CPA, visited New Delhi for
the 53rd Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference, 2130 September 2007. The Namibian Minister of Trade and
Industry, Immanuel Ngatjizeko led the Namibian
delegation for CII Conclave on India-Africa Project
Partnership (IAPP) 2007 at Maputo from 1-4 July 2007.
The Minister invited Indian investors in the following
sectors: infrastructure development, mining, foodprocessing, “Green Scheme”, agricultural projects, sugar
and joint ventures in small and medium enterprises, gas
and energy, power generation and distribution.

There was further consolidation and diversification of
India’s relations with South Africa which is a strategic
partner. The strong friendship forged at the political level
manifested itself in a series of high level visits culminating
in the 2nd IBSA Summit held in Pretoria on 17 October
2007 attended by Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh.
There was fruitful cooperation between the two countries
on multilateral issues, in particular the reform of the UN
system and the WTO Doha Round. The two countries
also discussed finalization of several new Agreements in
the fields of visa, police cooperation, training of diplomats
and agricultural cooperation.
Chairperson, UPA and Congress President, Sonia Gandhi,
visited South Africa from 21-23 August 2007. During her
visit, she met former President Nelson Mandela, President
Thabo Mbeki, among others and delivered the inaugural
Lecture in the Gandhi Lecture Series at the University of
Cape Town and also addressed the ANC Caucus in
Parliament.

Seychelles

There were several visits at the Ministerial level – by
Minister of State for External Affairs, Anand Sharma, in
May 2007 to inaugurate the CII Conclaves on India-South
Africa Project Partnerships in Johannesburg and Cape
Town; Minister of State for Women and Child
Development, Renuka Chowdhury, to represent India at
the 4th World Congress for Women in Durban in April
2007; Minister of Science and Technology, Kapil Sibal for
the World Economic Forum meeting at Cape Town.
Minister of State for Industry, Dr. Ashwani Kumar visited
South Africa twice in August and October 2007 for the
‘India Calling’ Conference organized by the Indian
Merchants’ Chamber and the Indian Engineering
Exhibition (INDEE 2007) organized by the Engineering
Export Promotion Council (EEPC) in Johannesburg.

Seychelles significantly supported all our candidatures for
elections to various international bodies, including that
of Commonwealth Secretary-General. Foreign Office
consultations were held on 25 September 2007. Coast
Guard Ship ‘Samar’ called at Port Victoria in September
2007 for joint exercises with the Seychelles Coast Guard.
In May 2007, 2-member delegation from Seychelles’ Small
Business Enterprises (SENPA) participated in the 6th
Annual Commonwealth-India Small Business
Competitiveness Programme in Cochin.

From the South African side, Brigitte Sylvia Mabandla,
Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development
visited India from 1-4 April 2007. Minister of Minerals
and Energy, B.P. Sonjica visited Mumbai to attend the
International Diamond Conference – ‘Mines to Market
2007’ on 26-27 April 2007. Foreign Minister Dr. N.
Dlamini Zuma visited New Delhi on 16-17 July 2007 to
attend the Fourth Meeting of the Trilateral Commission
of the IBSA Dialogue Forum. Minister in the Presidency,
Dr. Essop Pahad visited India in August 2007 to participate

Rwanda
There was further consolidation of our relations with
Rwanda with the signing of EXIM Bank Agreement for
Government to Government loan of US$ 20 million as
first tranche for a power project to be executed by BHEL.
Union Minister of State for Agriculture, Kanti Lal Bhuria
visited Rwanda from 30 May-1 June 2007. During the
visit an MoU was signed on 31 May 2007 with the Ministry
of Agriculture and Animal Resources of Rwanda for
cooperation in the field of agriculture and animal
husbandry.

61

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

Indian investment in South Africa continued to rise.
Indian companies are reported to be executing projects
worth US$ 2 billion in South Africa. Concomitant with
the increasing Indian business footprint in South Africa,
the need for an umbrella body was felt. Accordingly, an
Indian Business Forum (IBF) was launched during the
visit of Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission, to
Johannesburg in March 2007. It has already enrolled 47
Indian companies as members and CII is providing the
secretariat for the Forum. An important milestone in the
increasing commercial and economic interaction between
the two countries was the holding of the first round of
negotiations for the India-Southern Africa Customs
Union (SACU) PTA in October 2007 in Pretoria.

in the 4th meeting of the India-South Africa CEO’s Forum
in Mumbai and also led a trade delegation to India from
8-11 October 2007. Home Minister, Nosiviwe MapisaNqakula visited India from 5-7 September 2007. L.
Xingwana, Minister of Agriculture and Land Affairs visited
India from 29 September–5 October 2007. The Premier
of Free State, Frances Beatrice Marshoff, visited India from
8-12 September 2007 on an investment and trade
promotion mission.
Chief of the South African Army, Lt General Solly
Zacharia Shoke visited India on a bilateral visit from 1014 September 2007. An Indian Naval delegation visited
South Africa in September 2007 to attend the India-RSA
Naval Staff Talks. South Africa was well represented in
the World Military Games hosted by India in October
2007. The National Defence College, New Delhi,
delegation toured South Africa in May 2007 and the South
African National Defence College toured India in
November 2007.

Academic links between the two countries were
strengthened with the visits to India of the Vice
Chancellors of the universities of KZN, UNISA and The
Witwatersrand. The decision of the Wits University to
set up a Centre of Indian Studies in Africa, and the
establishment of the Gandhi-Luthuli Chair in the
University of KZN would lend further impetus to academic
interaction. On the cultural side, for the first time, India
became a partner country at the Arts Alive Festival of
the city of Johannesburg leading to a major exposition of
Indian literature, performing arts, cuisine, cinema, textiles
and crafts in August-September 2007. The South African
Minister of Arts and Culture, Dr. Pallo Jordan, visited
India from 7-10 December 2007. During the visit, he also
inaugurated a major exposition of South African arts titled
‘Scratches on the Face’.

Elizabeth Thabethe, Deputy Minister of Trade and
Industry, led a 20-member delegation to India from 1317 November 2007. She participated in the SME
Exposition, Techmart, and met our Minister of Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises.
The period 2007-08 saw a significant increase in
commercial interaction between India and South Africa.
Total bilateral trade crossed US$ 4 billion. India’s exports
to South Africa grew from just US$ 1.52 billion in 200506 to US$ 2.24 billion in 2006-07 registering an increase
of 47%. For the first time ever, India was the ‘Partner
Country’ at the Futurex-ICT Exhibition in Johannesburg
in May 2007 which is the premier ICT event in South
Africa. Also in May 2007, CII organized two Conclaves
in Johannesburg and Cape Town focusing on the ICT and
the infrastructure sectors. During the Conclaves, CII also
signed 3 MoUs with UYF, eThekwini Municipality and
the South African Municipal Local Development Agency
(SAMLEDA). India was also the ‘Partner Country’ at the
Africa Big Seven trade fair in July 2007 that focused on
food processing industry. In August 2007, the Mumbai
based Indian Merchants’ Chamber (IMC) organized the
‘India Calling’ Conference in Johannesburg. Thereafter,
Johannesburg hosted ‘INDEE 2007’ organised by the
Engineering Export Promotion Council (EEPC) of India
which saw the participation by a record 175 Indian
companies.

The total bilateral trade between India and South Africa
in the financial year 2006-07 was US$ 4718.15 million.
The exports from India to South Africa were US$ 2246.49
million while the imports reached US$ 2471.66 million

Swaziland
The Swazi Enterprise and Employment Minister led a
business delegation to India from 12-19 August 2007 to
explore possibilities of increase in trade and investment
between the two countries. Swaziland has expressed keen
interest in establishment of Internet Kiosk –Learning
Stations under the Hole-in-the-wall programme of the
Government of India.

Tanzania
The bilateral relations between India and Tanzania
remained cordial and friendly during 2007-08. A number
62

Africa (South of Sahara)

Agriculture, Kanti Lal Bhuria visited Uganda from 28-30
May 2007. During his visit an MoU on cooperation in
the fields of agriculture and allied sectors was signed with
the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries
of Uganda. Minister of State for Women and Child
Development, Renuka Chowdhury was in Kampala from
6-15 June 2007 in connection with addressing the
Commonwealth Parliamentary Forum on Women and
Child development and to attend the 8th meeting of
Commonwealth Women Affairs Ministers. Anand
Sharma, Minister of State for External Affairs visited
Uganda from 28-30 June 2007 to attend a Regional
Conclave on “India-Africa Project Partnership 2007”
organised by the CII.

of high level delegations from Tanzania visited India. Basil
Mramba, the Minister for Industry, Trade and Marketing
led the Tanzanian delegation for the second meeting of
India-Tanzania Joint Trade Committee held in New Delhi
from 16-18 May 2007. The two sides agreed to further
strengthen trade and economic relations between India
and Tanzania. In addition, there were also visits to India
by Tanzanian parliamentary delegations for interaction
with the relevant Indian parliamentary institutions and
committees.
There were significant developments in strengthening of
India-Tanzania economic cooperation. A small industry
information centre was established at the Small Industry
Development Organization (SIDO), Dar-es-Salaam. The
project funded by the Ministry of External Affairs was
implemented by the National Small Industry Corporation
of India. Progress was made in implementation of two
other major Government of India funded projects in
Tanzania viz. establishment of a Centre of Excellence in
ICT in Dar-es-Salaam Institute of Technology; and setting
up of tele-education and tele-medicine centres under the
pan-African e-Network project in Dar-es-Salaam.

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh attended CHOGM
2007 held in Kampala from 23–25 November 2007. First
Deputy Prime Minister of Uganda, Eriya Kategaya visited
India from 19-24 February 2007 to attend the India-EAC
Ministerial Meeting. Internal Affairs Minister of Uganda,
Ruhukana Rugunda led a delegation to India in May 2007.
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of Uganda Isaac
Musumba visited New Delhi from 5-17 September 2007,
as a special representative of the President of Uganda,
Yoweri K. Museveni.

There was growing interest in Tanzania on the part of
Indian corporates and business companies. The most
significant development in strengthening India’s corporate
presence in Tanzania was the handing over of the
operation of Tanzania railways on 1 October 2007 to
Tanzania Railway Limited (TRL) in which Indian
company RITES holds 51% shares with the remaining
49% by the Government of Tanzania.

An MoU to set up two ‘Hole-in-the-Wall’ stations in
Uganda as a gift was signed in Kampala on 14 May 2007.
The Government of Uganda had requested a grant/
concessional credit of US$ 350 million for a 200-300 MW
hydro-electric project on the Ayago River, for which the
BHEL signed an MoU with the Government of Uganda
on 1 July 2006 in Kampala. The Department of Economic
Affairs has sanctioned US$ 50 million as the first tranche
of a US$ 350 million Letter of Credit (LoC). As part of
assistance to Uganda to organise the Kampala CHOGM,
Government of India gifted 2 executive buses and 12
garbage disposal trucks. India provided an amount of
Rupees one crore as relief assistance to the flood victims
of Uganda.

On the private investment front, Reliance Industries Ltd.
(RIL) acquired a majority stake and management control
of Gulf Africa Petroleum Corporation (GAPCO) through
a wholly owned subsidiary, Reliance Industries Middle East
(RIME), a company registered in United Arab Emirates.
In Tanzania, Tata Chemicals was also working in a joint
venture with the National Development Corporation of
Tanzania to construct a soda ash extraction plant in Lake
Natron area in the Arusha region.

A Regional Conclave on India–Africa Project Partnership
2007 ‘Strengthening Partnerships’ organised by the CII
was held in Kampala on 29 June 2007.

The total bilateral trade between India and Tanzania for
the financial year 2006-07 was US$ 386.94 million.

Zambia
Uganda

Bilateral relations maintained their positive atmosphere.
Zambia continues to provide support to India in the
international arena, especially support for Indian

Bilateral relations continued to be warm with the
exchange of several high level visits. Minister of State for
63

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

candidates to various elections. In the economic field,
Zambia has utilized the US$ 10 million credit line fully.
In the mining sector, the Indian group, Vedanta is
implementing a US$ 1 billion investment on projects at
its copper mines in Konkola. Indian plant and machinery
is also used in PTA Bank financed projects in cement
and sugar industries, and also in a Zambian Indian US$
125 million steel project. The Double Taxation Avoidance
Agreement draft has been finalized during the year.
Assistance under ITEC is continuing both in the defence
and the civilian sectors (60 slots), in the form of
deputations and training scholarships.

signed in October, last year is being systematically
implemented. Various areas of cooperation like, economic
cooperation in various sectors, deputation of experts in
IT, pharmaceuticals, energy and industrial sectors are
under various stages of implementation. COMESA
Secretariat has responded favourably to India’s proposal
to devise a comprehensive Energy Master Plan to
COMESA region. An Agreement of cooperation in
Science and Technology is in final stages of negotiation.
CII and CBC (COMESA Business Council) are
negotiating an MoU for a substantive cooperation.
Proposal of fertilizer production under buy back
arrangement, development of small scale industry,
development of agriculture and irrigation facilities,
technology transfer and capacity building for Small and
Medium Enterprises (SMEs) in COMESA countries are
under consideration of COMESA Secretariat. A
Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement with
COMESA is under active consideration of Ministry of
Commerce and Industry.

Zimbabwe
The implementation of the US$ 5 million Indo-Zim SMEs
Project under the MoU signed in June 2006, progressed
well. Installation of machines in the Tool and Die
Workshop at India-Zim Technology Centre located at
Harare Institute of Technology and the common facility
at Small Enterprises Development Corp (SEDCO) in
Harare is nearing completion. In the cultural field, India
continued to participate in the annual Harare
International Festival for Arts (HIFA) held in Harare from
1-6 May 2007. India also participated in the annual
Zimbabwe International Film Festival (ZIFF) held in
Harare from 24 August–2 September 2007. In the
pharmaceutical sector, Indian companies maintained their
strong presence with Ranbaxy and Torrent representatives
based in Harare. The Cotton and Ginning Plant of ‘Grafax
Cotton’ at Mt. Darwin was inaugurated by Vice President
Joyce Mujuru on 12 July 2007. She also laid down the
foundation stone for another edible oil plant of Grafax
Cotton at Mt. Darwin. Edible oil plants set up by Grafax
Cotton at Sanyati and Surface Investments in Harare
(Zimbabwe) continued their operations.

India-EAC (East African Community)
Following the visit of the EAC Ministerial delegation to
India in February 2007, the Joint Communiqué issued by
the two sides also included projects for cooperation
between India and EAC pertaining to Railways,
Telecommunications, Energy, Capital Market
Development and Tourism. EAC has approved the draft
agreement of cooperation in Science and Technology and
modalities of its signing are being worked out. The two
sides have been meeting in Dar-es-Salaam to monitor the
implementation of these projects.
New Partnership for Africa’s Development
(NEPAD)
At the regional level, India stepped up its dialogue with
NEPAD aimed at the establishment of a high level
strategic engagement and assisting NEPAD in priority
sectors such as private sector promotion, environment,
science and technology and infrastructure.

Regional/Sub Regional Organisations
India-Africa Capacity Building Foundation
(ACBF)
India continued to interact and attend the meetings of
Harare-based Africa Capacity Building Foundation
(ACBF). ACBF is a premier institution for sustainable
development and poverty alleviation in Africa. India is
the first Asian country to have become a full member of
the ACBF.

Pan African Parliament
An effort was also made to enhance engagement with
the Pan African Parliament (PAP) based in Midrand,
South Africa. The PAP has expressed interest in
Parliamentary exchanges with India and in deepening
cooperation with India.

India-COMESA (Common Market for Eastern and
Southern Africa)
The India-COMESA Joint Communiqué, which was
64

Africa (South of Sahara)

venture between India and 9 countries of West Africa,
continues to provide an effective impetus to deepen India’s
relations with several important countries of West Africa.
This was evident in the Ministerial level visits that India
received from countries like Angola, Benin, Chad, Cote
d’Ivoire, DRC, ROC, Gabon and Ghana.

India-Southern African Development Community
(SADC) – India Forum
India- SADC Forum was launched in April 2006. A 4member technical team visited SADC Secretariat and
after discussions with Secretariat officials have identified
11 projects out of which 7 are on priority viz., development
of dry-land agriculture with regional irrigation and water
management; value addition to agricultural products;
study on Science and Technology Entrepreneurs Park;
feasibility study on transfer of water from Congo basin to
water scarce countries of SADC region; technical
assistance to develop projects in regional strategic water
infrastructure development programme to bankability and
technical assistance to SADC Secretariat-secondment of
network engineer and ICT experts to the SADC
Secretariat. SADC Secretariat has requested India for
joint implementation of projects in 2008.

Angola
Bilateral relations between Angola and India continued
to be warm and friendly. Interactions between the two
countries have steadily increased with the cessation of
the long civil war in Angola in 2002. Aguinaldo Jaime,
Deputy Prime Minister of Angola visited India to attend
a “Mines to Market Conference” on Diamonds in Mumbai
from 25-28 April 2007. The Minister of State for External
Affairs, Anand Sharma, visited Angola on 8-9 June 2007.
The State Bank of India which opened its Representative
Office in Luanda on 18 April 2005 extended a commercial
line of credit of US$ 5 million this year for supply of
tractors from India.

West Africa
India continued to intensify its traditionally warm and
cordial links with the countries of West Africa. The year
witnessed the landmark visit of Prime Minister, Dr.
Manmohan Singh to Nigeria which catapulted the
relationship between the countries to a new level. India
further deepened its ties with the region at not only the
bilateral level but also at a regional and institutional level.
The Minister for External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee,
during his visit to Ethiopia in July 2007, met with AU
Chairperson Prof. Alpha Oumar Konare and had wide
ranging discussions on the greater cooperation between
India and Africa and the proposal to hold an India-Africa
Summit in India in April 2008. During the visit of Prime
Minister to Nigeria, the President of ECOWAS
Commission called on him and expressed desire for further
intensifying cooperation between India and ECOWAS.

Benin
Relations with Benin continued to strengthen. Foreign
Minister of Benin, Madam Mariam Aladji Boni Diallo
visited India on 9 May 2007. Government of India gifted
medicines worth 50 lakhs to Benin which were highly
appreciated.

Cameroon
Relations with Cameroon continued to prosper with the
Government attaching special significance to harnessing
potential of cooperation with India. A delegation from
Cameroon Chamber of Commerce visited India from 2230 November and signed a MoU for cooperation with
CII. Cameroonian businessmen also participated in CII
Conclaves. Official level delegation from the Foreign
Ministry of Cameroon visited India in the first week of
July 2007 to explore the possibilities of cooperation in
various fields. They held discussions with officials in the
ministries of Finance, Commerce and External Affairs as
well as with several public and private sector undertakings.

Ministry of External Affairs continued its active
participation in the India- African Project Partnership
Conclaves organized by the CII as an important part of
our economic diplomacy. During 2007, CII organized four
Regional Conclaves in South Africa, Mozambique,
Uganda and Ivory Coast. The Conclaves were successful
with businesses from both regions striking significant
partnerships and considering joint initiatives in a variety
of business sectors and contributed to the promotion of
Brand India in a major way.

Central African Republic
India’s relations with Central African Republic gathered
some momentum when the senior officials from the
Ministry of Mines, Energy and Hydrocarbons of the
Central African visited India from 5-11 November 2007,

The TEAM-9 Initiative, a techno-economic cooperation
65

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

to participate in the India-Africa Conference and
Exhibition on Hydrocarbons.

Commerce of DRC visited India from 13-18 January 2008
to attend the CII Partnership Summit in New Delhi.
During the visit he had a meeting with Minister of
Commerce and Industry, Kamal Nath.

Chad
India’s relations with Chad received an impetus when a
delegation led by Youssouf Abbassalah, Minister of
Commerce, Industry and Aircraft including Djiddah
Moussa Outman, Deputy Minister of External Relations,
Republic of Chad, visited India from 26-30 November
2007. The delegation met Minister of State for External
Affairs, Minister of State for Industry and Commerce and
also held meeting with the EXIM Bank and CII.

Republic of Congo (ROC)
Emile Ouosso, Minister of Transport and Civil aviation
of the ROC visited India on 20 July 2007. During the
visit the ROC minister had a meeting with our Railway
Minister. The ROC Minister, who is the Chairman of a
group of transport ministers of 53 African Countries,
mooted a proposal for holding a summit of transport
ministers of Africa in India.

Cote d’ Ivoire
Gabon

On 15 March 2007, Ivorian President Gbagbo laid the
foundation stone of Mahatma Gandhi Technology Park
for IT and Biotechnology in Grand Bassam. The project
is being set up with assistance of Software Technology
Parks of India (STPI). Government of India has allocated
US$ 20 million Line of Credit for the project. CII organized
the regional conclave on India-Africa Project Partnership
2007 on 2-3 August 2007 in Abidjan. During the
Conclave, it was formally announced that India would
shortly inaugurate the Demonstration Centre of food
processing and other micro machines in Abidjan, being
set up by NRDC. As a gesture of friendship and solidarity,
India gifted medicines worth Rs. 2.00 crores in April 2007
to the Government of Cote d’Ivoire for treatment of toxic
waste victims.

India’s friendly relations with Gabon continued to gather
momentum during the year. Ali Bongo Ondimba, Senior
Minister for National Defence of Gabon visited India from
4-10 November 2007 along with 11 member delegation.
He held bilateral discussions with the Minister of Defence
and visited defence training centres and production
facilities.

Gambia
Gambia was extended a US$ 20 million LoC for rural
electrification by India out of the consolidated LoC worth
US$ 250 million extended by India to the ECOWAS Bank
for Investment and Development (EBID) in May 2006.
The Indian NGO, Barefoot College from Tilonia,
Rajasthan in partnership with Riders for Health, a UKbased NGO installed solar electricity panels in two villages
in Gambia. The project was officially inaugurated by the
Gambian Vice-President, Dr. Aja Isatou Njie-Saidy on 3
September 2007.

Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC)
The relations between India and the DRC continued to
be very cordial and gathered momentum with three
Ministerial level visits from DRC. Remi Henri Kuseyo
Gatange, DRC minister of Transport and Means of
Communication visited India from 13-17 August 2007.
During the visit, the DRC minister had a meeting with
our Railway Minister, held discussions with officials from
RITES and Railway Board. Salomon Banamuhere,
Baliene, DRC Minister of Energy was on a working visit
to India from 20-24 August 2007. The minister held
meetings with the Indian ministers of water resources,
new and renewable energy and power and requested
India’s assistance for the development of these sectors in
DRC. Simon Mboso Kiamputu, Minister of Industry of
DRC visited India from 3-7 September 2007.

A delegation led by Dr. Amadou Sowe, Permanent
Secretary, Department of State for Agriculture of Gambia
attended the Ministerial Conference on Avian and
Pandemic Influenza held in New Delhi from 4-6 December
2007 and had interaction with concerned authorities in
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare of the Govt. of
India and discussed mutual concerns in the field of health.

Ghana
India and Ghana maintained friendly bilateral relations
during the year. Minister of State for External Affairs,
Anand Sharma, visited Ghana from 4-7 March 2007 as
representative of Prime Minister for Golden Jubilee

Andre-Philippe Futa, Minister of National Economy and
66

Africa (South of Sahara)

Nigeria

Celebrations of Ghana’s Independence. Shirley Botchwey,
Deputy Foreign Minister of Ghana visited India from 1517 May 2007. Government of India donated medicines
worth US$ 1,53,000 for victims of severe flooding in
Northern Ghana. Ghana was also extended a US$ 30
million Line of Credit (LoC), out of the consolidated LoC
worth US$ 250 million extended by India to EBID, for
establishing a plant for production of bio-diesel, glycerine
and organic fertilizer.

Relations with Nigeria were elevated to a new level with
the visit of Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh from
14-16 October 2007, which was a landmark bilateral visit
after a gap of 45 years. During his visit, the two countries
agreed to establish a Strategic Partnership between India
and Nigeria that would cover bilateral political, economic,
trade, security, cultural, education, science and technology
and international dimensions. A comprehensive Abuja
Declaration on Strategic Partnership was issued. Prime
Minister addressed a joint session of the Nigerian National
Assembly on 15 October 2007 and spoke on India-Nigeria
and India’s Partnership with Africa in the 21st century.
During the visit the following agreements were signed:

Guinea
Relations between India and Guinea continued to be
cordial and friendly. India gifted 50 electric transformers
to Guinea worth Rs.1.76 Crores on 24 April 2007 to
improve electricity services in Conakry. Under the US$
250 million Line of Credit announced for ECOWAS,
Guinea was allocated funds for two projects (a)
rehabilitation and expansion of electricity network of US$
20 million and (b) urban transportation system
improvement of US$ 8.5 million.

MoU between Foreign Service Institute and the
Nigerian Foreign Service Academy.
MoU between Indian Council for World Affairs
(ICWA) and Nigerian Institute of International
Affairs.
Protocol for Foreign Office Consultations.

Mali

MoU on Defence Cooperation.

India’s relationship with Mali received a boost when
Minister of State for External Affairs, Anand Sharma, led
the Indian delegation at the Fourth Ministerial Meeting
of the Community of Democracies held in Bamako, Mali
from 14-17 November 2007. A 9-member delegation led
by Abu Baker Traore, Mali’s Minister of Economy and
Finance and Hamed Diane Semega, Minister of Mines,
Energy and Water, visited India in the first week of April
2007 to sign a credit line agreement between Government
of India and the Government of Mali. A concessionary
line of credit worth US$ 75 million has been extended for
electricity transmission and distribution project in Mali
and Cote d’Ivoire.

Prime Minister offered a US$ 100 million LoC to Nigeria
with a view to encourage further Indian investment in
Nigeria. Prime Minister also announced that the number
of scholarships for Nigeria under our ITEC and other
programmes would be increased from fifty to seventy five.
Defence Cooperation remained a major plank of
cooperation with exchanges of instructors, cadets in
National Defence Academy (NDA) and National
Defence College (NDC), sports teams, training of Nigerian
armed forces personnel in specialized operations and
adventure activities, donation of defence communication
equipment worth US$ 1 million and a trophy, “India Cup”
to NDA, and approval of establishment of 2 IT Labs in
Nigerian defence institutes. MoU on Defence Cooperation
signed during Prime Minister’s visit to Nigeria
institutionalized the longstanding relationship. Several
major Indian companies in the private and public sectors
are making forays into diversified sectors of Nigerian
economy. Nigeria is India’s largest trading partner and
has also emerged as the fourth largest destination for
Nigerian non-oil exports.

Mauritania
Relations between India and Mauritania continued to be
warm and friendly. Mauritanian Minister for Agriculture
and Animal Husbandry, Correra Issagha visited India in
October 2007 and met with senior officials in Ministry of
External Affairs as well as several representatives of the
business community.
Issagha Correra, Minister of Agriculture and Animal
Husbandry of Mauritania attended the Ministerial
Conference on Avian and Pandemic Influenza held in New
Delhi from 4-6 December 2007.

Senegal
India’s relations with Senegal continued to witness
significant improvement during the year. On 10 May 2007,
67

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

three hundred double cabin pickups, fifty single cabin
pickups and fifty TATA Safaris valued at US$ 5.3 million
were handed over to the President of Senegal, Abdoulaye
Wade as part of US$ 11 million line of credit offered by
the Government of India under the rubric of TEAM-9.
On 25 October 2007, President Abdoulaye Wade presided
at the ceremony for handing over food processing
equipment worth US$ 5.7 million to be distributed to rural
women and young people. A new Line of Credit of US$
15 million for acquisition of three bi-directional units of
train, out of the consolidated LoC worth US$ 250 million
extended by India to EBID, was allocated to Senegal.

with the Togolese President and discussed matters relating
to bilateral issues, UNSC expansion and the Pan-African
Satellite network.

African Union
India’s interaction with the African Union (AU) showed
signs of increase during the year and two Working Group
meetings took place to work on the areas of cooperation
to be discussed at the proposed India-Africa Summit to
be held in India in 2008. The Working Groups met
alternatively in New Delhi in March 2007 and in Addis
Ababa in May 2007. Minister for External Affairs, Pranab
Mukherjee, during his visit to Ethiopia in July 2007, also
met with AU Chairperson Prof. Alpha Oumar Konare and
had wide ranging discussions on the greater cooperation
between India and Africa and the proposal to hold an
India-Africa Summit in India in 2008.

M.A.A. Fatmi, Minister of State for Human Resource
Development led a 6-member delegation from 10-13
December 2007 to attend the 7th Meeting of High Level
Group on Education for All in Dakar and held discussions
with his Senegalese counterpart in the framework of the
development of bilateral relations. Madicke Niang,
Minister of Mines and Industry of Senegal visited India
from 24-26 January 2008 and held discussions with
Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Ram Vilas Paswan.

Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS)
Relations with ECOWAS received a boost when the
President of ECOWAS Commission called on our Prime
Minister during his visit to Nigeria, and expressed desire
for further intensifying cooperation between India and
ECOWAS with greater participation by India in the
ECOWAS projects. ECOWAS countries have begun to
avail of US$ 250 million line of credit for infrastructure
projects in member countries. Projects worth US$ 113.5
million, have already been approved India.

Sierra Leone
India and Sierra Leone share close and friendly relations.
India gifted packages of indelible ink in May 2007 for
conducting their presidential and parliamentary elections
held in September 2007.

Togo
During his visit to Accra from 4-7 March 2007, the
Minister of State for External Affairs, Anand Sharma, met

68

Europe

T

he member States of the European Union (EU) are
important to India individually as well as collectively.
The European Union, which has always been an economic
powerhouse, has evolved as a political entity spreading
eastwards and encompassing 27 countries. The EU Reform
Treaty was signed by the Heads of State or Government
of the 27 Member States in Lisbon on 13 December 2007.
Called the Treaty of Lisbon, it aims to provide the EU
with modern institutions and optimised working methods.
The Schengen area too grew in December 2007 by
including 9 of the 12 New Member countries; the rest
three of the New Member countries, viz., Cyprus, Bulgaria
and Romania are likely to join later. The EU is India’s
largest trading partner and bilateral trade crossed 46
billion in 2006. India and EU are also important
investment partners with significant two-way flows. India
and EU are also important investment partners with
significant two-way flows. Total FDI inflow from the EU
to India is US$ 10.86 billion (24% of total FDI inflows Aug 1991-Feb 2007). Indian investment has also been
growing steadily particularly in UK, Germany and Italy.
India’s relations with Europe have grown exponentially
from what was a trade and economic driven relationship
to one covering all areas of interaction. India’s engagement
with individual countries in Europe intensified and
diversified in fields such as energy, science and technology
and culture. India and Europe have worked for
development of common approaches to addressing new
and emerging global challenges.

7

confronted by these countries as well as by India - their
moving away from communist-era socialist planned
economies to market economies and India undergoing
liberalization. However, the relatively high rates of
economic growth in India as opposed to Europe, the
availability of skilled technologists and technicians at very
competitive costs, the huge Indian middle class market,
and niche areas of excellence including IT and
Pharmaceuticals, and the capacity of Indian companies
to invest in different sectors of the economy in their
respective countries, taken together with the prospect of
aging populations and shrinking academic and labour
force, all led to renewed interest of central and eastern
European countries in India. Trade with most of these
countries is increasing at a fast pace, moving away from
traditional commodities to engineering goods and valueadded items. Investments from India are also increasing.
The potential for high technology manufacturing in India,
cooperation in petroleum, non-conventional energy,
biotechnology and nano-technology and engineering,
together with more areas like deep-sea fishing and food
processing are raising new possibilities for collaboration
in trade and investment. Scandinavian countries are also
beginning to view the Indian stock market and financial
instruments as safe and remunerative investments for their
large investable funds, and have commenced investing in
India. The relatively high growth rates in the former East
Europe, coupled with the new possibilities arising from a
dynamic and economically vibrant India is boosting
activity between India and Europe to mutual benefit.

India’s bilateral interactions with the countries of Europe
have gathered considerable momentum during 2007.
Summit-level interactions have taken place with Italy,
Netherlands, Germany Portugal, the U.K. and France.
There has also been extensive interaction at Ministerial
and official levels besides growing exchanges of
Parliamentarians and civil society dialogues.

Austria
Dr. Ursula Plassnik, Federal Minister for EU and
International Affairs of the Republic of Austria, paid an
official visit to India from 15-18 March 2007. Austrian
Federal Minister for Science and Technology, Johannes
Hahn visited India from 28-30 November 2007. The
Agreement on Science and Technology cooperation was
signed during the visit.

India’s relations with the majority of the new entrants to
the EU and the countries of the Western Balkans has had
to be redefined in the context of the new realities
69

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

Treaty on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters,
Protocol for amending the Bilateral Investment Promotion
and Protection Agreement (BIPA), Treaty on Mutual
Legal Assistance in Civil and Commercial Matters,
Agreement on Economic Cooperation, Protocol of Intent
on promoting Cooperation in the areas of Labour
Relations, Employment and Social Security, Memorandum
of Understanding between the National Small Industries
Corporation Limited of India, and the Bulgarian Small
and Medium Enterprises Promotion Agency were signed.

The Austrian Federal Minister for Science and
Technology, Johannes Hahn visited India from 29
November-1 December 2007. The Austrian Minister met
Minister of Science and Technology, Kapil Sibal and the
two Ministers signed an Agreement on Science and
Technology on 29 November 2007. The Austrian Minister
also visited Bangalore and Agra.
The Austrian Federal Minister for Economy and Labour,
Martin Bartenstein visited India from 9-14 December
2007 to attend the Joint Economic Commission Meeting.
The Austrian Minister also held talks with Minister of
Commerce and Industry, Kamal Nath. During the visit,
he met Minister of Railways, Lalu Prasad Yadav; Minister
of New and Renewable Energy, Vilas Muttemwar; Minister
of State (Independent Charge) Labor and Employment,
Oscar Fernandes; and the Chief Minister of Delhi, Sheila
Dikshit.

The third meeting of the India-Bulgaria Forum on
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT
Forum) was held on 15 October 2007 in New Delhi. It
was agreed to further strengthen ICT cooperation between
the two countries in the priority areas of e-Governance,
Technology Park, ICT Education, Research and
Development and Info-Security. It was also decided to
set up specific groups in these areas for close interaction
and speedy implementation of future collaborative
projects.

Belgium
Relations between India and Belgium are warm and cordial
and continued to flourish during the year.

The Fifth Session of India-Bulgarian Joint Science and
Technology Committee meeting was held in New Delhi
on 12 November 2007.

India’s economic linkage with Belgium is growing –
bilateral trade has increased from around US$ 5.78 billion
during 2003-04 to US$ 7.6 billion during 2005-06. There
is a gradually growing trend of setting up of joint ventures
between companies of both sides. India received FDI to
the tune of US$152 million during the period August
1991-June 2006. In the recent past, Indian investment in
Belgium has exceeded investment by Belgian firms in
India. Several Indian companies particularly in the IT and
software sector have established base in Belgium to cater
to Belgian as well as other north European markets.
Several takeovers of Belgian firms by Indian companies
have also occurred.

Prof. Radoslav Gaidarski, Minister of Health of the
Republic of Bulgaria visited India from 2-7 December 2007
to attend the Ministerial Conference on Avian and
Pandemic Influenza held in New Delhi.

Croatia
Minister of State for External Affairs, Anand Sharma,
visited Croatia, from 18-20 September 2007. An
Agreement on Visa Exemption for Diplomatic and Official
Passport Holders was signed during the visit.

Cyprus
Civil Aviation Minsiter, Praful Patel visited Belgium in
May 2007 during which the agreement for Jet Airways
scheduled services to New York and Toronto via Brussels
Airport connecting New Delhi and Mumbai was signed.

Speaker of Lok Sabha, Somnath Chatterjee led a
Parliamentary delegation to Limassol, Cyprus from 16-21
April 2007, to attend the mid-year meeting of the
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA). The
Minister of External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee visited
Cyprus from 24-26 May 2007. During the visit, agreements
on Combating International Terrorism, Organized Crime
and Illicit Drug Trafficking; Agreement on Abolition of
Visa Requirement for Diplomatic and Official/Service
Passports, and the Cultural Exchange Programme for
2007-2010 were signed.

Finance Minister, P. Chidambaram visited Belgium on 17
September 2007.

Bulgaria
Prime Minister of Bulgaria, Sergey Stanishev paid an
official visit to India from 10-15 September 2007. During
the visit, Treaty on the Transfer of Sentenced Persons,
70

President, Pratibha Devisingh Patil, the Chief Guest President of France, Nicolas Sarkozy and the Prime Minister,
Dr. Manmohan Singh, at the ‘At Home’ function, organised by the President, in New Delhi, on 26 January 2008.

Minister of State for External Affairs, Anand Sharma meeting President of the Republic of Croatia,
Stjepan Mesic during his visit, 20 September 2007.

71

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

Czech Republic

Finnish Minister for Foreign Trade and Development,
Paavo Vayrynen visited India from 21-26 October 2007.
He was accompanied by a delegation comprising officials
and business delegation.

The Vice Chief of Army Staff (VCOAS) paid a visit to
the Czech Republic from 10-13 July 2007. The visit was
to explore the new areas of cooperation in defence
relationship.

France

Foreign Minister of the Czech Republic, Karel
Schwarzenberg visited India from 18-21 November 2007.
During the visit, a Memorandum of Cooperation between
the Foreign Service Institute and the Czech Diplomatic
Academy was signed during the visit.

India and France have enjoyed cordial and substantive
ties, with regular interaction between the leadership of
both countries. India and France have a strategic
partnership since 1998. This is a logical culmination of
our traditionally warm and friendly relations, marked by
regular high level exchanges at the Head of State/Head
of Government levels, and growing commercial exchanges
including in strategic areas such as defence, nuclear energy
and space.

Czech Republic Senate President, Premysl Sobotka paid
an official visit to India from 2-6 December 2007. During
the visit, he met Vice President of India, Lok Sabha
Speaker, and Minister of Commerce and Industry. He also
visited Hyderabad where he met Chief Minister of Andhra
Pradesh. He was accompanied by a large business
delegation and, parliamentarians. The visit focused on
economic, trade and investment issues.

The President of France, Nicolas Sarkozy held a meeting
with Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh on the sidelines
of the G-8 Summit in Germany from 7-8 June 2007.
Earlier, the Minister of External Affairs had a meeting
with the French Foreign Minister, Bernard Kouchner in
Hamburg in May 2007.

Denmark
Dr. Per Stig Moller, Minister for Foreign Affairs paid an
official visit to India from 22-24 October 2007.

The French Minister for Research and Higher Education
visited India in November 2007 and met Minister for
Human Resource Development, Arjun Singh and Minister
for Science and Technology, Kapil Sibal.

Anders Fogh Rasmussen, Prime Minister of Denmark paid
a State visit to India from 4-8 February 2008. During his
visit, he called on the President, and met the Prime
Minister, and the UPA Chairperson. During the visit,
agreement for establishment of bilateral Joint Commission,
Arrangement on Gainful Employment for spouses of
members of diplomatic missions in each other’s countries,
and MoU for cooperation in new and renewable energy
were signed.

The French Foreign Minister, Bernard Kouchner visited
India from 19-23 December 2007. India-France Strategic
Dialogue was held on 4 January 2008 for which Jean David
Levitte, Adviser to the President of France, visited India.

The fourth meeting of the Joint working Group (JWG)
on Environment with Finland was held in Helsinki from
4-5 October 2007.

Nicolas Sarkozy, President of France accompanied by a
high level Ministerial and business delegation paid a state
visit to India from 25 to 26, January 2008. This was his
first visit to India after assuming office in May 2007. He
was the Guest of Honour at the Republic Day Parade. A
Joint Statement providing a strategic roadmap not only
for our future cooperation but also for our strategic
partnership was issued after the delegation level talks. A
Joint Declaration between India and France on the fight
against global warming was also issued during the visit.
Several agreements/MoUs in the fields of defence,
consular matters, development cooperation and
neurosciences were signed during the visit.

A 9-member delegation of the Commerce Committee of
the Finnish Parliament led by Jouko Skinnari, visited India
from 27-30 September 2007.

France is ranked 5th in the list of India’s trading partners
among EU countries. Indo-French bilateral trade has been
growing over the years, however, Indo-French trade, at

Finland
The 15th Session of the India-Finland Joint Commission
meeting was held in New Delhi on 19 April 2007. Both
sides reviewed the economic situations in their respective
countries, bilateral trade relations including trade
promotion measures and bilateral cooperation in several
areas.

72

Europe

5.6 billion in 2006, is still below the potential. Foreign
Direct Investment (FDI) approved from France from 1991
to March 2007 is of the order of US$ 1.76 billion out of
which the actual inflow is of the order of US$ 900 million.
The number of technical and financial collaborations
approved with France is 915. France is the 8th largest
foreign investor in the period August 1991 to March 2007.

promotion of shared and cherished values in the global
arena. Besides, several agreements/MoUs in the fields of
science, defence and intellectual property rights were
signed.
An announcement on setting up of a CEO’s Round Table
was also made during the visit and its first meeting was
held in Mumbai.

The first Indo-French Legal Forum was held in Paris from
16-19 October 2007 at Paris. The Indian delegation was
led by the Chief Justice of India, K. G. Balakrishnan.

Germany is India’s largest trade partner in the EU, our
second most important source of technological
collaborations globally and an important investor. Bilateral
trade has been growing and crossed the figure of 10
billion in 2006 showing an increase of 39.18%, exports
from India were 4.19 billion (+23.1%) and imports were
6.36 billion (+52.5%). During the first six months of
2007, total trade increased by 15.29%; Indian exports by
12.21% to
2.39 billion and imports by 17.61% to
3.34 billion. In terms of FDI inflows, Germany is the
seventh largest investor in India with total inflows of US$
1.9 billion between 1991 -June 2007. There is also a rising
trend of Indian companies acquiring companies or opening
their subsidiaries in Germany.

France has been an important partner in the space field
for 4 decades. The last meeting of the JWG headed by
Chairman ISRO and President of the French space agency
CNES (Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales) for
cooperation in space was held in Hyderabad in September
2007. INSAT 4B was launched from Kourou in French
Guyana on 11 March 2007. The Megha-Tropiques mission
is an Indo-French joint satellite programme for study of
the tropical atmosphere between ISRO and CNES. ISRO
will build the Megha-Tropiques spacecraft, which will be
similar to the Indian Remote Sensing (IRS) satellites.
The High Level Committee on Defence (HLCD) meeting
took place from 17-18 December 2007 at Delhi. Joint
exercises, staff talks at the level of the Armed Forces and
other professional exchanges at the mid-career level have
been proceeding well. The last Garuda series of air
exercises took place in India in February 2007 and the
Varuna exercises were conducted in September 2007.

Both the leaders have now set the target of reaching the
bilateral trade to 20 billion by 2012.
The 16 th session of the bilateral Joint Economic
Commission was held on 8-19 September 2007 in Berlin.
India was also the partner country for the International
Tourism Bourse in Berlin in March 2007. An India day
was held at the Frankfurt International Motor Show in
September 2007.

The Gupta Art Exhibition was held at prestigious Grand
Palais, Paris from 2 April-9 July 2007.

In 2007, there were a series of high-level visits including
by four leading Parliamentary delegations to India: the
Finance and Foreign Affairs Committees of the Bundestag
led by their Chairmen, the CDU Parliamentary Party
Leader and the President of the German Bundestag visited
India.

Germany
The traditionally warm and friendly relations between
India and Germany have been deepened further by the
visit of the Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany,
Dr. Angela Merkel to India from 29 October-1 November
2007.

Dr. Anette Schavan, Federal Minister of Education and
Research visited India from 5-9 February 2007 to co-chair
the EU Science Minister’s Conference held on 7-8
February 2007.

Prime Minister and the Chancellor flagged off the Science
Express on 30 October 2007 which, with its 13 carriages,
would be visiting 56 cities in India. A Joint Statement on
the further development of the strategic and global
partnership between India and Germany was issued by
Prime Minister and Chancellor Merkel. This document
provides a strategic roadmap not only for our future
cooperation but also for our strategic partnership in the

Priya Ranjan Dasmunshi, Minister for Information and
Broadcasting visited Germany on 16-17 February 2007 to
sign the “Audio-Visual Co-Production Agreement” along
with German Foreign Minister Steinmeier during the
“Berlinale” film festival 2007. Ambika Soni, Minister for
73

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

students of Schools of Tourism professions to Greece, and
proposed Greek investment in our tourism industry.

Tourism and Culture, visited Berlin from 6-10 March 2007
to co-inaugurate the International Tourism Bourse 2007
along with Michael Glos, German Minister of Economics
and Technology.

Deputy Foreign Minister of Greece, Petros Doukas visited
India from 11-15 November 2007 to attend the 5th Joint
Economic Commission meeting held in New Delhi on 1213 November 2007.

Scientific and Technological Cooperation is one of the
most important elements in the Indo-German interaction.
The establishment of the Indo-German Science and
Technology Research Centre during the visit of Chancellor
Merkel would facilitate cooperation in industrial and basic
research and ensure that important scientific
breakthroughs are turned into practical applications.

Kostas Karamanlis, Prime Minister of the Hellenic
Republic paid a State visit to India from 10-13 January
2008. During his visit, he had meetings with President,
Vice-President, Prime Minister, Minister of External
Affairs, UPA Chairperson and Leader of the Opposition
in Lok Sabha.

Educational links are also increasing with India having
created five Rotating Chairs in prestigious German
Universities.

Holy See
Pope Benedict XVI announced that Oswald Garcias,
Archbishop of Mumbai would be created Cardinal. The
Consistory was celebrated on 2 November 2007 at St.
Peter’s Basilica, Vatican City.

The first meeting of the Defence Secretaries took place
on 20 April 2007 in New Delhi. This was preceded by the
meeting of the three subgroups on Strategic Defence
Cooperation; Defence Technical Cooperation; and
Military to Military Cooperation.

Hungary
The first meeting of the India-Hungary Joint Working
Group on Defence Cooperation took place in Hungary
from 25-28 April 2007.

th

The 16 meeting of the Indo-German Consultative Group
was held at Hyderabad from 2-4 November 2007.

Foreign Office Consultations with Hungary were held on
29 August 2007 in Budapest.

Greece
President of India, APJ Abdul Kalam paid a State visit to
Greece from 25-28 April 2007. The State visit came after
a gap of 21 years and helped consolidate the recent
development of India’s relations with Greece in a crosssectoral manner. Both countries sought to add greater
content to this age old and traditional relationship. During
the visit, two important agreements on Bilateral
Investment Promotion and Protection, and Science and
Technology were signed. The Indian President met with
his counterpart Dr. Karolos Papoulias. He also met with
the Prime Minister of Greece and the President of the
Parliament. The latter awarded him a Gold Medal of the
Hellenic Parliament. The Mayor of the city of Athens,
Nikitas Kaklamanlis honoured him with the Gold Medal
of Merit of the city of Athens.

Dr. Istvan Hiller, Minister Culture and Education,
Republic of Hungary visited India from 3-5 October 2007.
Ferenc Gyurcsany, Prime Minister of Hungary paid a State
visit to India from 16-19 January 2008. During his visit,
he had meetings with President, Prime Minister, UPA
Chairperson, Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha and
Minister of External Affairs, Minster of Petroleum and
Natural Gas, and Commerce and Industry Minister. The
agreements signed during the visit include an MoU on
cooperation in the Health Sector, an MoU on cooperation
in prevention of Illicit Trafficking in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances, Agreement for cooperation in
Agriculture, Plant Quarantine and Protection and Animal
Husbandry, an MoU on the Establishment of an IndiaHungary Science and Technology Fund, and an MoU on
cooperation between ONGC and MOL Hungarian Oil
and Gas Plc.

An official tourism delegation from Greece visited India
to participate in the Joint Working Group on Tourism in
New Delhi on 16 April 2007. The discussions provided
impetus to our cooperation in tourism sector including
exchanges between the tour operators, hospitality
organizations and travel media personnel, visit of 5

Iceland
P. Chidambaram, Minister of Finance, visited Iceland from
28-30 June 2007. An agreement on the Bilateral
74

British Prime Minister, Gordon Brown calling on the President, Pratibha Devisingh Patil on 21 January 2008.

Vice President of India, M. Hamid Ansari meeting with Dr. Angela Merkel,
Federal Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany in New Delhi on 30 October 2007.

75

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

Investment Protection and Promotion (BIPA) between
India and Iceland was signed during the visit.

The 6 th meeting of the India-Italy Joint Defence
Committee was held in New Delhi on 1-2 February 2007.

An MoU on Sustainable Fisheries Development with
Iceland was signed in New Delhi on 30 July 2007.

The Chief of Army Staff visited Italy in March 2007 and
the Italian Defence Minister, Arturo Parisi visited India
from 7-10 May 2007.

An MoU for cooperation in the field of Energy with
Iceland was signed in New Delhi on 9 October 2007.

The Italian Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister,
Massimo D’Alema visited India from 10-12 October 2007.

Icelandic Minister of Finance, Arni Mathiesen visited
India from 22-28 November 2007. During the visit, an
Agreement and the Protocol between the Government
of the Republic of India and the Government of Iceland
for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention
of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income was
signed.

Other visits from India to Italy include those of Minister
of Overseas Indian Affairs, Minister of State for New and
Renewable Energy, Minister of State for Industry, Minister
of State for Home Affairs.

Latvia
Minister of State for Ministry of External Affairs, Anand
Sharma paid an official visit to Latviaia from 27-29 March
2007. Special Assignments Minister for Electronic
Government Affairs of Latvia, Ina Gudele visited India
from 8-12 October 2007.

Ireland
In February 2007 Minister for Overseas Indian Affairs,
Vayalar Ravi visited Ireland to meet NRIs/PIO community
in Dublin. The long and close historical relationshop
between Ireland and India was celebrated by naming a
road in New Delhi after one of Ireland’s greatest patriots
and political leaders, Eamon de Valera on 17 March the
National Day of Ireland. Irish Minister of State for Justice,
Frank Fahey to India visited India for the naming
ceremony.

Lithuania
Minister of State for Ministry of External Affairs, Anand
Sharma paid an official visit to Lithuania on 25-26 March
2007. Lithuanian Government conveyed their intention
to open a Consulate General in New Delhi headed by a
Consul General, Algirdas Albertas Dambrauskas with
jurisdiction over the entire territory of India. At present,
Lithuania does not have resident mission in India. The
proposal has been approved and the concurrence of the
Government of India has also been conveyed to
Lithuanian government on 10 September 2007.

The Instrument of Ratification for the Cultural agreement
was signed between India and Ireland on 11 December
2007 by the Irish Ambassador and Secretary (Culture),
Government of India.

Italy
Italian Prime Minister, Dr. Romano Prodi visited India in
February 2007. He led a large business delegation and
visited Chennai, Bangalore, Calcutta, Mumbai and Delhi.
He was accompanied by three Ministers and a 400-strong
business delegation.

Luxembourg
India’s relations with Luxembourg, a major European
financial centre, continued to develop and diversify during
the year.
Luxembourg ranks 3rd in terms of portfolio investments
in India (US$ 6 billion; 15% of total portfolio
investments). It holds the top position in terms of GDRs
(Global Depository Receipts) - over 100 GDRs have been
set up by Indian companies and listed on Luxembourg
Stock Exchange.

Two MoUs on setting up a Joint Working Group on
Combating International Terrorism and Transnational
Crime and on Renewable Energy Cooperation were signed.
The Cultural Exchange Programme 2007-09 was also
signed. A large number of commercial contracts between
Indian and Italian companies were also signed during the
visit. The Joint Statement issued at the end of the visit
affirms the commitment of both sides to work towards
the establishment of a strategic partnership. A Joint
Working Group on counter-terrorism was also set up.

M/s Paul Wurth, a well known Luxembourgish iron and
steel company won Steel Authority of India’s 100 million
( Rs 580 Crores ) contract for upgrading the blast furnace
of SAIL’s steel plant at Bokaro.
76

Europe

Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of
Luxembourg, Asselborn visited India in February 2007.
The Treasury and Justice Minister, Luc Frieden visited
India in the third week of January 2007. Minister for
Economy and Foreign Trade, Jeannot Krecké visited India
in April 2007.

A Dutch trade mission headed by the Minister for Foreign
Trade Frank Heemskerk visited India from 25-30
November 2007. It was the largest ever foreign trade
mission by the Netherlands to any country and more than
75 Small and Medium Enterprises and Vice-Mayors of
five major cities were part of the trade mission.

Macedonia

Norway

The first round of Foreign Office Consultations between
India and Macedonia was held in Skopje on 17 July 2007.

A 16-member Norwegian Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Education, Research and Church Affairs
headed by Eriksen Søreide, Ine Marie, Chairperson visited
India from 23 February- 3 March 2007. A 12-member
Norwegian Parliamentary Standing Committee on Family
and Cultural Affairs headed by May-Helen Molvaer
Grimstad, Chairperson visited India from 2-8 March 2007.
Storting (Norwegian Parliament) President T. Jagland paid
an official visit to India from 11-17 March 2007 at the
invitation of the Speaker of Lok Sabha. Norwegian
Finance Minister, Kristin Halvorsen paid an official visit
to India from 29-31 March 2007, and Norwegian Minister
of Local Government and Regional Development,
Magnhild Meltveit Kleppa visited India from 29-31
October 2007.

Netherlands
The bilateral relations have strengthened and intensified
over the year. The high-level visits from the Netherlands
have imparted further momentum to the relationship.
Bilateral trade between India and the Netherlands is on
the increase in the past few years. Total trade which stood
at US$1.8 billion during 2003-04 rose to 3.04 billion in
2006. The balance of trade has been in India’s favour for
the past several years, in 2006 to the tune of 769 million.
Cumulative Dutch investment into India is of the order
of US$ 2.6 billion (August 1991-March 2007) making
Netherlands the fourth largest investor in India.

The first meeting of the India-Norway Joint Working
Group (JWG) on Science and Technology was held in
New Delhi on 14 June 2007. The first session of the IndoNorwegian Joint Working Group (JWG) on Environment
was held in Oslo from 1-2 October 2007. The main issues
which were discussed include Climate Change including
CDM and adaptation strategies, International
Environmental issues in relation to Sustainable
Development and UNEP, Biological Diversity, and
Sustainable Consumption and production.

Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands, accompanied by the
Crown Prince Willem-Alexander and Princess Maxima,
Foreign Minister Maxime Verhagen and Minister of
Economic Affairs, M. J. A. van der Hoeven as well as a
business delegation comprising CEOs of eight top Dutch
multinationals visited India in October 2007. It was of
special significance as the second State visit to a single
country by Queen Beatrix. Economic relations were the
focus of the visit. Two MoUs – one on cultural cooperation
and the other between Indian Council for Cultural
Relations (ICCR) and Stichting Amsterdam India Festival
(AIF) – were signed during the visit.

Minister of Finance, P. Chidambaram visited Norway from
23-25 October 2007.

Poland

Mechanism of Foreign Office Consultation (FOC) is
working to the satisfaction of both sides. The last round
of FOC was held at New Delhi in September 2007.

Polish Minister of Labour and Social Welfare, Anna Kalata
paid a three-day visit to India from 13-15 June 2007 at
the invitation of Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs. The
discussion focused on availability of Indian workers to
Poland in sectors such as construction and agriculture as
there is a shortage of skilled workers in these sectors in
Poland. Cabinet has approved in a meeting held on 11
October 2007 an MoU for bilateral cooperation in the
field of Health and Medicine between the Republic of
India and Republic of Poland.

Regular consular consultations on improving the visa and
consular issues between the two countries are working
well. Discussions on a bilateral Social Security Agreement
are at an advanced stage.
Chairperson of UPA, Sonia Gandhi visited the
Netherlands from 8-10 June 2007 where she delivered a
lecture at the Nexus Institute.
77

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

Foreign Office Consultations with Poland were held on
31 August 2007 in Warsaw.

30 November-1 December 2007 in connection with the
8 th India-EU Summit being held in India under the
Portuguese Presidency of the EU and held bilateral talks
with the Prime Minister. A MoU on cooperation in the
field of Football and on Chamber of Commerce level
cooperation between FICCI and AICEP (Portugal GlobalBusiness Development Agency) was signed.

Minister of State for Environment and Forests, S.
Raghupathy accompanied by two official delegates
attended the Fifth Ministerial Conference on the
Protection of Forests in Europe-‘Forests for Quality of Life’
held from 5-7 November 2007 in Warsaw.

Republic of Serbia

Indo-Polish Joint Working Group (JWG) for Defence
cooperation was held in Warsaw on 10-12 December 2007.
K.P. Singh, Secretary (Defence Production) headed the
Indian delegation. From Polish side, Piotr Czerwinski,
Secretary of State for Armament and Modernization,
Ministry of Defence. The issues discussed included
upgradation of technology in defence productions, offer
of Ph. D programmes in Defence Studies, and defencerelated training programmes.

Minister of State for External Affairs, Anand Sharma paid
an official visit to Serbia from 16-18 September 2007.
During the visit, the Minister met with Serbian President,
Boris Tadic, Serbian Prime Minister, Vojislav Kostunica,
Foreign Minister, Vuk Jeremic, Parliament Speaker and
other senior dignitaries. During the visit, agreements on
visa exemption for Diplomatic and Official passport and
MoU for cooperation between the Foreign Service
Institute of India and its counterpart in Serbia were signed.

Portugal
On the issue of Kosovo, our Minister conveyed India’s
position that the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
international borders should be fully respected and that
the issue should be resolved by peaceful means through
consultation and dialogue with the concerned parties,
without resorting to confrontation or military action,
unilateral or otherwise, as well as without any artificial
deadlines.

Portuguese President Anibal Cavaco Silva visited India
from 10-17 January 2007 on a week-long official visit to
boost political and economic cooperation. He headed a
delegation comprising of Foreign Minister Luis Amado,
Economy Minister Manuel Pinho and the Culture Minister
Isabel Pires de Lima as well as 60-member business
delegation. An Extradition Treaty as well as a Cultural
Exchange Programme and an Educational Exchange
Programme were signed during the visit.

Slovakia

Minister for Overseas Indian Affairs, Vayalar Ravi, visited
Portugal from 1-3 February 2007.

Minister of State for External Affairs, Anand Sharma paid
an official visit to the Slovak Republic from 22-24 March
2007 where he met Jan Kubis, the Slovak Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Lubomir Jahnatek, Minister of Economy,
Frantisek Kasicky, Minister of Defence and Diana
Strofova, State Secretary of Foreign Affairs. During these
discussions, Slovakia reiterated its support for the Indian
candidature for the permanent membership of the UNSC
and agreed to strengthen bilateral relations in trade and
investment, defence, culture and other areas. It was also
agreed to setup a joint working group for cooperation in
defence.

The Second meeting of the Indo-Portugal Joint
Commission on Science and Technology was held in New
Delhi from 19-25 March 2007 when the Programme of
Cooperation for 2007-09 was approved.
Minister of State for External Affairs, Anand Sharma
visited Lisbon on an official visit from 10-12 June 2007.
During his visit he called on President Cavaco Silva and
held meetings with Luis Amado, the Portuguese Minister
of Foreign Affairs and Dr. Joao Cravinho, Secretary of
State for Foreign Affairs.

Slovenia

Minister of State (Independent Charge) for Labour and
Employment, Oscar Fernandes led a 6-member delegation
to Portugal to attend the 2 nd EU-India Seminar on
Employment and Social Policy from 15-18 September
2007.

Foreign Office Consultations with Slovenia were held on
28 August 2007 in Ljubljana.

Spain
Spanish Minister for Industry, Tourism and Commerce,
Joan Clos visited India from 12-14 December 2007 and

Portuguese Prime Minister Jose Socrates visited India from
78

Europe

Industry, Kamal Nath. A Memorandum of Understanding
(MoU) between the Ministry of Commerce and Industry
of India and the Federal Department of Economic Affairs
of Switzerland on intellectual Property was signed on the
occasion.

met Industries Minister of Maharashtra in Bombay and
also visited Mazagon Dock Ltd., where Spanish company
Navantia is building, along with French MDL, six
Scorpene submarines for Indian army.
An 8-member Spanish Parliamentary delegation led by
Javier Rojo, President of the Senate visited Indian from
23 January-4 March 2007.

President of the Swiss Confederation, Micheline CalmyRey paid a State visit to India from 5-8 November 2007.
During the visit, she held discussions with the President,
Pratibha Devisingh Patil, the Vice President, Mohammad
Hamid Ansari, the Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh,
the Minister of External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee. She
also met with the Chairperson of UPA, Sonia Gandhi and
the Leader of Opposition, L.K. Advani. The visit which
took place during the 60th anniversary of the signing of
the India-Swiss Treaty of Friendship, will help enhance
our bilateral political, economic, science and technology
and cultural ties.

The treaty on “Mutual Legal Assistance on Criminal
matters” between India and Spain has entered into effect
from 31 March 2007. This treaty was first initialled in
2002 and was finalized during Spanish Prime Minister
Zapatero’s visit to India in July 2006.
Minister for Science and Technology, Kapil Sibal visited
Spain on 12 June 2007 and signed a MoU of cooperation
between India and Spain in the field of Science and
Technology with his Spanish counterparts.

Foreign Office Consultations with Switzerland were held
on 31 January 2008.

Sweden
Carl Bildt, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Sweden visited
India from 1-7 May 2007. During the visit, he held
discussions with the Prime Minister, the Minister of
External Affairs, the Defence Minister, the Minister for
IT and Communications, and the National Security
Advisor.

Turkey
Turkish Foreign Minister, Ali Babcan paid an official visit
to India from 5-10 February 2008. During the visit, an
Agreement between India and Turkey concerning the
mutual abolition of visas for holders of Diplomatic Passport
was signed.

Minister of State for Environment and Forests, Namo
Narayan Meena visited Sweden from 11-14 June 2007 to
take part in the Informal Ministerial Dialogue on Climate
Change.

United Kingdom
India and the UK share a strategic relationship. Fourth
India-UK Annual Summit was held in Delhi on January
21, 2008 for which Prime Minister Gordon Brown visited
India. He was accompanied by a high powered business
delegation. A Joint Statement was issued at the end of
the visit and an agreement in the field of education was
signed. Focal areas of cooperation identified were
Education, Science &Technology, Environment and
approaches to multilateral problems. Delhi University
conferred an Honorary Doctorate on Prime Minister
Gordon Brown during the visit.

Swedish Foreign Trade Minister, Sten Tolgfors paid an
official visit to India from 1-5 September 2007. Delegation
level talks were held on 3 September 2007.
Two 12-member Standing Committees on Labour and
Finance from the Swedish Parliament visited India from
2-9 January 2008. They met the Chairman and members
of the Committees on Commerce and Trade and members
of the Committee on Labour of the Lok Sabha during the
visit. The Swedish Parliamentarians also visited Pune and
Mumbai.

There are increasing economic linkages and close political
ties. The large Indian diaspora in the UK (around 1.5
million) is another important link. The UK is our 4th largest
global trading partner and the second largest in the EU,
with annual two-way trade in 2006 at around 8.5 billion.
With a figure of £ 3.4 billion, the UK continues to be the
largest cumulative investor in India and the 3rd largest

Switzerland
Doris Leuthard, Swiss Federal Councillor for Economic
Affairs visited India from 6-8 August 2007. Delegation
level talks were held on 6 August 2007. The Indian
delegation was led by the Minister of Commerce and
79

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

post-1991, with US$ 3.6 billion (8.5 % of total FDI inflows)
(August 1991- January 2007). Since 2004, Indian
investment in the UK has exceeded British investment
into India.

India is US$ 10.86 billion (24% of total FDI inflows August 1991-February 2007). India has also begun to
invest in the EU in recent years. Indian investment has
also been growing steadily in UK, Germany and Italy.

India-UK Foreign Office Consultations were held in
London in May 2007 and in New Delhi in September
2007.

The Eighth India-EU annual Summit took place on 30
November 2007 in New Delhi. The EU side was
represented by José Sócrates, Prime Minister of Portugal,
in his capacity as President of the European Council and
Jose Manuel Barosso, President of the European
Commission. Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh led
the Indian side. The two sides discussed the various issues
of mutual interest, thereby, further strengthening the
strategic relationship launched at the fifth India-EU
Summit at The Hague in 2004. The 6th Summit at New
Delhi in 2005 saw the adoption of an ambitious and
comprehensive India-EU Joint Action Plan (JAP). A Joint
Statement and Joint Action Plan Implementation Report
were issued at the Summit. The summit was preceded by
an India-EU Business Summit and a CEO Round Table
on 29 November 2007. An Agreement for Scientific and
Technological Cooperation was renewed and a MoU on
Multi-Annual Indicative Programme 2007-2010 in
development cooperation was signed between the two
sides during the summit.

The JETCO (Joint Economic and Trade Committee), set
up in 2005, held its 3rd meeting in January 2007 has set up
8 working groups in specific areas for special attention.
These include working groups on: Hi-tech, IPR,
Accountancy, Legal Services, Infrastructure, Agribusiness
and Healthcare. The last JETCO meeting was held in
London in December 2007.
The Indo-British Partnership Network (IBPN) has been
formed with official British financial backing.
The Indo-British Economic and Financial Dialogue was
launched during the visit of Chancellor Gordon Brown
to India in January 2007.
The 10th meeting of the India-UK Round Table was held
in Ditchley, UK, from 11-13 April 2007. It was co-chaired
by Nitin Desai and Chris Patten. The Round Table made
recommendations in such areas as healthcare, education,
research, financial services, bilateral business and
investment, a rethink on global issues as well as studies
on the wider horizons of the relationship.

Parliamentary exchanges are growing. On the invitation
of the European Parliament’s President, the President of
India, APJ Abdul Kalam visited Strasbourg, France on
24-25 April 2007 and addressed the European Parliament.
This was the first ever visit and address by an Indian
President to the European Parliament. The President
spoke on the ‘Dynamics of Unity of Nations’. During the
visit he also addressed the International Space University
at Strasbourg on ‘Creative Leadership for Future
Challenges of Space’.

The MoU on Return of Illegal Immigrants, signed in
January 2004, was renewed for another period of one year
in 2007.

European Union (EU)
The member states of the EU are important to India
individually as well as collectively. The European Union,
a strong economic player, is an evolving political entity,
expanding eastwards geographically and in the process of
evolving a common foreign and security policy. The EU
is an important trade, technology and investment partner
for India and is also home to a large Indian diaspora. The
EU is India’s largest trading partner (1/5th of India’s total
external trade). Bilateral trade has steadily grown between
2001 and 2006 at over 10% on average and crossed 46
billion in 2006 (Indian exports
22.3 billion; Indian
imports 24 billion). India and the EU are also important
investment partners. Total FDI inflow from the EU to

The European Parliament created a new Delegation for
Relations with India in March 2007. Ms Neena Gill,
Chairperson of the Delegation, visited India in August
2007.
The EU was associated with SAARC as an Observer State
and attended the 14th SAARC Summit held in New Delhi
from 1-4 April 2007.
Minister of External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee,
participated for the first time in the ASEM Foreign
Ministers’ Meeting in Hamburg, Germany in May
2007.
80

Europe

Science and Technology (S&T) Departments, and from
leading scientists from both India and the EU. It allowed
for an active discussion on key co-operation priorities,
and on the potential benefits of a Coordinated Joint Call
for proposals with co-investment of resources, including
funds for sponsoring India-EU research projects and means
to deepen EU-India S&T collaboration under the IndiaEU S&T Co-operation Agreement and the seventh
Framework Programme. The outcome was the ‘New Delhi
Communiqué’, which outlined the future of India-EU cooperation in Research and Development.

The EU-India ministerial Troika meeting on 31 May 2007
in Berlin was an opportunity to take stock of recent
progress in the implementation of the Strategic
Partnership and to discuss how to further intensify it.
The eleventh meeting of India-EU Civil Society Round
Table was held in September 2007 in New Delhi. It was
co-Chaired by N.N.Vohra and Dimitris Dimitriadis. The
members discussed issues of social development, trade and
investment, and renewable energy. The India-EU Civil
Society Internet Forum was launched on 1 May 2007, by
Anand Sharma, India’s Minister of State for External
Affairs (www.india-eu.org).

Energy is an important area of ongoing and future policy
dialogue and practical co-operation between India and
the EU. India-EU Energy Panel and its working groups,
had its third meeting on 20 June 2007 in Brussels. All
four working groups met in the first half of 2007 before
the meeting of Energy Panel. It was agreed to expand the
scope of work of the working group on Coal with alternate
meetings adopting different emphasis on mining oriented
and conversion technologies respectively. The two sides
stand ready to identify a new flagship project on R&D in
solar energy. India is also a participant in the International
Biofuels Forum, which met twice so far: in July 2007 in
Brussels and in October 2007 in New Delhi.

There is a regular mechanism of Senior Officials Meetings
between India and the EU. The 14th meeting was held in
New Delhi on 15 October 2007. The 13th meeting was
held in Berlin on 2 May 2007.
Negotiations for an India-EU broad based Trade and
Investment Agreement were opened in Brussels on 2829 June 2007. A second round of negotiations took place
in New Delhi during the first week of October 2007. The
third round of negotiations took place in Brussels from 612 December 2007. During the India EU Summit held on
30 November 2007, the two sides agreed to work towards
early conclusion of the negotiations during 2008.

Various meetings of Joint Working Groups envisaged
under the Joint Action Plan were held during the course
of year.

The first EU-India Ministerial Science Conference took
place in New Delhi in February 2007. The meeting had a
strong representation from EU Member States, from

81

8

The Americas

United States of America

disruption of supply over the lifetime of India’s reactors.
It contains a full reflection of the 2 March 2006 supply
assurances, its linkage to safeguards in perpetuity and the
provision for corrective measures that India may take to
ensure uninterrupted operation of its civilian nuclear
reactors in the event of disruption of foreign fuel supplies.

T

he India-US bilateral engagement has broadened
with a number of initiatives announced during the
visits of Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh to
Washington DC in July 2005 and President Bush to New
Delhi in March 2006. As a result, India and US interaction
today encompasses strategic and security issues, defence,
counter-terrorism, science and technology, health, trade,
space, energy, maritime cooperation, and environment.
Frequent contacts at political as well as at official levels
and the regular bilateral dialogue on a wide range of issues
have contributed to the qualitative transformation in
bilateral cooperation in areas of common interest.

India is engaged in negotiation of an India specific
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards
agreement. The United States will work with Nuclear
Suppliers Group (NSG) for an adjustment of NSG
guidelines to enable its members to enter into civil nuclear
cooperation and trade with India.
Counter-Terrorism
The 9th meeting of India-US Joint Working Group on
Counter-terrorism was held in Washington from 29-30
November 2007 to discuss bilateral cooperation in
combating terrorism.

Civil Nuclear Energy
On 20 July 2007 after five rounds of negotiations, India
and the US agreed on the text of a bilateral cooperation
Agreement to implement the understandings of July 2005
and March 2006. The 123 Agreement meets the basic
objectives of safeguarding autonomy of our strategic
nuclear programme and indigenous three-stage nuclear
power programme and indigenous nuclear research and
development. It meets all the assurances to Parliament
given by Prime Minister on 17 August 2006. It provides
for full civilian nuclear co-operation between India and
the US covering nuclear reactors and aspects of the
associated nuclear fuel cycle including enrichment and
reprocessing.

Defence
Under the India-US Defence Policy Group, which is the
apex institutional dialogue mechanism for defence
cooperation the Joint Technology Group (JTG) held its
9th meeting on 10 April 2007 in Washington, the Defence
Procurement and Production Group (DPPG) held its 4th
meeting on 30-31 May 2007 in Hawaii, the Senior
Technology Security Group held its 4th meeting in New
Delhi on 26 November 2007 and the 8th meeting of
Military Cooperation Group (MCG) met in Hawaii on
11-13 December 2007. India-U.S. Defence Joint Working
Group (DJWG) held two meetings- first in April 2007 in
New Delhi and second in November 2007 in Washington.
In the first ship acquisition by India from the US, USS
Trenton was handed over to Indian Navy on 17 January
2007. It has been commissioned as INS Jalashwa. The
defence forces of the two countries engaged in bilateral
exercises and participated in multilateral exercises. US
companies participated at the Aero India show held in
Bangalore from 9-13 February 2007. India-US joint
military exercises were held in Alaska from 8-26
September 2007.

The Agreement explicitly provides that it will not affect
the un-safeguarded facilities of either Party and that it
shall be implemented in a manner so as not to hinder or
otherwise interfere with any military nuclear facilities or
nuclear material produced, acquired or developed by us
independent of this agreement. It accords consent to
reprocess spent fuel deriving from processed US fuel. The
agreement provides for the negotiation of arrangements
and procedures for this within one year.
The Agreement provides for the development of a
strategic reserve of nuclear fuel to guard against any
82

The Americas

and Economic Forum meeting in New Delhi. The
objective of Secretary Paulson’s visit was to explore
opportunities for US companies to invest in roads, ports,
airports and other infrastructure projects in India.

Space
The second meeting of India-U.S. Joint Working Group
(JWG) on civil space cooperation was held in February
2007 in Washington D.C. In-depth discussions were held
covering broad topics like Space Science, Earth
Observations and Earth Science, Data Policy, Landsat
Data Continuity Mission, Export Control etc. The JWG
adopted the Joint Statement on U.S.-India Cooperation
in the Use of GPS and Space-based Positioning,
Navigation and Timing Systems and Applications.

A meeting of the India-US CEO Forum was held in New
York on 24 September 2007 co-chaired by Ratan Tata
and William Harrison; it was preceded by a governmentto-government Economic Dialogue meeting.
The 5th Meeting of High Technology Cooperation Group
(HTCG), co-chaired by the Foreign Secretary was held
in Washington DC in February 2007. A Working Group
on Nanotechnology and a sub-group to discuss Medical
Devices and Pharmaceutical issues were established.

Trade and Economy
USA continues to be India’s largest trading partner and a
leading foreign investor. During 2006, the total bilateral
trade in merchandise and commodities stood at US$ 31.91
billion as compared to US$ 26.76 billion in 2005, an
increase of 17%. The total bilateral trade in merchandise
and commodities during the first nine months of 2007
stood at US$ 29.64 billion. The U.S. continues to be one
of the largest foreign direct investors in India. The
cumulative FDI flows from USA from August 1991 to
July 2007 stood at US$ 6215 million. FDI inflows from
the U.S. constitute about 12% of total actual FDI inflows
into India. The U.S. is the leading portfolio investor in
India. During 2006-07, portfolio investments by USA were
US$ 2240 million. The U.S. is also the most important
destination of Indian investment abroad. Between 1996
and March 2007, Indian companies invested US$ 2727
million in the U.S. largely in manufacturing and nonfinancial services.

India and the US signed in June 2007 a Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU) to establish the India-US Aviation
Cooperation Programme (ACP), a public-private
partnership between Ministry of Civil Aviation of India
and US Trade Development Agency (USTDA) and
Federal Aviation Agency (FAA). A Memorandum of
Cooperation (MoC) was signed between Ministry of Urban
Development of India and US Department of
Transportation in September 2007 to expand cooperation
in the fields of public transportation.
The third meeting of US-India Joint working Group
(JWG) on Information and Communication Technology
(ICT) was held in July 2007 in Washington DC.
Under the bilateral Knowledge Initiative on Agriculture
(AKI), a work plan to focus on four areas of cooperation
- university capacity building, food processing and
marketing, biotechnology and water management - has
been finalized and is being implemented. The 5th meeting
of the Board constituted under the AKI met Washington
DC in June 2007 to review the implementation of the
February 2006 Work Plan.

On her first visit to India as US Trade Representative
(USTR), Susan Schwab co-chaired the India-US Trade
Policy Forum Meeting with Commerce and Industry
Minister Kamal Nath in April 2007. It was decided to set
up a Private Sector Advisory Group (PSAG) to provide
strategic recommendations and insights for enhancing
bilateral trade and fostering investment. The forum had
its inaugural meeting in September 2007 in New York.
India and USA signed a Letter of Intent (LOI) in January
2007 to promote reciprocal trade and opportunities for
strategic linkages between small business of the US and
small and medium enterprises of India. Commerce and
Industry Minister Kamal Nath visited Washington DC in
June 2007 to participate in the “Global India Summit”.
The US Treasury Secretary, Henry Paulson Jr. visited India
on 27-31 October 2007. Secretary Paulson and Finance
Minister, P. Chidambaram co-chaired India-US Financial

Energy and Environment
The US Energy Secretary Bodman visited India in March
2007. The Coal Working Group under the India-U.S.
Energy Dialogue met in June 2007 at Washington DC.
External Affairs Minister, Pranab Mukherjee led the
delegation to the Major Economies Meeting on Energy
Security and Climate Change convened by the US
President George W. Bush which was held on 27
September 2007.
83

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

September). B.S. Hooda, Chief Minister of Haryana,
visited Canada from 16-18 October 2007.

Science and Technology and Health
India-US Science and Technology cooperation has been
further strengthened during the year. Agreements for
Science and Technology Cooperation have been
concluded with the State of Iowa, Purdue University and
the Ohio State University. The cooperation on Nuclear
Safety, Reactor Design, Licensing and other regulatory
aspects was further augmented with manpower training.
For the first time, two Indian young scientists received
one year training at US Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
The Indo-U.S. Vaccine Action Program has been
extended for another 5 years. India-US Cooperation for
capacity building is developed with US Universities in
order to acquire international clinical trial standards. India
and the US are collaborating to set up 2 Schools of Public
Health in India. The teaching of basic courses on
Ayurveda was offered in several Medical Schools for the
third consecutive year by two experts nominated by the
Department of AYUSH. India-US S&T Forum and
American Physical Society initiated a new program for
supporting visits of 12 faculty and 20 students during next
two years.

Strategic Dialogue
Assistant Deputy Minister, International Security Branch
and Political Director of the Department of Foreign Affairs
and International Trade, Canada Colleen Swords visited
India from 11-15 November 2007 to hold the third round
of the India-Canada Dialogue on Strategic Issues.
Defence
A delegation of the Indian National Defence College
visited Canada from 20 -26 May 2007.
Counter-Terrorism
The 8th meeting of the India-Canada Joint Working Group
on Counter-Terrorism and the India-Canada Security
Dialogue took place in Ottawa from 20- 22 March 2007.
The Joint Working Group discussed the threat of terrorism
that two countries faced in the regional and global
contexts and agreed on a number of measures to
strengthen bilateral cooperation.
Air India Inquiry
The Justice John Major Inquiry Commission into the Air
India bombing continued its hearing during 2007. The
report is expected early 2008.

Canada
Canada has reiterated its commitment to strengthen its
political and economic relationship with India. Important
visitors from Canada to India included Monte Solberg,
Minister of Citizenship and Immigration (9 January), Ted
Menzies, Parliamentary Secretary to International Trade
Minister as Head of Infrastructure Delegation (12-16
March), Dr. David Emerson, Minister of International
Trade (18-19 April), James Judd, Director of Canadian
Security Intelligence Service (CSIS) (5-8 June), Diane
Finley, Minister of Citizenship and Immigration (2
November), and Rona Ambrose, President of the Queen’s
Privy Council for Canada and Minister of
Intergovernmental Affairs and Minister of Western
Economic Diversification (5-7 November).

Environment
Minister of State for Environment and Forests, N.N.
Meena led Indian delegation to the 19th Meeting of the
Parties to the Montreal Protocol on Substances that
Deplete the Ozone Layer in Montreal in September 2007.
On the margins of the Conference, a bilateral agreement
was signed for setting up an India-Canada Forum for
Environmental Cooperation. Canadian Deputy Minister
of Environment, Michael Horgan, visited India to
participate in the Second Ministerial Meeting of the AsiaPacific Partnership on Clean Development and Climate
on 15 October 2007 in New Delhi. Canada was admitted,
with India’s support, as the 7th member of the Asia-Pacific
Partnership on Clean Development and Climate.

Visitors from India to Canada included Subodh Kant
Sahai, MOS (Independent Charge), Ministry of Food
Processing Industries (16-19 February), Kamal Nath,
Commerce and Industry Minister (16-17 June), Kanti Lal
Bhuria, MOS for Agriculture (18-23 June), Dr. R.
Chidambaram, Principal Scientific Adviser (26-29 June),
Vayalar Ravi, Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs (25-28
September) and G.K. Pillai, Commerce Secretary (19-21

Bilateral Investment Promotion and Protection
Agreement (BIPA)
Negotiations to finalise a text for India-Canada BIPA were
concluded in 2007.
Acquisitions of Canadian Companies
Novelis Inc., originally a Canadian company (now
registered in the US), was acquired by Aditya Birla Group
84

The Americas

company Hindalco Industries Ltd. for approx. US$ 6
billion. In April 2007, Essar Global Ltd., through its wholly
owned subsidiary Essar Steel Holdings Limited “Essar”,
acquired Algoma Steel for approx. C$ 1.85 billion (US$
1.7 billion approximately).

Costa Rica, Nicaragua and El Salvador. India has
announced its intention to open a new mission in
Guatemala.
26 countries from the LAC region co-sponsored India’s
draft resolution tabled at the UN General Assembly
proposing that Mahatma Gandhi’s birthday on October
2 be observed and celebrated as the International Day of
Non-Violence.

Science and Technology
Dr. R. Chidambaram, Principal Scientific Adviser, visited
Canada from 26-29 June 2007. As a follow up of his visit,
a 3-member delegation led by Dr. S.K. Sikka, Scientific
Secretary, Office of Principal Scientific Adviser, visited
Canada from 24-29 September 2007 and signed a Letter
of Intent for India-Canada Bilateral Scientific Cooperation
in the field of Synchrotron Sciences between the
Department of Science and Technology, Government of
India, and the Canadian Light Source Inc., University of
Saskatchewan, Canada.

Highlights of bilateral interaction which took place during
this time include the following:

Antigua & Barbuda
An Indian Naval Ship INS Tarangini visited Antigua from
19-24 April 2007 on a sail training expedition in the
Atlantic Ocean. Prime Minister Baldwin Spencer
attended a reception hosted on the ship.

Biotechnology
A delegation consisting of five officials and 9
biotechnology companies visited Canada in September
2007. During the visit, an agreement was signed between
Department of Biotechnology and National Research
Council-Plant Biotechnology Institute, Saskatoon,
Canada, for setting up a joint fund for research in identified
areas of plant biotechnology.

Bolivia
Bilateral relations with Bolivia remained cordial. Jindal
Steel and Power Ltd won a US$ 2.1 billion contract for
the El Mutan iron ore project in Bolivia. The project
involves exploitation of 20 billion tons of iron-ore over a
period of forty years. The annual revenue of 400 million
dollars is to be shared 50:50 between Jindal and the
Bolivian Government. This is the largest-ever project
contract secured by an Indian company in Latin America.

Latin America & the Caribbean (LAC)
Relations between India and the countries of Latin
America continued to progress. Several high-level
incoming and outgoing visits gave impetus to ongoing
interaction with these countries. These included the visits
of President Luis Inacio Lula da Silva of Brazil in June
2007 and of President Felipe Calderon Hinojosa of Mexico
in September 2007. Foreign Ministers of Cuba, Guatemala,
El Salvador, Brazil also visited India. Visits from India to
this region included those to Cuba, Dominican Republic,
Guatemala, Colombia and Ecuador. In keeping with our
initiatives to reach out to new markets, Indian trade
missions and commercial delegations to LAC region were
facilitated. Indian business majors established operations
in the oil and gas sector in Trinidad and Tobago, Mexico,
Brazil, Colombia and Cuba, and iron ore sector in Bolivia.
Similarly companies in the IT and pharma sectors became
active in several Latin American Countries. LAC
countries are responding to these developments and new
resident missions are being opened in Delhi by Guatemala,

Brazil
The strategic partnership launched in September 2006
was further strengthened during 2007. President Lula paid
an official visit to India from 3-5 June 2007. During the
visit, seven agreements were signed. The Red Fort
Declaration of 4 June 2007 in New Delhi, reaffirmed the
bilateral resolve to deepen ties in diverse fields, including
defence, space and oil sectors and to continue cooperation
in multilateral fora such as the UN and WTO. During
the visit, a CEOs Forum was launched in New Delhi.
President Lula was conferred the Jawaharlal Nehru Award
for International Understanding on 5 June 2007.
The third India-Brazil Joint Commission Meeting was held
in New Delhi from 12-14 April 2007. It was co-Chaired
by Celso Amorim, Foreign Minister of Brazil and External
Affairs Minister from Indian side. The JCM fixed the
bilateral trade target as US$ 10 billion by 2010.
85

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

Chile

visits from both sides. The 6th Joint Commission Meeting
was held in Havana in February 2007. Cuban Foreign
Minister, Felipe Perez Roque visited India on 11-12 April
2007. Union Minister for New and Renewable Energy,
Vilas Muttemwar visited Cuba from 22- 25 May 2007.
During the visit, a MoU for pursuing cooperation in the
New and Renewable Energy sector was signed. The
Second Indian Film Festival was organized from 25-30
October 2007 in Havana.

Foreign Office consultations were held in New Delhi on
5 April 2007. The Preferential Trade Agreement (PTA)
between India and Chile, which was signed on March
2006, came into force after it was ratified by the Chilean
President on 16 August 2007. Under this Agreement,
India will give preferential duties to 178 Chilean items
and Chile will give preferential duties to 296 Indian items.
The average duty concession is 20%. Chile is the first
country in Latin America with which India has signed a
PTA. An Air Services Agreement was signed between
India and Chile in New Delhi on 29-30 August 2007.

Dominican Republic
Relations between India and Dominican Republic
strengthened with the visit of the Minister of State for
External Affairs, Anand Sharma to the Dominican
Republic in February 2007.

Colombia
Minister of State for External Affairs, Anand Sharma
visited Colombia from 19-21 June 2007. Minister of
Tourism and Culture, Ambika Soni visited Cartagena in
Colombia from 25-29 November 2007 to participate in
the 17th General Assembly of the UNWTO. India was
elected to the Executive Council of the UNWTO from
Asia along with Iran and was thereafter unanimously
elected President of the Council for the period 2008-09.
Minister of Urban Development, Jaipal Reddy, visited
Colombia from 27-31 May 2007 to study the metro-bus
system in the country. During the visit, a MoU for
Cooperation in Transportation systems was signed.
Colombian Defence Minister visited India from 25-28
November 2007and met with Indian Ministers of Defence,
External Affairs and Home. An 8-member business
delegation from the Confederation of Indian Industries
(CII) led by Sanjay Kirloskar visited Colombia from 2123 August 2007 to participate in Joint Business Forums
between Indian and Colombian businessmen in Bogota
on 22 August 2007 and in Medellin on 24 August 2007.

Ecuador
India-Ecuador relations received a boost with the visit to
Ecuador from 21-23 June 2007 of the Minister of State
for External Affairs, Anand Sharma. The Minister
announced India’s donation of generic medicines to
Ecuador.

Guyana
India provided credit line assistance to Guyana during
this period. Government of India- financed US$ 2.1
million state-of-the-art traffic lights system at 50 junctions
in and around Georgetown was formally commissioned
on 21 July 2007 by Prime Minister Samuel Hinds. A 2member Indian delegation led by Dr. D. Subbarao, Finance
Secretary attended the Commonwealth Finance Ministers
meeting held in Georgetown from 15-17 October 2007.
A 10-member Bhojpuri Songs and Dance troupe visited
Guyana from 9-18 May 2007 to participate in the monthlong 169th anniversary celebrations of the Indian Arrival
Day.

Costa Rica
On 14 June 2007 the Government of Costa Rica issued a
Gazette notification declaring India to be included in the
Group 3 list of countries on consular issues, according to
which Indian nationals are now not required to apply for
Costa Rican visas for up to 30 days stay in Costa Rica if
they have valid visas for or were residents of the US or
the European Union.

Mexico
The highlight of India-Mexico relations during 2007 was
the state visit of the Mexican President Felipe de Jesus
Calderon Hinojosa, to India on 10-11 September 2007.
The visit took place after 22 years. It was Calderon’s first
visit to Asia as the new President of Mexico and India
was chosen as the first destination in this region. IndiaMexico relations were elevated to ‘Privileged Partnership’.
Three agreements on Avoidance of Double Taxation,
Mutual Legal Assistance and Extradition Treaty were

Cuba
India’s relations with Cuba gained a new momentum in
2007 with a series of activities and exchange of high level
86

Prime Minister, Dr Manmohan Singh meeting with the President of Brazil,
Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, in New Delhi on 4 June 2007.

President of Mexico, Felipe Calderon Hinojosa with the President, Pratibha Patil and the Prime Minister,
Dr. Manmohan Singh at a ceremonial reception, in New Delhi on 10 September 2007.

87

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

Trinidad & Tobago

signed. The two sides, while noting that their economic
cooperation is not commensurate with the strength of
their relations, agreed to expand bilateral trade to US$ 5
billion by 2010.

The Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs, Vayalar Ravi
visited Trinidad & Tobago from 29 May-1 June 2007 to
participate in the celebrations of the 162nd anniversary of
the Indian Arrival Day. Bank of Baroda opened its branch
in Port of Spain on 17 October 2007.

Peru
Bilateral relations continued to grow. Peru welcomed
initiatives by Indian companies to invest in the
hydrocarbons sector. Government of India made a cash
donation of US$ 500,000 as humanitarian assistance in
the wake of the havoc wrought by the 15 th August
earthquake which affected the southern part of Peru. CII
and CHEMEXCIL business delegations visited Peru during
this period

India-Central America
Minister of External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee, met the
foreign Ministers of the Central American Integration
System (SICA) in New York on the sidelines of UNGA.
The SICA Foreign Ministers accepted an invitation from
the Minister of External Affairs to visit India in 2008 for
the next India-SICA meeting. While El Salvador and
Costa Rica, Nicaragua announced plans to open
embassies, Honduras declared its plan to open an
Honorary Consulate in New Delhi in 2008. It has been
agreed to set up three IT Centres in Honduras, Nicaragua
and El Salvador under Indian assistance. Following
bilateral consultations, El Salvador, Honduras and
Nicaragua relaxed their visa regimes for Indian nationals.

Suriname
The Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs, Vayalar Ravi
visited Suriname from 2-5 June 2007 to participate in the
celebrations of the 134th Anniversary of Indian Arrival
Day. From Suriname, the Minister of Defence and the
Minister of Home Affairs, visited India during the year.

88

United Nations and
International Organizations

I

ndia continued to play an important and effective role
within the United Nations (UN) system. An important
area of interest for India in 2007 remained the
implementation of the reform of the Organization. This
includes reform of the Security Council, revitalization of
the General Assembly, reform of the Economic and Social
Council (ECOSOC) and the recovery of the central role
of the UN with regard to international development issues,
efforts to conclude and adopt a Comprehensive
Convention on International Terrorism, implementation
of a global counter terrorism strategy, better management
of the post-conflict peace building processes, the provision
of effective emergency relief for natural disasters, and for
an equitable management of international human rights
issues. Within the Organization, reform includes efforts
to bring to the UN improved management and budgetary
practices.

9

architecture as a key ingredient to achievement of the
internationally agreed development goals; the overarching
principle of special and differential treatment for
developing countries as a categorical imperative for an
early and substantive progress at the Doha round of trade
negotiations. He also announced a further pledge of US
$10 million by India to the UN Democracy Fund. On
reform of the United Nations, External Affairs Minister
observed that such reform will inevitably remain
incomplete without comprehensive reform and expansion
of the Security Council, and revitalization of the General
Assembly. He, inter alia, reiterated the need for UN
Security Council reform in both permanent and nonpermanent categories of membership.
During his visit, External Affairs Minister hosted the
Ministerial meeting of the South Asian Association for
Regional Cooperation (SAARC) and participated in the
Ministerial meetings of the Non-Aligned Movement,
Asian Cooperation Dialogue, India-Brazil-South Africa
initiative, the Outreach 5, Brazil-Russia-India-China
(BRIC) and the Central American Integration Initiative.
Apart from these meetings, the Minister called on
President of Sri Lanka, President of the Palestine National
Authority and the Prime Minister of Mauritius. He also
held bilateral meetings with several Foreign Ministers or
equivalents and also with the President of the 62nd General
Assembly, the Secretary-General of the UN, EU High
Representative for the Common Security and Foreign
Policy and the NATO Secretary-General.

A major development was the adoption on 15 June 2007
by the 61st Session of the UN General Assembly of a
resolution piloted by India that designated Mahatma
Gandhi’s Birthday, 2 October as the International Day of
Non-Violence. This resolution was co-sponsored by 142
countries, and was the basis upon which the International
Day of Non-Violence was commemorated for the first time
at an informal plenary of the UN General Assembly
(UNGA) held on 2 October 2007 during the 62nd Session.

The 62 nd Session of the General
Assembly
External Affairs Minister, Pranab Mukherjee, who led the
Indian delegation to the General Debate of the 62nd
General Assembly from 23 September - 2 October 2007,
addressed the following issues in his address at the General
Debate: India’s position on the issue of Climate Change,
and the need for it to be dealt within the UN context and
in accordance with the principle of common but
differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities;
poverty and underdevelopment, which remain the central
challenges of the current times; the problem of inadequate
flows of official development assistance and
comprehensive reform of the international financial

Nineteen Members of Parliament participated in the 62nd
UNGA as non-official Members of India’s Delegation and
articulated India’s perspectives on a number of important
issues.
Political, Economic and Social issues in the
General Assembly:
India made statements in the UNGA plenary on agenda
items relating to the Report of the Secretary General on
the Work of the Organization, revitalization of the General
Assembly, peacekeeping, migration and development
89

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

India is among the longest serving and the largest troop
contributors to UN’s peacekeeping activities. More than
100,000 Indian troops, Military Observers and Civilian
Police Officers have participated in 43 out of the 63
peacekeeping operations established since the inception
of the UN. India remains the third largest contributor of
troops to UN peacekeeping missions, with deployment of
9357 personnel (including 493 police officials) to 11 out
of the 17 ongoing UN peacekeeping missions as of end
December 2007, in areas as diverse as the Democratic
Republic of Congo, Sudan, the Ethiopia-Eritrea border,
Lebanon Golan Heights and Liberia where India has
contributed the UN’s first fully Female Formed Police
Unit.

issues, reviewing the mandate of several United Nations
missions, peace-building and social and humanitarian
issues. India also intervened on issues relating to the
International Atomic Energy Agency’s (IAEA) annual
report, and on political issues such as the Middle East,
the situation in Afghanistan, Oceans and the Law of the
Sea and the reform and expansion of the Security Council.
Middle East: India has remained engaged in the UN’s
consideration of the Middle East issue in the UN General
Assembly, and where feasible, at the Security Council.
India’s views on the need for a return to the process of
dialogue, and for an early end to the cycle of violence
and counter-violence has been underlined repeatedly at
various fora. Minister of State for External Affairs E.
Ahamed made a statement on agenda item: 17 and 18
‘The Situation in the Middle East’ and ‘Question of
Palestine’ at the 62nd Session of UNGA on 30 November
2007. Statements were also made by the Indian delegation
during consideration of issues relating to the Middle East
in the Fourth Committee.

The Security Council
India intervened in discussions in the UN Security Council
only on specific issues of concern, such as on the situation
in Afghanistan, and during thematic debates of the
Security Council on Climate Change and Security, and
on Natural Resources and Security.

Afghanistan: India has been closely involved in
consideration of this issue in both the General Assembly
and the Security Council. India participated in negotiating
the annual General Assembly resolution on Afghanistan
on 5 November 2007 and in regular discussions in the
Security Council. External Affairs Minister participated
in a high-level event co-hosted by the UN SecretaryGeneral (UNSG) and President Hamid Karzai of
Afghanistan, on the margins of the General Debate of
the 62nd UN General Assembly, on 23 September 2007.

United Nations Security Council (UNSC) reform : In
the second half of the 61st General Assembly(GA) session,
informal consultations commenced in the Open-Ended
Working Group(OEWG) on the Question of Equitable
Representation on and Increase in the Membership of the
Security Council and other Matters. A series of meetings
conducted by five facilitators appointed by the President
of the GA were held in February-March 2007 on five
elements: size; categories; regional representation; veto
and working methods; and the relationship between the
Council and the General Assembly. Reports were
submitted by the facilitators in April and June 2007.

Terrorism: Countering terrorism remains a priority issue
for India in the United Nations. Two processes are
ongoing:

In September 2007, at the end of the 61st UNGA session,
as many as 27 countries including India, Brazil and South
Africa and several African, Caribbean and Pacific Island
states, tabled a Procedural Resolution on Security Council
Reform. While the resolution was not called to vote, it
played an important role in the OEWG report, adopted
at the end of the 61st Session, having a reference to
intergovernmental negotiations as well as a commitment
to achieving “concrete results”. This process was taken
forward, including during November and December 2007,
when UNGA Plenary discussion on Security Council
reform and meeting of the OEWG on this issue,
respectively, were held. At the UNGA Plenary on Security
Council Reform that took place from 12-14 November
2007, nearly 90 countries made statements with an

the finalization of a Comprehensive Convention on
International Terrorism (CCIT), piloted by India as
far back as in 1996, and
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, adopted by
the UN General Assembly in September 2006.
India remains in the forefront of the efforts to secure
agreement on a Comprehensive Convention on
International Terrorism. An informal meeting of the
plenary of the implementation of the UN Global CounterTerrorism Strategy was held in December 2007, to take
stock of achievements thus far, and the action that may
be required in the ten months prior to the review of the
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in September 2008.
90

United Nations and International Organizations

overwhelming majority calling for initiation of element
based, result-oriented, intergovernmental negotiations.

Geneva. It was the first session since the adoption in 2006
of a General Assembly resolution strengthening
ECOSOC, and mandating two new components in the
high level segment i.e. the Annual Ministerial Reviews
(AMR) and a biennial Development Cooperation Forum
(DCF).

Besides participating in the UN discussions and debates
on the issue of UNSC reform, India continued
consultations on this issue within the G-4 (Brazil, India,
Germany and Japan) as well as with the larger UN
membership.

The Annual Ministerial Review provides for voluntary
national presentations by countries on the implementation
of the outcomes of major UN conferences and summits
in the economic, social and related fields. Six countries,
Ghana, Barbados, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Ethiopia and
Bangladesh volunteered for the review.

Observance of the First International Day of NonViolence at the UN
The First International Day of Non-Violence was observed
at the UN on 2 October 2007. Sonia Gandhi, Member of
Parliament and Chairperson of the United Progressive
Alliance (UPA) addressed an informal plenary meeting
of the UN General Assembly and spoke on the enduring
validity of the message of the Mahatma, recalling the
Mahatma’s belief that strength flowed from righteousness,
not force, and that ends and means were inseparable.

The session launched the biennial Development
Cooperation Forum (DCF), which will focus on the
enhancement of the implementation of the internationally
agreed development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs). The first biennial Forum
will take place in New York in 2008. ECOSOC also
adopted a resolution approving the graduation of Samoa
out of the list of Least Developed Countries.

A round-table discussion chaired by External Affairs
Minister was convened at the UN premises on 2 October
2007, at which several eminent participants took part,
including Prof. Amartya Sen, Dr. John Nash, the Rev. Jesse
Jackson, Dr. Gene Sharp and Ela Gandhi. Sonia Gandhi
inaugurated a photographic exhibition on Mahatma
Gandhi at the UN and a film on Gandhiji was also
screened to mark the occasion. The UN Postal
Administration (UNPA) issued a special cancellation for
use during October 2007.

The Spring High-level Meeting of the ECOSOC with the
Bretton Woods institutions, the World Trade Organisation
(WTO) and the United Nations Conferences on Trade
and Development (UNCTAD) was held in New York on
16 April 2007. India was represented by the Finance
Secretary.
United Nations Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP)
The 63rd annual session of UNESCAP was held in Almaty,
Kazakhstan, from 17-23 May 2007. The session marked
the 60th anniversary of ESCAP. The Indian delegation to
the session was led by the Minister of State for Industry
Dr. Ashwini Kumar.

Economic issues
India continued to play an active role in the Second
Committee of the United Nations General Assembly
(UNGA) in order to ensure that development remains a
core concern of the United Nations (UN). The focus of
the Second Committee was on implementation of the
commitments undertaken at the major UN conferences
and summits in the economic, social and related fields,
particularly the 2005 World Summit. In concert with other
developing countries in the Group of 77, India pushed
for greater role for the United Nations, particularly
through the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC),
in the oversight of the international economic and
financial system, and in trying to have a greater emphasis
of the development dimension in international regimes.

In a special ceremony to mark the 1st International Day
of Non-Violence on the birth anniversary of Mahatma
Gandhi on 2 October 2007, a bust of Mahatma Gandhi
presented by the Embassy of India, Bangkok, was unveiled
at the UNESCAP premises by the Minister of Panchayati
Raj, Youth Affairs and Sports and Development of North
Eastern Region, Mani Shankar Aiyar.
Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice (CCPCJ)
India actively participated at the 16th session of the
Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
(CCPCJ), held in Vienna from 23-27 April 2007. The

Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC)
The substantive session of the Economic and Social
Council (ECOSOC) for 2007 was held in July 2007 in
91

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

leader of the delegation made a statement at the plenary
on the “Use and Application of UN Standards and Norms
in Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice”, apprising the
session of the amendments made by the Government of
India in the last two years to the Code of Criminal
Procedure with the objective of improving the criminal
justice system.

September 2007. Finance Minister, P. Chidambaram
participated in the event as Special Envoy of the Prime
Minister.

Commission on Narcotic Drugs (CND)
The 50th Session of the CND was held in Vienna from
12-16 March 2007 with the thematic debate: “New
challenges for controlling precursor chemicals”. The
resolutions moved by India on the “Need for balance
between demand for and supply of opiates used to meet medical
and scientific needs” and on “Identifying sources of precursors
used in illicit drug manufacture” enjoyed widespread support
and were adopted by consensus.

India participated in two thematic preparatory meetings
of the forthcoming five-year review of implementation of
the Almaty Programme of Action on the special needs of
landlocked developing countries. The meetings, in Upper
Volta (June 2007) and Mongolia (August 2007),
highlighted transit transport infrastructure, and
international trade and trade facilitation respectively.
India underlined the need for greater financial and
technical resources to implement the programme.

Environment
and
Development Issues

India participated in the biennial High Level Dialogue
on Financing for Development in October 2007 in New
York, stressing the need for greater implementation by
developed countries of the commitments undertaken
under the Monterrey Consensus.

India participated in the 9 th UN Conference on the
Standardization of Geographical Names, held in New York
from 21-30 August 2007. The Deputy Director of the
Survey of India led the Indian delegation.

Sustainable

India participated in the work of the Commission on
Sustainable Development, the high-level commission
within the UN system for sustainable development with
the role of reviewing and promoting the implementation
of Agenda 21 and the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation. The 15th session of the Commission was
held in New York from 30 April-11 May 2007, while its
intergovernmental preparatory meeting was held from 27
February-2 March 2007. The session focused on the
thematic cluster of energy for sustainable development,
climate change, air pollution/atmosphere and industrial
development. Dr. Prodipto Ghosh, Secretary, Ministry of
Environment and Forests, led the Indian delegation. No
negotiated outcome could be reached.

India participated in the Vienna Climate Change
Conference (4th session of the Ad Hoc Working Group
on further commitments for Annex I Parties under the
Kyoto Protocol and the 4th workshop under the Dialogue
on long-term cooperative action to address climate change
by enhancing implementation of the Convention). The
Indian delegation was led by R.H. Khwaja, Additional
Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests.
India hosted the 2nd Ministerial Meeting of the Asia-Pacific
Partnership for Clean Development and Climate on 15
October 2007 which included Ministers and high level
representatives from Australia, Canada, China, India,
Japan, Republic of Korea and the United States. The
Partnership officially warmly welcomed Canada as a new
Partner. The Meeting released the New Delhi
communiqué which summarizes the accomplishments of
the Partnership over the last two years. A Flagship
portfolio of 18 projects and activities was approved apart
from the eight Task Force Action Plans and their
accompanying 110 projects. The Asia-Pacific Energy
Technology Cooperation Centre was also endorsed.

India also participated in the 7th session of the United
Nations Forum on Forests, which was held in New York
from 16-27 April 2007. G. K. Prasad, Director General of
Forests and Special Secretary, Ministry of Environment
and Forests, led the Indian delegation. The meeting
adopted the non-legally binding Instrument on all types
of forests, which aims to promote sustainable forest
management through global actions.
India participated in an informal high-level event on
climate change called “The Future in our Hands:
Addressing the Leadership Challenge of Climate Change”,
which was convened by the UN Secretary-General on
the margins of the General Debate of the 62nd United
Nations General Assembly (UNGA) session, on 24

Kapil Sibal, Minister for Science & Technology and Earth
Sciences led the Indian delegation to the Thirteenth
Conference of Parties (COP) to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
92

United Nations and International Organizations

in Geneva from 5-7 June 2007. The Global Platform has
been established by the General Assembly as a successor
mechanism to the Inter-Agency Task Force for Disaster
Reduction.

and the Third Meeting of Parties to the Kyoto Protocol
(COP/MOP) held in Bali, Indonesia from 3-14 December
2007. The Delegation included officers of the Ministry.
The conference agreed on a Bali Action Plan to launch a
comprehensive process to enable the full, effective and
sustained implementation of the UNFCCC through longterm cooperative action. An Ad Hoc Working Group was
established with a tight time-table of meetings to complete
its work by the COP-15 of the UNFCCC to be held in
Copenhagen in December 2009. The Bali Action Plan
also covers enhanced action on adaptation, which is a
critical imperative for developing countries, technology
development and transfer and provision of financial
resources.

United Nations Operational Activities for
Development
India takes an active interest in the operational activities
for development by the UN. As in the past, India
emphasised the role of the programme countries and the
importance of the principle of country- driven
programming in accordance with national development
plans and priorities. India also supported the efforts of
other developing countries to resist the introduction of
conditionalities in the development assistance programme
of the UN. The 62nd UN General Assembly focused its
attention on the triennial guidance provided by Member
States to the UN development system through the General
Assembly resolution on “Triennial Comprehensive Policy
Review”. India played an active role in the discussions and
negotiations of this resolution.

A meeting of the world’s largest economies was held in
Washington D.C on 27-28 September 2007 under the
rubric of the Major Economies Meeting (MEM). Pranab
Mukherjee, Minister of External Affairs represented India
at the inaugural session while Dr. R. Chidambaram,
Principal Scientific Adviser to the Government led the
delegation of officials, which included officers of this
Ministry. Acknowledging that the UNFCCC was the
forum for international negotiations on climate change,
it was agreed that MEM would work to strongly backstop
the multilateral negotiations.

Social and Human Rights Issues
The evolution of the new Human Rights Council
established by a UNGA resolution in March 2006
replacing the Commission on Human Rights remained a
focus of activity and interest. The Council concluded the
first year of its work in June with the adoption of landmark
decisions relating to its architecture and methods of work,
which were subsequently endorsed by the General
Assembly. The Council also convened a Special Session
in October to discuss the emergent human rights situation
in Myanmar. In keeping with its traditional commitment
to the human rights and values, India actively participated
in the process to reform and strengthen the UN human
rights system.

Dr. R. Chidambaram led the Indian delegation to the
second MEM which was held in Honolulu on 30-31
January 2008. The discussions focused on issues in the
context of the Bali Action Plan that could potentially be
addressed by the leaders of the major economies.

Humanitarian Issues
India participated in the UNGA discussions on the
coordination of humanitarian assistance provided by the
UN. India piloted, on behalf of the Group of 77, a
resolution tabled annually on ‘International Cooperation
in Humanitarian Assistance for Natural Disasters, from Relief
to Development’. The resolution emphasises the need to
focus on and pay continued attention to the situations of
transition from relief to development following natural
disasters. Apart from the member countries of the Group
of 77, a number of other countries also supported the
resolution by joining as its co-sponsors.

India ratified the UN Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities on 1 October 2007.
The Resumed Session of the UN Committee on NonGovernmental Organisations took place in May 2007.
During 2007, the NGO Committee recommended 13
Indian NGO applications for ECOSOC status.
Migration
India participated in the first Meeting of the Global Forum
on Migration and Development (GFMD), held in Brussels
from 9-11 July 2007. This marked the start of a new global
process designed to enhance the positive impact of
migration on development (and vice versa).

Disaster Risk Reduction
A high-level delegation led by Member, National Disaster
Management Authority, participated in the first meeting
of the Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction, held
93

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

Elections
In May 2007, India was re-elected to the Human Rights
Council by the UN General Assembly securing the highest
tally of votes for a 3-year term, for the period 2007-2010.

to attend the 21st Governing Council Meeting of UNHABITAT in Nairobi from 16-20 April 2007. She was
unanimously elected the chairperson of the 21st Governing
Council of UN-HABITAT and Comm. UN-HABITAT.

India was elected to the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) in November
2007.

Shivrajsingh Chauhan, the Chief Minister of Madhya
Pradesh, visited Nairobi from 17-18 April 2007 along with
a delegation to attend a parallel event organized during
the UN-HABITAT Governing Council meeting on ‘ProPoor Governance in Water Supply and Sanitation’.

In the elections for the 16 subsidiary bodies of ECOSOC
in April 2007, India was elected to (i) Commission on
the Status of Women for a 4-year term; (ii) Programme
Coordination Board of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) for a 3-year term;
and (iii) Governing Council of the UN Human
Settlements Programme (UN-HABITAT) for a 4-year
term.

Disarmament and International Security
Affairs
India’s commitment to global, non-discriminatory and
verifiable elimination of all Weapons of Mass Destruction,
in particular nuclear weapons, continued to be reflected
in its policy pronouncements and diplomatic initiatives.
India’s stand on issues related to disarmament and
international security in various multilateral and regional
forums was premised on India’s national security interests
and its tradition of close engagement with the
international community to promote cooperative efforts
at addressing these challenges.

Dr. S. Rajan was elected to the Commission on the Limits
of the Continental Shelf at the elections held during the
17th Meeting of the States Parties to the UN Convention
on the Law of the Sea in June 2007.
Dr. Arjun Sengupta was elected the Chairman of the InterGovernmental Working Group of the Human Rights
Council on the Rights to Development on 17 September
2007.

At the regional level, India participated in the ASEAN
Regional Forum (ARF) and the Conference on Interaction
and Confidence Building Measures in Asia (CICA).

V.N. Kaul, Comptroller and Auditor General of India, was
elected to the UN Independent Audit Advisory
Committee in November 2007.

Regular contacts were maintained with key international
and non-governmental organizations active in the field
of disarmament with a view to disseminating the Indian
perspectives on disarmament issues.

Nagesh Singh, First Secretary in the Permanent Mission
of India to the UN, was elected to the UN Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
in November 2007.

United Nations General Assembly (UNGA)
The External Affairs Minister and leader of the Indian
delegation, Pranab Mukherjee, in his address to the 2007
UNGA reiterated India’s long commitment to universal,
non- discriminatory and comprehensive nuclear
disarmament, and also called on the international
community to intensify the effort to address the very real
threat posed by the link between terrorism and
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs).

United Nations Industrial Development
Organization (UNIDO)
India participated in the 23rd Session of the Programme
and Budget Committee, held from 2-4 May 2007, and
the 33rd Session of the Industrial Development Board of
UNIDO from 25-27 June 2007 in Vienna.
Minister of Commerce and Industry, Kamal Nath was a
keynote speaker in the Industrial Development Forum at
the 12th Session of the UNIDO General Conference from
3-7 December 2007. The Commerce and Industry
Minister also addressed the UNIDO General Conference.

India continued to play an active role at the 62nd Session
of the UN General Assembly’s First Committee that deals
with disarmament and international security issues.
During the general debate the Indian delegate reiterated
India’s commitment to the nuclear weapon free world
emphasizing that those possessing the most important
arsenals have a special responsibility for taking the lead
on nuclear disarmament.

United Nations Human Settlements Programme
(UN-HABITAT)
Kumari Selja, Minister of State (Independent Charge) for
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, led a delegation

In recognition of growing international concerns about
94

United Nations and International Organizations

nuclear power and its applications for peaceful purposes
as well as safety and security. In the context of future
technologies, India encouraged International Project on
Innovative Nuclear Reactors and Fuel Cycles (INPRO),
Small and Medium Reactors and their application in
nuclear desalination and hydrogen production, fusion
related research and thorium cycle. India continued to
organize training programmes in various areas of relevance
to IAEA for its Member States.

the serious global threats posed by the possibility of nonState actors acquiring weapons of mass destruction and
using it, India’s resolution on ‘Measures to Prevent
Terrorists from Acquiring Weapons of Mass Destruction’
was adopted by consensus, as during previous five Sessions.
India re-introduced its Resolution “Convention on the
Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons” which has
been adopted annually since 1982. This Resolution calls
upon the Conference on Disarmament to commence
negotiations on an international convention prohibiting
the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons under any
circumstances, as a first step towards reducing the salience
of nuclear weapons. India’s Resolution on “Reducing
Nuclear Danger”, first introduced in 1998, which calls
for the review of nuclear doctrines and immediate and
urgent steps to reduce the risk of unintentional and
accidental use of nuclear weapons, was also re-tabled.
Both the resolutions were adopted by a good majority as
in previous years.

India ratified the following agreements and handed over
the Instruments of Ratification to Director General, IAEA
in March 2007: (i) Agreement on the Establishment of
International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor
(ITER) International Fusion Energy Organization for the
Joint Implementation of the ITER Project, and (ii)
Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the ITER
International Fusion Energy Organization for the Joint
Implementation of the ITER Project. India also ratified the
Amendment to the Convention on Physical Protection of
Nuclear material; the Instrument of Ratification was
deposited with the Director General, International Atomic
Energy Agency on 19 September 2007.

The Conference on Disarmament
The Conference on Disarmament (CD) met at Geneva
from 22 January-30 March 2007, 14 May-29 June 2007
and 30 July-14 September 2007. The six Presidents of the
2007 session (P-6) presented to the conference a proposal
to conduct negotiations, without preconditions, on a nondiscriminatory multilateral treaty banning the production
of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear
explosive devices and to conduct substantive discussion
on three other core issues on the agenda of the CD, i.e.
Nuclear Disarmament, Prevention of Arms Race in Outer
Space and Negative Security Assurances for non nuclear
weapon States. During consultations, India adopted a
constructive approach in order to contribute to
establishing a Programme of Work for the CD that reflects
the concerns and priorities of all its Member States.

The Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission and the
Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy led the Indian
delegation to the 51st General Conference(GC) of IAEA,
from 17-21 September 2007. At India’s initiative a
resolution on Small and Medium Reactors was adopted
by the GC for the first ever time. A tripartite MoU among
India, IAEA and Vietnam was finalized on the sidelines
of the GC which provides for the donation by India of
Bhabatron-II (the indigenous Cobalt-60 Teletherapy Unit
for the treatment of Cancer) to Vietnam.
Director General IAEA Dr. Mohammad El-Baradei visited
India from 8-12 October 2007 and was apprised, interalia, of the growing demands for energy in India for its
economic development and India’s plans in that context
for raising the share of nuclear power in its energy mix.

International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
India took active part in the deliberations of the IAEA
through the regular and special meetings of the Board of
Governors and also through its participation at the 51st
Annual General Conference (AGC) of the IAEA in
September 2007. During the prolonged negotiations on
the Agency’s Budget for 2007 and 2008, India supported
the concept that Agency’s resources should be augmented.
India contributed to the formulation of key resolutions
on nuclear power, nuclear safety, safeguards, technical
cooperation, etc., adopted at the 51st AGC of the IAEA.
India also supported activities related to development of

Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC)
India continued to play an active role at the Organization
for the Prohibition of the Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
at The Hague during the year. India continued to fulfill
all its obligations under the Convention in line with its
commitments. India’s destruction of its chemical weapons
is proceeding in accordance with the timelines under the
Convention. India played a key role at the Twelfth
Conference of States Parties to the CWC at The Hague
from 5-9 November 2007, as well as at the Sessions of the
95

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

discriminatory, universal and global ban on anti-personnel
landmines.

Executive Council. India also participated actively in the
Open Ended Working Group (OEWG) set up for the 2nd
Review Conference of the CWC which is to take place in
2008.

Small Arms and Light Weapons (SALW)
India continued to participate actively in the search for
effective solutions, including the implementation of the
Programme of Action (PoA) adopted at the UN
Conference on Illicit Trafficking in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, held in July 2001. In 2007,
India participated in an informal meeting on ‘Transfer
Control Principles for Small Arms and Light Weapons’
held in Geneva from 27-31 August 2007.

The Convention marked its tenth anniversary in 2007.
To commemorate this important milestone, India
organized a National Seminar of CWC Inspection and
verification in Vadodara, Gujarat, in December 2007. In
several events held in different parts of the world, India
was commended for fulfilling its commitments under
CWC.
Biological Weapons Convention (BWC)
Pursuant to the decision of the 6th Review Conference of
the States Parties to the Biological Weapons Convention
(BWC) held at Geneva from 20 November to 8 December
2006, the annual Meeting of Experts was held in Geneva
from 20-24 August 2007.

Outer Space Affairs
India actively participated at the 50th Session of the United
Nations Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
(UNCOPUOS) held from 5-16 June 2007 in Vienna. The
Session adopted the Space Debris Mitigation Guidelines.
During the meeting of the Scientific and Technical SubCommittee of COPUOS held at Vienna from 12-23
February 2007, India reiterated that it should become the
responsibility of every nation to maintain outer space
exclusively for peaceful purposes without trying new
ventures violating the very concept of peaceful uses of
outer space.

Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons
(CCW)
India is a party to the Convention on Prohibitions or
Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons
Which may be Deemed to be Excessively Injurious or to
Have Indiscriminate Effects (CCW) and has ratified all
its protocols. India has also ratified the Amendment to
Article 1 of the Convention.

Non-Aligned Movement (NAM)
The Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of
the Non-Alignment Movement was held on 28 September
2007 during the General Debate of the 62nd UN General
Assembly. The meeting discussed, in an interactive format,
“Concrete measures to reinforce the capacity for action
of the Non-Alignment Movement”. External Affairs
Minister Pranab Mukherjee participated in this Ministerial
Meeting. He reaffirmed India’s commitment to the NAM
and highlighted the need for more effective coordination
between the Non-Alignment Movement and the Group
of 77 to bring fresh energy to both organizations. The
External Affairs Minister also participated in the NAM
Ministerial Committee on Palestine, held on 25 September
2007 on the margins of the UN General Assembly session.

The annual meeting of the High Contracting Parties to
the Convention on CCW was held in Geneva from 7-13
November 2007. The issue of regulations on use of cluster
munitions dominated the meeting. The meeting decided
that a Group of Governmental Experts, which would meet
in 2008 to negotiate a proposal to address urgently the
humanitarian impact of cluster munitions.
The first annual meeting on Protocol V of CCW on
Explosive Remnants of war, was held on 5 November 2007
in Geneva. The Annual Meeting of the States Parties to
the Amended Protocol II to the Convention on CCW on
prohibitions or restrictions on the use of mines, booby
traps and other devises was also held at Geneva on 6
November 2007. India informed the Meeting about the
steps taken by it to implement the provisions of Amended
Protocol II and its commitment to the vision of a world
free of landmines.

Commonwealth
India is the largest member of the Commonwealth and is
its fifth largest financial contributor. India has increased
its annual contribution to the Commonwealth Fund for
Technical Cooperation from British Pound (GBP) 800,000
in 2005-06 to GBP 900,000 in 2007-08. India is the largest
contributor (with commitment of Euro 1 million) to the

India attended, as an observer, the 8th Annual Meeting of
the State Parties to the Ottawa Convention in Jordan to
underline its commitment to the objective of a non96

United Nations and International Organizations

Commonwealth Connects Special Voluntary Fund,
created by the Heads of Government at the Malta
Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting
(CHOGM) in November 2005 to bridge the digital divide
in the Commonwealth countries and is a member of the
Steering Committee established to carry forward its action
programme. To further enhance India’s technical
assistance to the Commonwealth developing countries,
India has offered 50-75 slots in select courses under ITEC
and SCAAP and up to five ICT experts for periods upto
six months under the Commonwealth Connects
Programme. India has also conducted training
programmes for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs)
Managers from Africa and South Asia. India continues
to be one of the principal supporters and contributors of
the Commonwealth Joint Office in New York, which
facilitates participation by Commonwealth small states
in UN activities. India has increased its contribution to
the Commonwealth of Learning from Rs.24 million to
Rs.40 million from 2007. India has proposed to undertake
the responsibility for upgrading the Commonwealth Youth
Programme (CYP) Asia Centre in Chandigarh as a Centre
of Excellence in association with the Rajiv Gandhi
National Institute of Youth Development, Sriperumbudur.

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh led the Indian
delegation to the Commonwealth Heads of Government
Meeting (CHOGM) in Kampala (Uganda) from 23-25
November 2007. External Affairs Minister, Pranab
Mukherjee attended the pre-CHOGM Commonwealth
Foreign Ministers (CFMs) meeting on 21-22 November
2007. Minister of State for External Affairs, Anand
Sharma represented India at the ‘Youth Dialogue’ and a
‘Sports Breakfast’ which were chaired by the President of
Uganda. Ashwani Kumar, Minister of State for Industries,
led a joint delegation of CII, FICCI and ASSOCHAM to
the Commonwealth Business Forum Meeting held in
Kampala from 20-22 November 2007. Kamalesh Sharma,
India’s High Commissioner to UK was selected as the next
Secretary General of the Commonwealth during the
Kampala CHOGM.
Community of Democracies (COD)
Minister of State for External Affairs, Anand Sharma led
the Indian delegation to the fourth Ministerial Conference
of the Community of Democracies (CoD) held in Bamako,
Mali from 14-17 November 2007. Participants from more
than 100 countries deliberated on proposals to advance
democracy and strengthen democratic institutions and
adopted the Bamako Declaration on the special theme of
‘Democracy, Development and Poverty Reduction’.

India hosted the Commonwealth Connects International
e-Partnership Summit as part of Commonwealth Connects
programme from 23-24 March 2007. The Sixth
Commonwealth-India Small Business Competitiveness
Development Programme was held in Kochi and the
Commonwealth Study Conference organised by CII from
25-30 March 2007.

ASEAN Regional Forum
India continued to actively participate in regular ASEAN
Regional Forum (ARF) meetings and Confidence Building
Mechanism (CBM) activities organized by the Member
States. External Affairs Minister, Pranab Mukherjee, led
the Indian delegation to the 14th ASEAN Regional Forum
(ARF) Ministerial Meting in Manila.

India hosted the 53 rd Commonwealth Parliamentary
Association (CPA) Conference in New Delhi from 21-30
September 2007 attended by 800 delegates from 53
Commonwealth countries. The Conference was formally
inaugurated by President, Pratibha Devisingh Patil on 25
September 2007.

An International Seminar on “UN Peacekeeping:
Challenges and Prospects” was organized in New Delhi
in April 2007, a CBM activity approved by the 13th ARF
Ministerial Meeting.

Minister of Finance attended the Commonwealth Finance
Ministers’ Meeting in Guyana from 15-17 October 2007.
Commonwealth Secretary General visited India in March
2007 and again in September 2007. Minister of State for
Women and Child Development (Independent Charge)
participated at the Eighth Commonwealth Women’s
Affairs Ministers Meeting in Kampala, Uganda from 1114 June 2007. Minister of Law and Justice participated at
the Commonwealth Meeting of Law Ministers on 4-5
October 2007 in London.

Conference on Interaction and Confidence
Building Measures in Asia (CICA)
India is a founding member of Conference on International
Confidence Building Measures (CICA) and continued to
actively participate in meetings of CICA. India seconded
a senior diplomat to the CICA Secretariat. Executive
Director of the CICA Secretariat paid an official visit to
CICA in December 2007. On the occasion of 15 th
Anniversary of inception of CICA Indian Prime sent a
97

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

congratulatory message to the President of the Republic
of Kazakhstan.

Comprehensive Review of the Whole Question
of Peacekeeping Operations in all their aspects:
Ad Hoc Committee on criminal accountability of
United Nations officials and experts on mission
The first session of the Ad Hoc Committee on criminal
accountability of United Nations officials and experts on
mission was held in April 2007. All delegations supported
the “zero tolerance policy” in all cases of sexual
exploitation and abuse committed by peacekeeping
personnel. On the issue of negotiating an international
convention on the criminal accountability of the United
Nations officials and experts on missions, our delegation
was of the view that it was premature to discuss such a
possibility and the Ad Hoc Committee should focus on
substantive matters leaving questions of form to a
subsequent stage. A Working Group was established with
a view to continuing the consideration of the Report of
the Group of Legal Experts during the 62nd Session.

International Law and Developments
India continued to actively participate in the discussions
in the Sixth Committee of the UN General Assembly
which focuses on matters relating to International law.
Other discussions in international law in which India
Participated were:
Administration of Justice at the United Nations
In discussions on this subject in the United Nations, it
was recognized that an independent, transparent,
professionalized system consisting of both an informal and
a formal system is required.
Oceans and the Law of the Sea
The sixth round of Informal Consultations of States Parties
to the Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea (UNCLOS) relating to the Conservation and
Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly
Migratory Fish Stocks was convened to review national,
regional, sub-regional and global implementation of the
Agreement.

IMO Legal Committee
The Diplomatic Conference of the IMO held in Kenya,
Nairobi adopted the Final Text of the Convention on
Wreck Removal (2007).
Legal sub Committee of the UN-Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of the Outer Space
The Legal Sub-committee of the UN Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of the Outer Space has been engaged in
the development of Space Law and it also works as a forum
for debates on emerging issues in Space Law. The Legal
and Treaties(L&T) Division participated in the 46 th
Session of the Committee which was held in Vienna from
26 March-5 April 2007. Besides considering traditional
agenda items, emphasis was placed this year on the
national legislation relating to the private participation
in space activities. It was decided that a new agenda item:
‘General exchange of information on national legislation
relevant to the peaceful exploration and use of outer space‘
will be taken up during the 47th session.

Working Group on Aggression
The Special Working Group on Crime of Aggression under
the Rome Statute held three meetings in the year 2007.
The main questions before it were: how to define an act
of aggression and how to trigger the Court’s jurisdiction.
Comprehensive Convention against International
Terrorism
The substantive provisions of the Draft Convention have
been largely agreed. However, further progress on the
Convention has been stalled by the insistence of some
countries that wish to exclude from the scope of the
Convention acts carried out in the course of “people’s
struggles against foreign occupation”.

UNESCO Legal Committee
The UNESCO Legal Committee meeting on the occasion
of UNESCO’s 34th General Conference was held in Paris
during October 2007. Legal and Treaties Division
participated in this Meeting.

Special Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations and on the Strengthening of the role of
the Organization
The Special Committee continued its consideration of
all proposals concerning the question of the maintenance
of international peace and security in all its aspects in
order to strengthen the role of the United Nations.

FAO Legal Experts Group
The Division also participated in the meeting of Informal
Group of Legal Experts on the process for a Change in
98

United Nations and International Organizations

subject held in Montreal, Canada, from 22-26 October
2007. The Meeting discussed the various elements of a
future legal regime on liability and redress for damage
suffered by a trans-boundary movement of a living
modified organism.

the Nature of a Statutory Body under Article XIV of the
FAO Constitution into a Body of outside the Framework
of the FAO convened by FAO at its Headquarters in Rome
in October 2007.
United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law (UNCITRAL)
During the 40 th Session of the UNCITRAL, the
Commission through a working group continued
finalization of the commentaries on the draft legislative
guide on secured transactions, which will be adopted later
in a resumed Session. A Congress celebrating the 40th
annual session of the Commission was held on the last
four days of the session.

The Legal and Treaties Division participated at the
Conference of Parties of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change from 3-14 December
2007, Bali, Indonesia. The Meeting among others
discussed a long term action plan for reduction of
greenhouse gas emissions in the commitment period 20082012 and beyond and the need for negotiating a new treaty
in this regard.
Antarctica
The Legal and Treaties Division was represented at the
XXX Antarctic Treaty Consultative Committee Meeting
(ATCM) held in New Delhi, India from 30 April-11 May
2007.

Maritime Transport Law
The Legal and Treaties (L&T) Division participated in
the nineteenth and twentieth sessions of Working Group
III (Maritime Transport Law) of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL),
held respectively at New York, USA from 16-27 April
2007 and at Vienna, Austria from 15-25 October 2007.
The Working Group is negotiating a new convention, with
a view to review the existing laws relating to the
international carriage of goods by sea, to cope with the
practical changes in this field emerged due to
technological developments.

Private International Law
During the year under report, India acceded to the Hague
Conventions on the Taking of Evidence Abroad in Civil
or Commercial Matters (1970), and on the Service Abroad
of Judicial and Extra Judicial Documents in Civil or
Commercial Matters, on 8 April 2007 and on 1 August
2007 respectively. The Hague Conventions on
International Access to Justice (1980), on Choice of Court
Agreements (2005) and on the Recognition and
Enforcement of Judgments in Civil or Commercial Matters
(1971) and the Convention on the Civil Aspects of
International Child Abduction (1980) are under
examination for India becoming a party to them.

International Humanitarian Law
The 30th International Conference on International Red
Cross and Red Crescent held in Geneva from 26-30
November 2007 adopted The Guidelines for the Domestic
facilitation and Regulation of International Disaster relief and
Initial Recovery Assistance, which was pending
consideration by the ICRC for a number of years. Another
important development on international Humanitarian
Law is that a decision to negotiate a legally binding
instrument on Cluster munitions was reached this year.
Legal and Treaties Division has been participating in the
development of International Humanitarian Law within
the ICRC and also in the meetings concerning
Convention on Conventional Weapons

Extradition and other International Judicial
Assistance
The L&T Division participated in a number of bilateral
negotiations for concluding extradition treaties,
agreements on mutual legal assistance in criminal and in
civil matters with foreign countries. A Draft SAARC
Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters
was prepared and the Division also participated in the
meeting of Legal Advisers of SAARC member States
convened for discussion on the Draft Convention at
Colombo, Sri Lanka from 10-12 September 2007. The
Division examined a number of extradition requests and
other requests for international cooperation received from
the domestic as well as foreign jurisdictions and rendered
legal advice therein.

International Environment Law
The Legal and Treaties Division was represented at the
Third Meeting of the Ad Hoc Open-Ended Working on
Liability and Redress in the context of Article 27 of the
Cartagena Protocol, held in Montreal, Canada, from 1923 February 2007; and the Fourth Meeting of the same
99

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

Agreement on Transfer of Prisoners/Sentenced
Persons
India is drawing up bilateral agreements with Egypt,
France, Sri Lanka, Honk Kong, Israel and Korea, which
are under various stages of negotiation.
Agreements on Combating International
Terrorism, Transnational Organized Crime and
Drug Trafficking
India is in the process of drawing up bilateral agreements
on the above subject with Cyprus, Italy, Sri Lanka, UAE,
Maldives and Vietnam, which are under various stages of
negotiation.
SAARC
Under the SAARC forum, the Legal and Treaties the
Division has participated in negotiations leading to the
signing of the Agreement for Establishment of SAARC
Development Fund during the SAARC Summit held in
New Delhi in April 2007. The Division was also involved
in the formulation of the SAARC Agreements for the
Establishment of SAARC Food Bank and SAARC
University which were signed during the year. The
Division also participated in the meetings of the Sub
Group on Investment held at SAARC Secretariat on 29
November 2007 and in negotiations for a SAARC
Agreement on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal
Matters.
BIMSTEC
The Legal and Treaties Division organized the third
Meeting of the BIMSTEC JWG-CTTC Sub-Group on
Legal and Law Enforcement Issues in New Delhi, from
19-20 April 2007. The discussions during the Meeting
finalized the text of an Agreement on Combating
Terrorism, Organized Crime and Drug Trafficking. The
meeting also considered the question of an Agreement
on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters between
BIMSTEC Members States.
The Division also participated at 14th and 15th Meetings
of the BIMSTEC Trade Negotiating Committee (TNC)

held in Paro, Bhutan, from 18-23 June 2007 and in Dhaka,
Bangladesh from 24-26 September 2007 respectively. The
issues undertaken by the TNC among others were related
to legal vetting of the Agreement on Trade in Goods on
the Framework Agreement on the BIMSTEC Free Trade
Area, the working group on Rules of Origin, Customs
Procedure and Cooperation, and Safeguards.
Participation in Bilateral Negotiations
During the year, negotiations on Bilateral Investment
Promotion Agreements (BIPA) with Trinidad and Tobago,
Hellenic Republic, Libya, Ethiopia, Iceland, Mexico and
Canada were completed and signed. Negotiations were
also completed with Canada, Senegal and Bulgaria and
the agreements are ready to be signed. The Division also
participated in the negotiations on Free Trade Agreements
with Japan, Korea, Sri Lanka, Mauritius, European Union
and ASEAN. The Protocol amending the Comprehensive
Economic Cooperation Agreement with Singapore was
finalised and is ready for signature.
The Legal and Treaties Division examined a number of
defence co-operation agreements, agreements on
international co-operation of peaceful uses of nuclear
energy; science and technology agreements during the
year.
India has signed/ratified many multilateral/bilateral
treaties/agreements with foreign countries during the year.
These inter alia include: The International Convention
for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance; the Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities Agreement for the Establishment of
SAARC University; SAARC Agreement on Establishing
the SAARC Food Bank; Intergovernmental Agreement
on Trans Asia Railway Network; the International
Convention against Doping in Sports and India-Bhutan
Friendship Treaty. A comprehensive list is placed at
Appendix XI. A list of Instruments of Full Powers issued
during the year 2007 is at Appendix XII and a list of
Instruments of Ratification is at Appendix XIII.

100

Multilateral Economic Relations

SAARC

T

he South Asian Association of Regional Cooperation
(SAARC) was created in 1985, as an expression of
the region’s collective decision to evolve a regional
cooperative framework. Presently, there are eight member
countries in SAARC, namely, Afghanistan, Bangladesh,
Bhutan, India, Nepal, Maldives, Pakistan and Sri Lanka.
India hosted the 14th SAARC Summit in New Delhi on
3-4 April 2007 thereby assuming the Chairmanship of
SAARC. For the first time in its history, SAARC expanded
its membership at the 14th Summit to include Afghanistan
as the eighth member. Also, it was the first Summit where
five Observers, from outside the region - China, Japan,
Republic of Korea, the United States of America and the
European Union - were invited to attend the Summit.
Iran has also been welcomed as an Observer in SAARC.
The 29th Council of Ministers Meeting (7-8 December
2007) approved the request of Mauritius to be associated
as Observer to SAARC.
The Heads of State/Government during the Summit
agreed to improve intra-regional connectivity through
physical, economic and people to people connectivity. In
case of physical connectivity, an important decision was
to extend the SAARC Regional Multimodal Transport
Study to Afghanistan. For economic connectivity, SAARC
countries committed themselves to early
operationalization of the SAARC Development Fund
(SDF) and implementation of trade facilitation measures.
The Heads of Government agreed to strengthen the
security network by sharing of information, increased
frequency of meetings between security chiefs and
consider India’s proposal to work towards finalizing an
Agreement on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal
Matters.
During the Summit, two important Agreements on the
establishment of a South Asian University and a SAARC
Food Bank were signed. The Leaders also agreed to
progress on the four key issues of development, namely,

10

Water (including flood control); Energy; Food and
Environment.
The 29th Council of Ministers Meeting took stock of the
implementation of decisions taken during the 14th SAARC
Summit. The Council gave direction for the urgent
operationalization of the SDF through an interim cell;
adopted a Declaration on Climate Change; granted
Observer status to Mauritius; appointed Dr. Sheel Kant
Sharma of India as the next Secretary General of SAARC;
and directed the immigration authorities to re-examine
the SAARC Visa Exemption Scheme (SVES).
The momentum in maintaining the dynamism generated
by the 14th SAARC Summit was ensured through (a) our
conscious effort to discharge our role in a non-reciprocal
manner; (b) choice of subjects for engagement, viz,
transport, finance and security; (c) increasing people-topeople interaction; (d) accelerating the establishment of
South Asian University and the SAARC Development
Fund; and (e) expediting the institutionalization of food
security through the Food Bank.
India hosted the first Meeting of the SAARC Transport
Ministers (29-31 August 2007) where the Report of the
SAARC Regional Multimodal Transport Study, prepared
and funded by Asian Development Bank (ADB), was
deliberated upon. A few pilot sub-regional and regional
projects were identified, namely Birgunj-KaatiharSinghabad-Rohanpur-Chittagong with links to Jogbani,
Biratnagar and Agartala; Kathmandu-Birgunj-Kolkata/
Haldia; Agartala-Akhaura-Chittagong; road link from
Phuntsholing to Hashimara; Rail Corridors between
Colombo and Chennai; Ferry Service between Colombo
and Cochin and Colombo and Tuticorin; Airconnectivities between Malé-New Delhi and IslamabadNew Delhi; and establishment of modern border crossing
facility at Phuntsholing.
India hosted the Finance Ministers’ Meeting preceded by
the Finance Secretaries Meeting from 14-15 September
2007. The Meeting discussed crucial issues like

101

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

development of Capital Markets in South Asia;
establishment of SAARC Development Fund; Promotion
and Protection of Investments; and co-operation in the
field of customs. The Ministers identified the three areas
in the social sector for implementation under SDF namely
Maternal and Child Health including Immunization;
Empowerment of women and Capacity building aimed at
enhancing the quality of education.
The Home Ministers’ Meeting (India, 23-25 October
2007) discussed issues relating to transnational crimes,
particularly terrorism, narcotics and psychotropic
substances and on trafficking in women and children. To
focus on social issues, India hosted the First Meeting of
the Regional Task Force to implement the SAARC
Convention on Trafficking in Women and Children (July
2007); Conference on Micro Financing and Women
Economic Empowerment in the SAARC Region (July
2007) and National Coordination Committee Meeting
to implement the SAARC Social Charter (September
2007).
SAARC Development Fund (SDF), the funding
framework to be used by SAARC member states for
development of the region, held its third
intergovernmental meeting on its establishment on 29
November 2007 where the draft Agreement was finalized.
The 29th SAARC Council of Ministers decided that a
temporary Cell would be set up at the SAARC Secretariat
to implement identified projects from available funds.
India has already committed US$ 100 million to the SDF.
The Council decided that the SDF should start funding
projects before the next Session of the Council.
We have taken the initiative in SAARC, to set up the
location of the prestigious South Asian University in New
Delhi. Work has started on establishing a Project Office
in New Delhi for a period of two years to acquire land for
the University, oversee its construction, and draw up its
Charter, Byelaws, Business Plan, Governance Structure,
Course Curricula etc.
A pilot project connecting one/two hospitals in each of
the SAARC countries with 3-4 Super Specialty hospitals
in India by the end of this year has started between Bhutan
and India. The Telemedicine Project has received
overwhelming support from other SAARC countries and
will be implemented phase-wise.
The initiative taken by India in involving people in the

SAARC process through culture witnessed tremendous
appreciation at the recently held First SAARC Cultural
Festival in New Delhi in December 2007. A series of
cultural events including SAARC Fusion Band Festival,
Folk Lore Festival, SAARC Car Rally photo exhibition
and Food festival was organized in the first week of
December 2007. A pilot project on the student and faculty
exchange was organized for both school and University
students. A SAARC Fashion Show was organized wherein
two designers from each of the SAARC countries
displayed their collection.
With the objective of preserving the rich South Asian
tradition of textiles weaving and handicrafts, the Museum
of Textiles and Handicrafts began its activities on 7
December 2007 from Crafts Museum, with an exhibition
on ‘Textiles Traditions of South Asia.” A handloom and
handicrafts sales outlet was organized for two weeks where
5 participants from each of the SAARC country sold their
regional handicrafts.
To ensure progress in areas that have so far been politically
sensitive such as Water, Energy, Food and Environment,
India has identified small regional, sub-regional projects
that have a small gestation period and immediate
dividends. These include projects on solar rural
electrification for 300 houses per SAARC member state,
capacity-building in rainwater harvesting, preservation of
forests and agri-business; and sharing of a protocol of
optimally utilizing rhizobium bacteria for increased
nitrogen-fixation for high yielding pulses.
Concerned about the adverse impact that drastic climate
change can effect on South Asia, the 29th SAARC Council
of Ministers adopted the SAARC Declaration on Climate
Change that was read out by President Gayoom in Bali.
Experiences on uplifting the rural hinterlands in each
member state were also shared through the exchange of
information on SAARC model villages.
The new SAARC Secretary General Dr. Sheel Kant
Sharma from India will be heading the SAARC Secretariat
from 1 March 2008. As we hand over the Chair to Sri
Lanka in 2008, India remains committed to move SAARC
from confabulation to implementation.

ASEAN – India Relations
India’s focus on strengthening and deepening its multifaceted relations with ASEAN is a central pillar to its

102

The leaders of the SAARC countries at the 14th SAARC Summit, in New Delhi.

External Affairs Minister, Pranab Mukherjee with Celso Amorim, Foreign Minister of Brazil and
N. Dlamini Zuma,Foreign Minister of South Africa at meeting of IBSA initiative in New York on 26 September 2007.

103

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

“Look East” policy. India also shares a convergence of
security perspectives with ASEAN countries, that is,
common interest in maintenance of peace and stability
in the region. Various projects are in the process of
implementation to further India-ASEAN cooperation.
The Centres for English Language Training (CELTs) were
set up by India in Cambodia, Lao PDR and Vietnam.
Under the India-ASEAN Media Exchange Programme,
15 ASEAN journalists visited India in June-July 2007.
A special training course for ASEAN diplomats was
conducted by FSI in August 2007 which was attended by
23 young diplomats.
One hundred students from ASEAN countries – 10
students each from all the ten ASEAN countries – visited
India in December 2007 on a trip of the sights and sounds
of modern and ancient India.
The India-ASEAN Science and Technology Development
Fund will be soon operationalized with an initial
contribution of US$ 1 million. This Fund will support the
development of strategic alliances between Indian and
ASEAN researchers and lead to further collaborative
Research and Development.
The 6th India-ASEAN Summit was held in Singapore on
21 November 2007. Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh,
proposed several measures to augment cooperation
between India and the ASEAN countries. Among these
are efforts to realize India-ASEAN trade target of US$ 50
billion by 2010, simplification of visa regime for
businesspersons traveling between India and ASEAN,
launching of an India-ASEAN Health Care Initiative with
a focus to provide basic drugs at low cost, setting up of an
India – ASEAN Green Fund for undertaking pilot projects
and tackling issues associated with climate change, an
expanded open skies policy with ASEAN, a target of 1
million tourists to India from ASEAN region by the year
2010 and launching of a special programme for exchanges
amongst parliamentarians.

India - ASEAN FTA
Three meetings of the Trade Negotiating Committee
(TNC) were held during the year 2007. Efforts are
continuing to reach consensus on all issues encompassing
the proposed India-ASEAN Free Trade Agreement.
India’s endeavour has been to safeguard the interests of

its large number of subsistence farmers. At the 6th IndiaASEAN Summit held in Singapore on 21 November 2007,
all sides agreed to work towards concluding the
negotiations on the FTA by March 2008.

East Asia Summit (EAS)
Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh attended the third
East Asia Summit held back to back with the 6th IndiaASEAN Summit, in Singapore on 21 November 2007.
The third EAS focused on the issues of energy,
environment, climate change and sustainable
development. The 16 leaders (10 ASEAN countries,
India, China, Japan, ROK, Australia and New Zealand)
participating in the Summit signed the Singapore
Declaration on Climate Change, Energy and
Environment.
The first meeting of the Nalanda Mentor Group chaired
by Nobel Laureate Prof. Amartya Sen, was held in
Singapore in July 2007. The Nalanda Mentor Group has
provided a roadmap to re-establishing this University
which will focus on becoming a centre for excellence for
research and teaching with an emphasis on postgraduate
studies. It will have departments for philosophy and
Buddhist studies, regional history, business and
management studies, international relations and peace
studies and study of languages. It will be established as an
international university through an international treaty.
Efforts continued for a study towards a Comprehensive
Economic Partnership in East Asia (CEPEA). It was also
decided that the Economic Research Institute of ASEAN
and East Asia (ERIA) would be temporarily
accommodated at the ASEAN Secretariat.
At the EAS Energy Ministers’ meeting held in Singapore
in August 2007, it was decided to cooperate in formulating,
on a voluntary basis, energy efficiency goals and action
plans, and enhancing cooperation on biofuels in the
region.

Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral
Technical and Economic Cooperation
(BIMSTEC)
India hosted a meeting on 22-23 May 2007 in New Delhi
which finalised the Memorandum of Association of the
BIMSTEC Centre on Weather and Climate which is
proposed to be set up in NOIDA, India.

104

Multilateral Economic Relations

India hosted a special training workshop for BIMSTEC
countries on “Geoinformatics Applications in Disaster
Management” at Indian Institute of Remote Sensing
(IIRS), Dehradun from 12-16 November 2007.
The Asian Development Bank (ADB) has conducted a
“BIMSTEC Transport Infrastructure and Logistics Study”.
The agreed priority areas for detailed study are: road and
rail connectivity between Bangladesh and India to
Thailand passing through Myanmar, including
connectivity to those corridors from Bhutan and Nepal;
modal assessment of transport infrastructure and services;
air transport hubs for intra-BIMSTEC passenger travel;
and major BIMSTEC ports along the Bay of Bengal coast.
ADB has submitted the final report to the BIMSTEC
Working Group in January 2008.
Two Expert Group meetings were held in Kathmandu on
1-2 February 2007 and in Dhaka on 27 November 2007
to discuss the proposed BIMSTEC Business Visa Scheme.
The negotiations for a BIMSTEC Free Trade Agreement
(BIMSTEC FTA) continued during the year. The
Fourteenth and Fifteenth meetings of the Trade
Negotiating Committee (BIMSTEC TNC) were held from
18-23 June 2007 in Paro, Bhutan and from 24-26
September 2007 in Dhaka, Bangladesh respectively.
India is a lead country in the BIMSTEC sector on CounterTerrorism and Transnational Crime (CTTC). The third
meeting of BIMSTEC Joint Working Group (JWG) on
Counter-Terrorism and Trans-National Crime was held
in Myanmar on 16-17 January 2007. The third meeting
of the BIMSTEC JWG-CTTC Sub Group on Legal and
Law Enforcement Issues was held in New Delhi on 19-20
April 2007. In the meeting, agreement was reached on
the text of the provisions of the draft “BIMSTEC
Convention on Combating International Terrorism,
Transnational Organized Crime and Illicit Drug
Trafficking”.
The First Expert Group Meeting of BIMSTEC on
Agricultural Cooperation was held in Myanmar from 1416 March 2007. India will host the next Expert Group
Meeting of BIMSTEC on Agricultural Cooperation in
2008.
The 2nd BIMSTEC Summit, which was to be held in early
2007 in India, was re-scheduled as the proposed dates
were not found convenient to some members. India will

host the 2 nd BIMSTEC Summit after consulting all
BIMSTEC member countries.

Asia-Pacific Trade Agreement (APTA)
The Second Ministerial Council Meeting of Asia Pacific
Trade Agreement (APTA) was held on 26 October 2007
at Goa. An announcement to launch the 4th Round of
Negotiations was made. The Standing Committee was
directed to conclude the negotiations by the Third
Ministerial Council Meeting (scheduled to be held in
October 2009). The Standing Committee is to adopt
modalities for extension of negotiations in other areas such
as non-tariff measures, trade facilitation, services, and
investment. To this effect the prospects of APTA have
been widen by the Ministers. A common set of
Operational Procedures for the Certificate and
Verification of the Origin of Goods for APTA was
approved and it was decided that the same would be
implemented with effect from 1 January 2008. The
Standing Committee and the Secretariat would undertake
necessary actions to expand the membership of this
Agreement and Member Countries to give positive
consideration to support the Secretariat’s activities
relating to APTA.

Mekong Ganga Cooperation (MGC)
India hosted a delegation of about one hundred Buddhist
pilgrims from Cambodia, Lao PDR, Myanmar, Thailand
and Vietnam from 5-12 September 2007 to promote
cultural exchanges within the framework of MGC. During
their stay in India, the pilgrims visited Patna, Pawapuri,
Rajgir, Nalanda, Bodh Gaya, Varanasi and Sarnath. A
special Air India plane was chartered for the purpose of
travel of pilgrims to India and back. All expenses on
international travel as well as boarding and lodging were
borne by Government of India.

Asian Cooperation Dialogue (ACD)
The 6th Foreign Ministers’ meeting of Asian Cooperation
Dialogue (ACD) was held in Seoul, Republic of Korea in
June 2007. E. Ahamed, Minister of State for External
Affairs represented India at this meeting. The Seoul IT
Declaration aimed at promoting IT development among
member countries was adopted at this meeting. It was also
decided to form a High Level Study Group of the ACD to
set its future directions and to consolidate cooperation
among member countries.

105

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

The Minister of External Affairs participated in a
Ministerial meeting of the ACD in September 2007 on
the margins of UNGA held in New York. The Ministers
discussed the regional situation in the Asian continent,
and reviewed ongoing cooperative endeavours with the
group. The Ministers discussed substantive ideas to begin
a cultural dialogue within the ACD. The group noted the
offer of the government of Kazakhstan to host the next
Ministerial meeting of the ACD in Astana, Kazakhstan
in October 2008.

Indian Ocean Rim Association for
Regional Cooperation (IOR-ARC)
At the Seventh Council of Ministers (COM) Meeting held
in Tehran in March 2007, India announced organising of
an IOR-ARC Trade Fair, as part of the India International
Trade Fair, at Pragati Maidan, New Delhi from 14-27
November 2007, an IOR-ARC Film Festival, two special
training courses on (i) IT and E-Government, and (ii)
Small and Medium Enterprises, under the ITEC
programme and to facilitate and strengthen education
exchanges among the IOR-ARC countries. Seven IORARC Member Countries, viz. Indonesia, Iran, South
Africa, Thailand, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and Tanzania
participated in the India International Trade Fair, at
Pragati Maidan. A Buyer-Seller Meet was also organized
on 14 November 2007. India also organised a Special
Training Course on Small and Medium Enterprises. The
IOR-ARC Film Festival has been scheduled to be held
from 22 February–1 March 2008.

Group of Eight (G8)
Prime Minister visited Germany to attend the Summit
Meeting of the G8 and the five Outreach Countries
(Brazil, China, India, Mexico and South Africa) at
Heiligendamm at the invitation of the German G8
Presidency on 8 June 2007. This was for the third
consecutive year that India was invited to participate in
the G8-Outreach Summit.
An important outcome of the meeting was the launching
of a high-level dialogue between the G8 and the Outreach
Countries, beginning in the second half of 2007 and to be
completed by the 2009 G8 Summit in Italy, on four issues,
viz., innovation, investment, energy efficiency and
development, particularly in Africa. During the Summit
Meeting of the G8 and the Outreach countries Prime
Minister spoke on the issue of climate change and other

issues. The five Outreach Countries (O5) brought out a
joint position paper covering issues such as economic
development, global governance, international trade,
international migration, climate change and South-South
cooperation for disseminating the common positions of
the O5 countries among the G8 countries.
The O5 Leaders met on 7 June 2007 in Berlin for a wideranging discussion, preceding the meeting of G8 leaders
with O5 Leaders on the following day at Heiligendamm.
The leaders reaffirmed their shared conviction that
developing countries must participate more actively in
the consolidation of strategies and initiatives that
effectively address the challenges of a globalising and
increasingly interdependent world. They also agreed to
have consultations on a regular basis on issues of common
interest and to coordinate their positions. During his visit
to Germany, our Prime Minister emphasized the need for
more active participation by Outreach countries in future
G8 Summits.

Asia – Europe Meeting (ASEM)
The Minister of External Affairs participated in the 8th
ASEM Foreign Ministers’ Meeting in Hamburg, Germany,
on 28-29 May 2007. This was our first Ministerial
participation in ASEM. The Asia-Europe Meeting
(ASEM) is an informal process of dialogue and
cooperation bringing together EU member states and the
European Commission, with countries in Asia and
ASEAN Secretariat. The ASEM dialogue addresses
political, economic and cultural issues, with the objective
of strengthening the relationship between the two regions.
The decision to admit India as a new member of the ASEM
process was taken at the ASEM Summit meeting held in
Helsinki in September 2006.

India, Brazil and South Africa (IBSA)
The 4th meeting of the Trilateral Commission was held in
New Delhi, India, on 16-17 July 2007. The Indian
delegation was led by the Minister of External Affairs and
Foreign Ministers of Brazil and South Africa participated
in the Trilateral Meeting.
The initial discussions commenced on 6 October 2007 to
conclude an India-SACU-MERCOSUR FTA. The
commitment to enhancing trade and economic relations
between the three sides was affirmed. The first IBSA
Conference of Editors was held in New Delhi on 3-4

106

Multilateral Economic Relations

September 2007 with participation from a high profile and
distinguished panel of editors from all the three countries.
Prime Minister participated in the Second Summit of
IBSA Forum, held on 17 October 2007 in Pretoria. A
Business Forum, an Academic Seminar, and meetings of
the newly constituted Parliamentary and Women’s Forum
preceded the Summit. The Summit adopted the Tshwane
Declaration. Seven MoUs were signed in areas such as
public administration and governance, culture, social
issues, health and medicines, public administration, higher
education and on customs and tax administration
cooperation. It was agreed to achieve an intra-IBSA trade
target of US$ 15 billion by the year 2010. The Third
Summit will be held in India in 2008.

OECD
Secretary General, Organization of Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD) visited India in October 2007

to release the first-ever survey of the Indian Economy by
this organisation. Since 2001, India is a member of the
OECD Development Centre, a semi-independent body
within the OECD. India participates as an “observer” in
several committees, including Steel Committee (since
2000), Fiscal Affairs (since 2006) and Consumer Policy
(since 2007).

APEC
With a 10-year moratorium on the APEC membership
coming to an end, the APEC Summit meeting held in
Sydney in September 2007 considered the membership
issue and decided to continue with the moratorium on
APEC membership till the year 2010. India’s position on
the APEC membership since 1991 has been that we would
consider joining APEC if our membership is endorsed by
consensus amongst APEC members.

107

11

Technical & Economic Cooperation and
Development Partnership

T

he Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation
(ITEC) Programme and its sister programme, the
Special Commonwealth Assistance for Africa Programme
(SCAAP), centered on the sharing of experiences, transfer
of technology and capacity building; formed an important
component of India’s interaction with the developing
world. The usefulness and relevance of the ITEC
Programme in their countries was reflected in the
increasing number of participants in the programme and
as conveyed by Ministers and officials from developing
countries in Africa, Asia, Eurasia, Latin America and the
Caribbean at bilateral meetings with their Indian
counterparts and at various other fora.
ITEC and SCAAP continued to draw large numbers of
participants to the training programmes conducted by
institutes in India, both in the Government and private
sector, under the civilian and defence training
programmes. Some 4,700 professionals, in Government
and other sectors from 156 developing countries, attended
the courses in areas of importance and usefulness to them.
To facilitate matters a website was created exclusively for
ITEC and SCAAP applicants and operationalised during
the year and a Brochure of the training programmes was
brought out in 5 languages in addition to English, namely,
Arabic, French, Portuguese, Spanish and Russian. (List
of 156 ITEC partner countries is at Appendix XV.

Civilian Training Programme

Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC),
Mekong Ganga Cooperation (MGC), the African Union
(AU), the Afro-Asian Rural Development Organization
(AARDO), the Pan African Parliament, the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM), the Commonwealth and the
World Trade Organisation (WTO).
In response to requests, the following special courses were
conducted during the year:- (i) Special Course on ‘Cotton
Cultivation, Quality Aspects and Value Addition’ for
Francophone Africa, i.e. C4 and other West African
Countries from 16-30 June 2007 by the South India Textile
Research Association (SITRA), Coimbatore; (ii) 3 Special
Courses on ‘Capacity Building for Equity Fund and
General Managers in the SME Sector in Africa & South
Asia’ from 4-15 February 2007, 2-13 July 2007 and 5-16
November 2007, jointly by Administrative Staff College
of India (ASCI) and National Institute of Micro, Small
and Medium Enterprises (NIMSME), Hyderabad for the
Commonwealth; (iii) 2 Special Courses on English and
IT for 24 Ecuadorians from August 6 - October 26, 2007
by NIIT, New Delhi followed by the second Special Course
for 36 Ecuadorians commencing in January 2008 for 3
months; (iv) Special Course for participants from the
Indian Ocean Rim – Association for Regional Cooperation
(IOR – ARC) Member countries from 27 August–5
October 2007 by the National Institute of Micro, Small
and Medium Enterprises (NIMSME), Hyderabad; (v) A
Special Training Programme was organized for Mongolian
Scientists at the Central Institute for Research on Goats,
Makhdoom, Mathura, on “Semen and Embryo Transfer
on Goats” from 26 November 2007-25 January 2008.

The Programme is fully sponsored by the Government of
India with 43 institutions on the panel which conducted
220 courses, primarily short-term, for working
professionals on a wide and diverse range of skills and
disciplines.

Defence Training

The ITEC Programme while essentially bilateral, in recent
years has increased the scope of its activities and associated
with regional and multilateral organisations. These
organisations and groupings include the Association of
South East Asia Nations (ASEAN) member countries,
the G-15, the Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi Sectoral

Growing interest in defence training was evident with the
three wings of the Defence Services i.e. Army, Navy and
Air Force accepting 572 officers/trainees from 61
countries, up from 388 participants the previous year from
36 countries to various defence training institutions. The
courses were general and specialized in nature and

108

Technical & Economic Cooperation and Development Partnership

included Security and Strategic Studies, Defence
Management, Artillery, Electronics, Mechanical
Engineering, Marine Hydrography, Counter Insurgency
and Jungle Warfare as also foundation courses for young
officers in the three services. Applications to the premiere
Defence courses at the National Defence College (NDC),
New Delhi and the Defence Services Staff College
(DSSC), Wellington, were oversubscribed in the ratio of
3:1 and saw officers from developed countries also
attending them on a self-financing basis.

Deputation of Experts
At the request of Governments and international
organisations, 49 experts in the Civilian and Defence field
were deputed and remained in position in 17 countries to
advise and provide expertise in areas including
Information Technology, Auditing, Legal Expertise,
diverse Agricultural fields, Pharmacology, Statistics and
Demography, Public Administration and Textiles. The
services of Defence teams were also availed of by the Lao
PDR, Lesotho, Seychelles and Zambia in training and
advisory capacities.

Other Assistance
At the request of the Government of Ecuador, delivery of
medicines worth US$ 1 million, donated by India,
commenced during the year.

Development Partnership & Projects
Cooperation
A number of bilateral projects were undertaken in 200708 notably in the fields of Archaeological Conservation,
Tourism and Hospitality, Information Technology (IT) and
Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs). The focus of the
projects under the bilateral cooperation program was on
setting up the requisite physical infrastructure and
capacity building to ensure long-term sustainability of the
projects under way.
The main projects under implementation included the
following:Maldives: Civil construction work on the India Maldives
Friendship Faculty of Hospitality and Tourism Studies”
commenced and is expected to be completed by middle
of 2009-10.
Cambodia: Conservation and restoration work by the
Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) at the World

Heritage Site of Ta Prohm temple proceeded apace
following the approvals from the UNESCO and local
government authorities.
Indonesia: A bilateral agreement was signed with
Government of Indonesia to set up a Vocational Training
Centre in the Construction Sector in Aceh in June 2007.
Lao People’s Democratic Republic (Lao PDR): (a) A
bilateral agreement with the Government of the Lao PDR
was signed to execute conservation and restoration at the
UNESCO World Heritage Site of Wat Phu to be executed
by the ASI; (b) An Information Technology project to
strengthen IT infrastructure in the Lao PDR continued
to operate smoothly; (c) 30 students from the Lao PDR
continued to undergo a 3 year Master of Computer
Application (MCA) programme at Indraprastha
University, Delhi; (d) Feasibility study to set up pilot rural
tele-centres was conducted.
Vietnam: Further discussions were held on ways to
implement the project for setting up an Advanced
Resource Centre in Hanoi committed by the Government
of India.
Zimbabwe: A Bilateral Agreement with the Government
of Zimbabwe reached in 2006 to establish a Centre in the
field of Small and Medium Enterprises neared completion.
Latin American & Caribbean (LAC) Region: In the
information Technology field, agreements were reached
with 4 countries in the LAC region to set up 4 IT Training
Centers in El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua and Jamaica.
Grenada: An IT Training Centre in Grenada is also being
set up.
In addition to the projects referred to above several other
projects were at various stages of implementation in areas
such as Healthcare Services and providing Consultancy
Services for setting up infrastructure including feasibility
study for setting up a Software Technology Park and a
Sewerage Treatment Plant in Antigua and Barbuda;
establishing an Administrative Staff College in Aceh,
Indonesia and a project for a neuro-speciality hospital in
Lao PDR.

Aid for Disaster Relief
Under disaster relief assistance, India rendered immediate
relief assistance to countries affected by natural calamities:
(i) A consignment of 2000 MT of rice was shipped to

109

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

North Korea as a measure of humanitarian assistance; (ii)
Supply of 5000 MT of rice and 5000 MT of sugar to
Mongolia; (iii) Providing medicines or financial assistance
to a number of countries affected with natural calamities

including cyclones and floods in Bolivia and Solomon
Islands, and (iv) Action was also initiated to provide
medical and financial assistance to Belize, Mexico, Haiti
and Dominican Republic.

110

Investment and Technology Promotion

T

he Investment and Technology Promotion (ITP)
Division’s annual publication “India-Dynamic
Business Partner: Investor Friendly Destination” was
published in June 2007 and circulated to all Missions/
Posts abroad, other agencies of the Government of India,
apex chambers of commerce and Industry etc. The
publication has been developed with the intent of
providing the reader a comprehensive picture of India’s
economic growth, sectoral developments, social and legal
background and potential business and investment
opportunities. With the intention of a wider reach and
making it user friendly, the publication is accompanied
by a CD version, and is available in Japanese, Chinese,
Russian, German, French, Italian, Spanish and Arabic
languages.
The ITP Division continues to provide to entrepreneurs
and policy makers global perspectives on the trends in
trade and opportunities for exports and advise on market
strategy through the medium of its detailed Investment
and Business Brief. The Brief serves as a handy and useful
document for all our Missions abroad equipping them with
the latest developments in the Indian economy along with
facts and figures relating to our trade and investments
and helps them in their own promotional activities.
The Division’s website www.indiainbusiness.nic.in which
is devoted exclusively for the economic and commercial
aspects of India’s diplomacy was revamped with new
features and hyperlinks with the aim of providing
comprehensive and latest information for global investors
and businessmen about the opportunities in India. The
website serves as a useful and reliable source of information
which is evident from the number of business and
investments related queries received by the Division. This
has also helped project the image of India as an established
economic power with attractive potential for investment
and business.
The Division participated and contributed actively in the
meetings of Foreign Investment Promotion Board, Reserve

12

Bank of India, Board of Trade and other policy meetings
concerning reforms and liberalisation of the economy and
simplifying of investment procedures and expeditiously
processed proposals relating to opening of Liaison/Branch
offices by foreign companies in India.
The Division interacted with Export Promotion Councils,
Trade and Industry bodies, such as Confederation of
Indian Industries (CII), Federation of Indian Chambers
of Commerce and Industry (FICCI), National Association
of Software and Service Companies (NASSCOM),
Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry
(ASSOCHAM), etc., Department of Commerce and
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP)
for promotion of India’s exports and investment initiatives.
Periodicals, Journals and other relevant information
brought out by these organizations and concerned
Government agencies were regularly circulated to Indian
Missions abroad to keep them abreast of various
developments in knowledge based industries such as
information technology, biotechnology and
pharmaceuticals.
As part of its efforts to enhance greater air-connectivity
between India and different regions of the world with a
view to making India as an attractive business and
investment destination, ITP Division actively participated
and made positive contributions in the bilateral civil
aviation talks held with several countries, including, inter
alia, Malaysia, Turkey, Jordan, Greece, UAE, Singapore,
and Russia.
A new Energy Security Unit has been established in the
Ministry of External Affairs in September 2007 and
appended to the ITP Division. This Unit would, interalia, maintain close coordination with the concerned
Ministries and support their international engagement
through appropriate and sustained diplomatic
interventions. It has also been charged with the
responsibility of supporting the efforts of our corporate
entities, both in public and private sectors, in acquiring
energy assets overseas, in transfer of new and emerging

111

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

technologies to India and in building strategic partnerships
with foreign companies.
The Division took active part in Governmental/nonGovernmental meetings on Energy issues and through its
network of Missions facilitated the work of Indian
companies. As part of its efforts to bolster energy security
for the country, the Division was instrumental in
mobilizing Ministerial level participation from several
African countries during the Indo-African Hydrocarbon
Exhibition and Conference jointly organized by the
Ministry of Petroleum and Federation of Indian Chambers
of Commerce and Industry in New Delhi on 6-7 November
2007.

which was successfully organized by Indian Council for
Research on International Economic Relations (ICRIER)
at New Delhi on 30 April 2007.
The Division actively pursued the policy of using Lines of
Credit on concessional terms for promotion of India’s
political, economic and commercial interests. During the
period from April 2007-November 2007, agreements on
Lines of Credit amounting to about US$ 365 million have
been approved for disbursal. The Lines of Credit have
helped Indian companies to obtain project contracts and
orders for supply of goods and services in number of
countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America.

The ITP Division extended part financial assistance for a
seminar on US-India Agricultural Knowledge Initiative,

112

Policy Planning and Research

T

he Policy Planning and Research Division serves as
a nodal point for interaction with the University
Grants Commission (UGC) and its affiliates and the Area
Study Centres (ASC) located in various universities,
specializing in research on various regions of the world.
The Division extended financial assistance to various
academic institutions/think-tanks located in different
parts of the country for holding conferences, seminars,
preparation of research papers, exchange of scholars and
support for Track-II programmes on issues related to India’s
external relations and security. A list of seminars/
conferences/meetings/study projects organized/
undertaken by institutions/NGOs partly funded by the
Policy Planning and Research Division is given at
Appendix XIV. A computerized database of experts and
institutions specializing in policy research and analysis has
also been developed by the Division and is updated on
regular basis.
The Policy Planning and Research Division continued
issuing Monthly Summary for the Cabinet. This covers
the broad spectrum of India’s relations with different
countries of the world during the month.
The Division continued to edit and publish the Annual
Report of the Ministry. The Report serves as a
compendium of India’s interaction with the rest of the
world in the political, economic, and cultural fields,
including the views of the government on various facets
of international relations.

13

The Division reviewed the functioning of Business Centres
set up in some of the Indian Missions and Posts abroad as
also content, scope and frequency of reporting by the
missions.
The Division was also responsible for scrutinizing the
depiction of India’s external boundaries in the foreign
publications imported into the country, and offered its
advice to the Ministries dealing with this matter. It
coordinated the supply of map- sheets to various
Government and semi-Government offices and research
scholars for use in their official work with the Survey of
India. The Division also dealt with the requests from
research scholars for access to the old records of the
Ministry.

Boundary Cell
A Boundary Cell has been established in the Ministry. It
provides technical support to all Territorial Divisions on
international boundary related matters. It has started
building database for boundary strip maps covering the
external boundary of India. During 2007-08 it undertook
archiving and digitisation of boundary strip maps and
archiving of Topographical Maps, in digital and hard copy
form, published by Survey of India covering international
boundary of India. The Boundary cell has participated in
various bilateral international meetings with neighbouring
countries for negotiations, delineation and demarcation
of external boundaries of India.

113

Protocol

14

I

ndia’s increasing engagement with the international
community has resulted in a large number of visits to
India by foreign dignitaries. There were 78 visits at the
level of Head of State/Vice President/Head of
Government/Foreign Minister during the year 2007.
Foreign Resident Diplomatic Missions in Delhi have
increased from 116 in 2003 to 132 in 2007. Foreign
Representatives in Diplomatic Missions in Delhi are also
growing in size with 80 posts added in 2007. During the
year 2007, three countries opened Resident Missions in
New Delhi: Bahrain (February 2007), Malawi (26 March
2007) and Malta (19 March 2007). Germany opened a
Consulate in Bangalore and China opened one in Kolkota.
Permission was given to Turkey to open a Consulate in
Mumbai, to Lithuania to open a Consulate in New Delhi
and to Japan to open its Consulate in Bangalore. In
addition, 18 countries were granted permission to appoint
Honorary Consul Generals in New Delhi, Kolkata,
Mumbai, Bangalore and Chennai. Protocol handled 28

credentials ceremonies, official entertainment, and
numerous other functions during 2007. Streamlining of
protocol norms and standards continued to be a focus of
attention. The Service Tax Exemption Framework was
implemented on the basis of reciprocity for entitled foreign
missions, diplomats and consulate officials.
The Conference Cell assisted in the organisation of the
following conferences:
Fourteenth SAARC Summit, New Delhi on 3-4
April 2007;
Third Meeting of the BIMSTEC JWG – CTTC SubGroup on Legal and Law Enforcement issues, New
Delhi on 19-20 April 2007;
Fourth IBSA Trilateral Joint Commission Meeting,
New Delhi, 13 and 16-17 July 2007;
Twenty Ninth SAARC Council of Ministers
Meeting, New Delhi on 7-8 December 2007.

Visits during 2007
State Visits by Head of State/Government/Vice President and Equivalent Level
S.No. Dignitary
1

H.E. Prof. Anibal Cavaco Silva, President of Portugal

2

H.E. Mr. Romano Prodi, Prime Minister of Italy

3

H.H. Shaikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum, Vice President and
Prime Minister of UAE, Ruler of Dubai

Dates
January 10-17
February 10-15
March 25-26

4

H.E. Mr. Aleksandr Lukashenko, President of Belarus

April 15-17

5

H.E. Mr. Luiz Inacio Lula Da Silva, President of Brazil

June 3-5

6

H.E. Gen. Surayud Chulanout, Prime Minister of Thailand

7

H.E. Mr. Nguyen Tan Dung, Prime Minister of Vietnam

8

H.E. Samdech Hun Sen, Prime Minister of Cambodia

9

H.E. Mr. Shinzo Abe, Prime Minister of Japan

10

H.E. Mr. Felipe Calderon Hinojosa, President of Mexico

June 25-27
July 4-6
July 8-11
August 21-23

114

September 10-11

Protocol

11

H.E. Mr. Sergei Stanishev, Prime Minister of Bulgaria

12

H.E. Gloria Macapagal Arroyo, President of Philippines

13

H.M. Queen Beatrix of Netherlands

14

H.E. Dr. Angela Merkel, Chancellor of Germany

15

H.E. Mrs. Micheline Calmy Rey, President of Swiss Confederation

16

H.E. Samdech Hun Sen, Prime Minister of Cambodia

September 10-15
October 3-6
October 22-27
October 29-November 1
November 4-8
December 7-10

Official/Working Visits by Head of State/Government/Vice President and Equivalent Level
1
H.E. Mr. Vladimir V Putin, President of Russian Federation
January 25-26
2

H.E. Mr. Maumoon Abdul Gayoom, President of Maldives

January 27- February 1

3

H.E. Dr. Navinchandra Ramgoolam, Prime Minister of Mauritius

January 28- February 1

4

H.M. Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck, King of Bhutan

5

H.H. Shaikh Salman Bin Hamad Al Khalifa, Crown Prince of Bahrain

6

H.R.H. Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn of Thailand

7

H.E. Jigme Singye Wangchuck, King of Bhutan

8

H.R.H. Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn of Thailand

9

H.E. Mr. Mahinda Rajapaksa, President of Sri Lanka

10

H.E. Mr. Jose Socrates, Prime Minister of Portugal

November 29 - December 2

11

H.E. Mr. Jose Manuel Barroso, President, European Commission

November 29 - December 1

12

H.H. Sayyid Fahad Bin Mahmood Al Said, Deputy Prime Minister of Sultanate of Oman

February 7-12
March 19-22
March 5-10
July 26-31
August 8-9
October 12-14

December 12-15

Official Visits by Foreign Minister and Equivalent Level
1
H.E. Mr. Dai Bingguo, Special Representative of China

January 16-20

2

H.E. Mr. George Yeo, Foreign Minister of Singapore

January 21-24

3

H.E. Mr. Rohitha Bogollagama, Foreign Minister of Sri Lanka

January 30- February 1

4

Archbishop Desmond Tutu, Nobel LaureateSouth Africa

January 29- February 1

5

H.E. Mr. LiZhaoxing, Foreign Minister of China

6

Fifth Trilateral meeting of Foreign Ministers of India, China and Russian Federation

7

H.E. Dato Seri Syed Hamid Albar, Foreign Minister of Malaysia

February 14-16

8

H.E. Ms. Benita Ferrero Waldner, EU Commissioner for External Relations

February 15-20

9

H.E. Mr. Jean Asselborn, Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Luxembourg

February 19-23

10

H.E. Mr. Khurshid Mehmood Kasuri, Foreign Minister of Pakistan

February 20-23

11

H.E. Mr. Sergei Martynov, Foreign Minister of Belarus

February 21-24

12

H.E. Mr. Pham Gia Khiem, Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Vietnam February 25 – March 1

13

H.E. Ratu Epeli Nailatikau, Foreign Minister of Fiji Islands

March 3-6

14

H.E. Mr. Francisco E Lainez, Foreign Minister of El Salvador

March 4-9

115

February 11-14
February 14

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

15

H.E. Dr. Ursula Plassnik, Foreign Minister of Austria

March 15-19

16

Rt. Hon. Don Mckinnon, Commonwealth Secretary General

March 21-23

17

H.E. Dato Seri Panglima Syed Hamid Albar, Foreign Minister of Malaysia

18

H.E. Mr. Celso Amorim, Foreign Minister of Brazil

April 10-14

19

H.E. Mr. Felipe Perez Roque, Foreign Minister of Cuba

April 11-12

20

H.E. Mr. Dai Bingguo, Special Representative of China

April 19-24

21

H.E. Mr. Carl Bildt, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden

22

H.E. Mr. Hor Namhong, Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Cambodia

23

H.H. Sheikh Abdulla Bin Zayed Al Nahyan, Foreign Minister of UAE

24

IBSA Trilateral Meeting [India, Brazil and South Africa Foreign Ministers]

25

H.E. Mr. Walid Al Moualem, Foreign Minister of Syrian Arab Republic

August 13-15

26

H.E. Mr. Gert Rosenthal, Foreign Minister of Guatemala

August 25-31

27

H.E. Mr. Massimo D Alema, Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Italy

October 9-12

28

H.E. Dr. Per Stig Moller, Foreign Minister of Denmark

October 22-24

29

H.E. Mr. Abdulla Shahid, Foreign Minister of Maldives

October 27-29

30

H.E. Mr. Lee Kuan Yew, Minister Mentor of Singapore

31

H.E. Mr. George Yeo, Foreign Minister of Singapore

November 11-12

32

H.E. Mr. Karel Schwarzenberg, Foreign Minister of Czech Republic

November 18-21

33

H.E. Mr. Lee Kuan Yew, Minister Mentor of Singapore

December 5-7

34

SAARC Ministerial Meeting

December 3-8

35

H.E. Mr. Bernard Kouchmer, Foreign Minister of France

April 9-10

May 1-7
May 17-19
June 5-6
July 14-18

October 28 - November 2

December 20-28

Private/Transit Visit of Heads of State/Government/Vice President and First Ladies and
Equivalent Level
1
Visit of Vice President of Indonesia
January 28-February 1
2

H.H. Shaikha Moodhi Bent Faisal Al Merri, Wife of King of Bahrain

March 30 and April 6

3

H.E. Mr. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of Uganda

4

H.E. Mr. Angel Marin, Vice President of Bulgaria

5

H.E. Mr. Paul Kagame, President of Rwanda

6

Deputy Prime Minister of Kuwait

7

Mrs. Sarojni Jugnath, First Lady of Mauritius

8

H.R.H. Crown Prince Maha Vajiralongkorn of Thailand

9

H.R.H. Grand Duke Henri, Head of State of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg

10

H.R.H. Crown Prince Maha Vajiralongkorn of Thailand

September 8

11

H.R.H. Crown Prince Maha Vajiralongkorn of Thailand

October 21

April 1
April 27
May 18-19
June 3
June 8-13

116

July 26
August 25

Protocol

12

H.E. Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, President of the State of Palestine

13

H.E. Mr. Nelson Oduber, Prime Minister of Aruba

14

H.E. Mr. S R Nathan, President of Singapore

December 10-25

15

H.E. Mr. Aneerudh Jugnauth, President of Mauritius

December 13-23

Visits Abroad of President/Vice President/Prime Minister of India
1
Prime Minister’s visit to Cebu, Philippines [East Asia Summit]

October 24
December 9-14

January 13-15

2

President’s visit to Strasbourg [France] and Greece

April 24-28

3

Prime Minister’s visit to Germany [G-8 Summit]

4

Prime Minister’s visit to Nigeria and South Africa

5

Prime Minister’s visit to Russia

November 11-13

6

Prime Minister’s visit to Singapore [East Asia Summit]

November 20-21

7

Prime Minister’s visit to Uganda [CHOGM]

November 22-25

June 6-9
October 14-18

List of Foreign Ambassadors/High Commissioners who Presented their Credentials During the Period
01.04.2007 to 18.12.2007
Sr. No. Name / Country
Date credentials presented
1.

H.E. Mr. Paek Young Sun, Ambassador of Republic of Korea (ROK)

22.05.2007

2.

H.E. Mr. Ihor Polikha, Ambassador of Ukraine

22.05.2007

3.

H.E. Mrs. Teresita V. Berner, Ambassador of the Philippines

22.05.2007

4.

H.E. Mr. Mohammed Ghassan Shaikho, Ambassador of Bahrain

22.05.2007

5.

H.E. Dr. Geza Palmai, Ambassador of Hungary

22.05.2007

6.

H.E. Mr.Lawal Mohammed Dustin MA, High Commissioner of Nigeria

19.07.2007

7.

H.E. Mr. John W.H. Kijazi, High Commissioner of Tanzania

19.07.2007

8.

H.E. Mr. Ion de La Riva de Guzman Frutos, Ambassador of Spain

19.07.2007

9.

H.E. Mr. Wilfred Kenley, Ambassador of Malta

19.07.2007

10.

H.E. Mr. Alem Tsehaye, Ambassador of Eritrea

19.07.2007

11.

H.E. Mr. Sayed Mehdi Nabizadeh, Ambassador of the Islamic Republic of Iran

19.07.2007

12.

H.E. Mr. Marc Courte, Ambassador of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg

26.09.2007

13.

H.E. Ms. Ann Ollestad, Ambassador of Norway

26.09.2007

14.

H.E. Mr. Jerome Bonnafont, Ambassador of France

26.09.2007

15.

H.E. Mr. Miguel Angel Ramirez Ramos, Ambassador of Cuba

26.09.2007

16.

H.E. Mr. Charles Richard Vernon Stagg, High Commissioner of UK

26.09.2007

17.

H.E. Mr. Jean Marie Deboutte, Ambassador of Belgium

26.09.2007

18.

H.E. Mrs. Daniele Smadja, Ambassador of EU

26.09.2007

19.

H.E. Mr. Hardijs Baumanis, Ambassador of Latvia (Non-res)

26.09.2007

117

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

20.

H.E. Mr. Mark Sofer, Ambassador of Israel

12.12.2007

21.

H.E. Mr. Juan Alfredo Pinto Saavedra, Ambassador of Colombia

12.12.2007

22.

H.E. Mr. Bob H. Hiensch, Ambassador of Netherlands

12.12.2007

23.

H.E. Mr. Hideaki Domichi, Ambassador of Japan

12.12.2007

24.

H.E. Mr. Parahat Hommadovich Durdyev, Ambassador of Turkmenistan

18.12.2007

25.

H.E. Prof. Festus Kaberia, High Commissioner of Kenya

18.12.2007

26.

H.E. Mr. Ferdinand Maultaschl, Ambassador of Austria

18.12.2007

27.

H.E. Ms. Ebyan Mahamed Salah, Ambassador of Somalia

18.12.2007

28.

H.E. Mr. Zhang Yan, Ambassador of China

18.12.2007

List of Foreign Ambassadors/High Commissioners who Left India during the period
01.04.2007 to 18.12.2007 on Completion of Assignment
Sr. No. Name / Country
Date of Departure
1.

H.E. Mrs. Laura Q Del Rosario, Ambassador of Philippines

01.04.2007

2.

H.E. Mr. T.G. Nizazzov, Ambassador of Turkmenistan

07.04.2007

3.

H.E. Mrs. Eva L. Nazro, High Commissioner of Tanzania

16.05.2007

4.

H.E. Mr. Abdul Gapar Ismail, High Commissioner of Brunei

16.05.2007

5.

H.E. Mr. Siyavash Zargar Yaghoubi, Ambassador of Islamic Republic of Iran

27.04.2007

6.

H.E. Dr. Jutta Stefan Bastl, Ambassador of Austria

27.05.2007

7.

H.E. Mr. Pedro Pablo De Bedout Gori, Ambassador of Colombia

30.06.2007

8.

H.E. Mr. Don Rafael Conde de Saro, Ambassador of Spain

29.06.2007

9.

H.E. Mr. Gabriel Fassil, Ambassador of Eritrea

04.07.2007

10.

H.E. Mr. Juan Carretero Ibanez, Ambassador of Cuba

19.07.2007

11.

H.E. Mr. Franis S.K. Bayah, High Commissioner of Kenya

21.07.2007

12.

H.E. Mr. Jorge Heine, Ambassador of Chile

01.08.2007

13.

H.E. Mr. Paul Stenimetz, Ambassador of Grand Duchy of Luxembourg

15.08.2007

14.

H.E. Mr. David Danieli, Ambassador of Israel

16.08.2007

15.

H.E. Mr. William Ehlers, Ambassador of Uruguay

01.09.2007

16.

H.E. Mr. Jon Westborg, Ambassador of Norway

01.09.2007

17.

H.E. Mr. Dominique Girad, Ambassador of France

27.08.2007

18.

H.E. Mr. Francisco da Camara Gomes, Ambassador of EU

31.08.2007

19.

H.E. Mr. Michael Arthur, High Commissioner of UK

07.09.2007

20.

H.E. Mr. Yasukuni Enoki, Ambassador of Japan

30.09.2007

21.

H.E. Mr. Don Rafael Conde de Saro, Ambassador of Spain

29.06.2007

22.

H.E. Mr. Luke Rokovada, Ambassador of Fiji

31.10.2007
118

Protocol

23.

H.E. Mr. Eric F. Ch. Nieche, Ambassador of Netherlands

11.11.2007

24.

H.E. Mr. Gilbert Bleu Laine, Ambassador of Cote d’ Ivoire

18.11.2007

25.

H.E. Mr. Sun Yuxi, Ambassador of China

11.12.2007

119

15

Consular, Passport and Visa Services

Passport Offices
here are presently 34 Passport Offices and 15 Passport
Collection Centres in India. It is proposed to open
new Passport Offices at Amritsar, Dehradun and
Coimbatore in 2007-2008. All Passport Offices are
computerized and they issue machine-printed and
machine readable passports as per the guidelines laid down
by the International Civil Aviation Organisation. Passport
applications are being scanned and stored electronically.

(c) Infrastructure
Suitable plots have been acquired for construction of
Passport Offices in Mumbai, Visakhapatnam, Guwahati,
Srinagar, Thane and Jalandhar and purchase of land at
Amritsar and Surat is under process. Bangalore Passport
Office has started functioning from the new premises.
Construction of Lucknow and Jaipur Passport Offices is
nearing completion. Construction of Passport Office at
Bhubaneswar has already commenced.

Passport Services

Public Grievance Redressal Mechanism

There has been a significant increase in the number of
passports issued over the years. A total of 49.4 lakh
passports were issued in 2007, an increase of 13.1% over
the corresponding figure in 2006. A total of 49 lakh
applications were received in 2007, an increase of 10.7%
over the corresponding figure in 2006. The total revenue
generated from all Passport Offices also increased to about
Rs 567 crore, an increase of 13.8% compared to the total
revenue in 2006. The Ministry has been taking a number
of measures to make the passport issuance system simpler
and speedier for the comfort and convenience of the
public. Some of these important steps are delineated as
under:

Steps have been taken to strengthen the public grievance
redressal mechanism in all Passport Offices. Facilitation
Counters and Help Desks have also been set up to assist
applicants and also to attend to grievances/complaints
expeditiously. A public grievance redressal mechanism also
exists in the CPV Division under the close supervision of
the Joint Secretary (CPV) and Chief Passport Officer.

T

(a) Decentralization through District Passport
Cells and Speed Post Centres
With a view to taking the passport issuance and related
services nearer to the doorsteps of the applicants, District
Passport Cells (DPCs) have been opened at the district
level where the office of the District Magistrate/
Superintendent of Police receives passport applications
and after scrutiny and police verification, forwards them
to the concerned Passport Office for issuance of passports.
Currently, there are 463 DPCs. The passport applications
are also received through the network of 1095 Speed Post
Centres.
(b) Online Applications
Online submission of passport applications has been
introduced in all Passport Offices.

Passport Adalats
Passport Offices have been holding Passport Adalats
periodically to redress the grievances of passport
applicants. These Adalats have been very useful in
disposing of old passport-related cases and also in the
issuance of passports to applicants.

Right to Information Act (RTI)
A Central Public Information Officer and Assistant Public
Information Officers have been appointed to provide
information to applicants under the RTI.

Website
The website of CPV Division www.passport.nic.in, which
was established in 1999 is being updated from time to
time to make it more user-friendly. It has detailed
information on passports, visas, consular matters and PIO
cards. It also has downloadable forms. The main website
provides status enquiry check of passport applications
submitted at Delhi. It is also linked to the status check
on the websites of all the Passport Offices.

120

Consular, Passport & Visa Services

Tatkal Scheme
The “Tatkal Scheme”, which was implemented in 2000
in recognition of the genuine needs of some passport
applicants for urgent issue of passports, has been further
liberalized. Passports are issued out-of-turn to eligible
applicants on post police verification based on submission
of prescribed documents. The number of passports issued
under the Tatkal Scheme in 2007 was about 4.6 lakh, 70%
increase over the corresponding figure for 2006.

Consular Attestation
This year 5,00,085 documents were attested in the CPV
Division, out of which 2,81,041 were commercial
documents. This service is rendered on the same day
without any charges.

Issuance of Visas
Over the years, the procedure for grant of visas by our
Missions and Posts has been simplified. Most Missions and
Posts grant visas either across the counter on the same
day or at the most within 48 hours.

Visa-Waiver Agreements
During 2007, Visa-Waiver Agreements for the holders of
Diplomatic and Official passports were signed with
Croatia, Cyprus, Ecuador, Japan, Philippines and Serbia.

Issuance of Diplomatic/Official Passports
The CPV Division issued 1950 diplomatic and 24,867
official passports in 2007, as compared to 2444 and 25,265
passports issued in 2006 respectively. The CPV Division
issued 6200 visas to foreign diplomatic and official
passports holders in the year 2007.

Computerization of Missions/Posts
Abroad
Computerisation of Passport and Visa issuance system was
completed in Missions/Posts at Bahrain, Toronto, Kuala
Lumpur, Birmingham, Jeddah, Colombo, Kandy and
Vancouver. Computerisation of Passport and Visa issuance
system of Houston, Chicago, San Francisco, Washington,
Moscow and Doha is underway.

New Projects
The Ministry has embarked on several projects with a view
to modernizing and upgrading the passport/visa issuance
system. These are as follows:

i Centralized Printing of Passports
The Ministry has successfully implemented the project
for centralised printing of Machine Readable Passports
(MRPs) in respect of 111 Indian Missions/Posts abroad.
The remaining Missions/Posts will be covered in the
beginning of 2008.
ii Issuance of E-Passports
The Government has decided to introduce e-passports,
also known as bio-metric passports, initially for diplomats
and officials as a pilot project by the middle of 2008. Based
on the experience gained from this pilot project, it is
proposed to start issuance of e-passports in the ordinary
category.
iii Passport Seva Project
The Government had entrusted the National Institute of
Smart Government (NISG), Hyderabad, with the task of
undertaking a time-bound study on the passport issuance
system, including its IT aspects with the objective to
deliver passport-related services to the citizens in a timely,
transparent, more accessible, reliable manner. NISG has
submitted its report which has been accepted by the
Government and “Passport Seva Project”, is under
implementation.
The project, which is expected to be completed in a time
frame of 19 months, will result in the issue of passports
within 3 days, and in cases which require police
verification, within 3 days after the completion of the
verification process. Tatkal passports are expected to be
issued the same day. The proposal is to have 68 Passport
Facilitation Centres all over the country where the nonsovereign functions, involved in the passport issuance
process, such as initial scrutiny of the application forms,
acceptance of fee, scanning of the documents, taking
photos, etc. will be done by the service provider to be
selected through an open bidding process. The
Government staff at the Passport Facilitation Centres will
verify the documents and decide on granting of passport.
The other activities such as printing and dispatch will
also be done by the Government staff. Police verification
will be expedited through electronic linkage of the
Passport Facilitation Centres with the police authorities
in State Capitals.
iv Outsourcing of Visa Work
Forty Indian Missions/Posts abroad have been authorized
to outsource visa application collection work out of which

121

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

24 Indian Missions/Posts, namely at Seoul, Tokyo, Kuala
Lumpur, Washington, New York, Chicago, Houston, San
Francisco, Tel Aviv, Bangkok, Paris, Canberra, Sydney,
Melbourne, Frankfurt, Colombo, Singapore, The Hague,
Beijing, Shanghai, Islamabad, Dhaka, Chittagong, and
Milan have already awarded the contracts.
v Launch of Apostille Convention Project
The Attestation Cell has launched Apostille Convention
Project from 29 August 2007 and 13, 633 documents had
been apostilled till the end of November 2007.

Extradition Cases and Legal Assistance
In order to provide a legal and institutional framework to
combat organized crime, international terrorism and drug
trafficking, and to respond to the growing international
dimensions of financial and other crime, bilateral
agreements are being negotiated with several countries
to provide legal under-pinning to this international efforts.
These consular agreements include Treaties on
Extradition, Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters,
Mutual Legal Assistance in Civil and Commercial Matters.
During the visit of the Mexican President, an Extradition
Treaty between the two countries was signed at New Delhi
on 10 September 2007. Similarly, during the visit of
Portuguese President, an Extradition Treaty was signed
at New Delhi on 11 January 2007. Also during the visit of
the President of Belarus, an Extradition Treaty was signed
on 16 April 2007.

The Instruments of Ratification of Extradition Treaty
between India and Kuwait were exchanged at Kuwait in
the month of August 2007 and the Treaty is in force from
7 August 2007. Treaty on Extradition between the
Republic of India and the Republic of Bulgaria came into
force from 1 February 2007. During the year, Indian official
delegations visited Australia, Egypt and Germany to
negotiate Treaties on Extradition and Mutual Legal
Assistance in Criminal Matters.
The Ministry actively pursues requests for extradition and
legal assistance from foreign Governments both for
criminal and civil/commercial offences, which also include
the financial matters. The requests for extradition
emanate from our obligations under the Extradition
Treaties or Extradition Arrangements entered into with
various countries. During the year, 20 requests for
extradition were received from various countries. Similarly,
18 requests were made by the Government of India to
foreign countries like Belgium, Canada, Singapore, UAE,
UK and USA for their consideration. During the same
period four persons have been extradited by the
Government of India to various foreign countries and
another four persons were extradited from foreign
countries. Apart from the above, the Ministry of External
Affairs is also receiving warrants/ summons/ notices and
other judicial processes from the Judicial Authorities/State
Governments /investigation agencies in India for services/
execution on the persons residing abroad.

122

Administration and Establishment

Administration

E

ffective pursuance of India’s foreign policy objectives
necessitates greater Indian diplomatic presence
abroad. For this purpose, there are 170 resident Indian
Missions and Posts abroad. In October 2007 two Posts
namely, Consulate General of India, Juba, Sudan and
Consulate General of India, Guangzhou, China were
opened .
A critical component in the effective functioning of Indian
Missions/Posts abroad is the locally recruited staff. To
enhance the attractiveness of working in Indian Missions/
Posts abroad, and to suitably adjust the pay scales on
account of increase in cost of living, the Ministry
implemented phase two of a comprehensive review of pay
scales for the locally recruited staff under the scheme
known as the Global Cluster Scheme. Consequently,
revision in pay scales was implemented in Missions/Posts
in 22 countries abroad under the second phase.
As part of continuing efforts to streamline the
administrative machinery of the Ministry, steps were taken
to achieve greater decentralization of decision making and
simplification of processes. Rules in respect of Children
Holiday Passage, Home Leave for India-based Domestic
Assistants have been further liberalized and streamlined.
An updated edition of the Indian Foreign Service (Pay,
Leave and Compensatory Allowances) [IFS (PLCA)]
Rules was published. A process for complete overhauling
and simplification of IFS (PLCA) Rules to eliminate
ambiguities in interpretation has been initiated.
Compilation of various instructions issued by the Ministry
during 2007-08 is also underway.
Despite a severe shortage in human resources on account of
reduction of posts, Ministry fully implemented the austerity
measures of the Government with regard to abolition of posts
and held the Screening Committee meeting for Optimization
of Direct Recruitment. Indents for fresh recruitment were
placed on time and review of deployment of manpower at
all levels was conducted periodically.

16

Management of the different cadres working in the
Ministry was undertaken through regular Departmental
Promotion Committee meetings, and through
implementation of provisions under the Assured Career
Promotion Scheme. Regular meetings of the Joint
Consultative Machinery were also held to consult the Staff
Associations on issues of concern to them, and to consider
possible ways of addressing the same.
The current strength of the Ministry is 3464. Details are
given in Appendix I. These personnel are deployed in
India and in 170 Missions / Posts abroad. This includes
officials from the Indian Foreign Service (IFS), Indian
Foreign Service, Branch ‘B’ (IFS ‘B’), Interpreters Cadre,
Legal & Treaties Cadre and the Library Cadre, but
excludes Group ‘D’ and ex-cadre posts.
Recruitment made to various groups in the Ministry from
1 April – 30 November 2007 through Direct Recruitment
(DR), Departmental Promotion (DP) and Limited
Departmental Examinations (LDE), including against
reserved vacancies, are given in the table at Appendix II.
The table at Appendix III gives details of the language
proficiency of officers of the Ministry.
Gender Issue
Gender equality has been a key element of the Ministry’s
overall policy. In keeping with this, equal opportunities
are provided to women officers to take up important
responsibilities.
Presently, there are 7 women officers at Secretary level, 7
women officers at Additional Secretary level and 29
women officers at Joint Secretary level. A total of 23
women officers are currently posted as Ambassador / High
Commissioner / Permanent Representative / Consul
General / Head of Office. The present distribution of
women officers among the various cadres in the Ministry
of External Affairs (MEA) is at Appendix IV.

123

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

Persons with Disability
Ensuring adequate opportunity to persons with disability
and to have suitable representation of persons with
disability among its personnel is an important objective
of the Ministry. Towards this goal, the Ministry has
identified posts suitable for appointment of persons with
disability, including in the Indian Foreign Service. In all,
the Ministry has 37 persons with disability in various
grades and cadres.
Organizational Set Up
The External Publicity Division has been bifurcated into
two Divisions viz. (a) External Publicity Division and (b)
Public Diplomacy Division.
Two Branch Secretariats one each at Hyderabad and
Chennai were set up mainly to advise the state
governments on promotion of trade and investment and
also to liaise with the State Government, Consulates,
Passport Offices etc. located in these cities.
The Development Partnership Division has been merged
with the Technical Cooperation Division.

Vigilance
Out of total 160 cases, 58 cases were initiated between 1
April 2007 to 30 November 2007. Total 22 cases were
closed during this period – 8 cases with imposition of
penalty and 14 cases without further inquiry.
Vigilance Unit, brought to the notice of the Consular
Officers and Heads of Chanceries working in various
Missions/Posts abroad, their responsibilities, as prescribed
in the consular manual, about accounting of consular
revenue. Missions/Posts have been issued instructions to
take a cash security/fidelity bond obtained from the
employees who handle cash. Missions/Posts have also been
asked to expedite the process of outsourcing collection of
visa applications.

widows of the deceased employees. In addition, financial
assistance to the tune of Rs. 15,000/- each has also been
provided.
On their return from Missions to Headquarters, the
officials of the Ministry face difficulties in getting
admission in various public/private schools, gas
connection, ration card and telephone connections.
Welfare Section has been helping them by issuing letters
to Schools, Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited
(MTNL) etc.
Welfare Division arranged for the collection of funds for
Flag Days for Communal Harmony, Red Cross, Armed
Forces and Ministry of External Affairs Staff Benefit Fund.
Compassionate Appointment
Two dependents were employed in the Ministry against
regular LDC posts on compassionate grounds, during
2007.
Educational Matters
Four wards of the MEA officials were accorded admission
to MBBS Course and 39 to Engineering courses, for which
the Division coordinated with the Ministry of Health and
Ministry of Human Resource Development. 44 seats in
Kendriya Vidyalaya were utilized by the children of the
officers/staff of the Ministry.
Grant In-Aid
Welfare Division assisted two Indian Missions/Posts abroad
to set up recreational clubs by providing grand-in-aid of
Rs.10,000/- each.
Canteen
The canteens provided professional services to the officials
of the Ministry. In addition, a parallel catering outlet has
been established in South Block for providing professional
services to visiting Diplomatic Corps, international visitors
as well as VIPs.

Welfare
Welfare Division looks after general welfare of all
employees of the Ministry and management of canteen
services at South Block, Akbar Bhawan and Patiala House.
During the year 2007-2008, the Ministry lost 12 of its
employees for whom all assistance was rendered for funeral
and ex-gratia payment from Staff Benefit Fund. On
Division’s recommendation, External Affairs Spouses
Association (EASA) donated Rs. 20,000/- each to eight

Right to Information (RTI)
Keeping in view the importance of the Right to
Information Act 2005, a separate RTI Division has been
functioning in the Ministry. A Joint Secretary level officer
has been designated as the Central Public Information
Officer (CPIO) and an Additional Secretary has been
designated as the Appellate Authority. During JanuaryDecember 2007, the Ministry (excluding CPV Division)

124

Administration and Establishment

received and processed 920 RTI applications. The
Appellate Authority disposed 71 appeals and the CPIO
of the Ministry appeared as respondent in 53 appeals
which came up before the Central Information
Commission (CIC). No penalty was imposed on any
official of this Ministry by the CIC under any provision of
the RTI Act during the period under report.
In addition, separate Appellate Authorities and CPIOs
have been designated in the CPV Division, ICCR and
ICWQ. The officer in-charge of each Passport Office has
also been designated as CPIO with Joint Secretary (CPV)
and Chief Passport Officer as the Appellate Authority.

Establishment
The Establishment Division primarily handles renting and
maintenance of properties, fixation of Foreign Allowance
and Representational Grant, purchase and supply of office
equipment, furniture and official vehicles, supply of object
d’Arts, management and maintenance of the Ministry
housing complex and hostels, maintenance of Toshakhana
and purchase and supply of stationery.
During the year 2007, efforts were made to streamline
the rules, regulations and procedures governing some of
these issues in order to make them simple and transparent.
As part of this exercise rules governing Special Grant,
club membership, insurance of official vehicles, allotment
of housing, provision of cable TV in missions abroad,
supply of Od’A items and maintenance of equipments at
the Headquarters were reviewed and made transparent.
A comprehensive policy on mobile and residential phones
has been put in place with the concurrence of Ministry of
Finance.
Annual review of the Foreign Allowance was undertaken
under the Indexation Scheme by a joint team of Ministry
of External Affairs and Ministry of Finance. The Ministry
of External Affairs has also initiated a proposal in
consultation with the Ministry of Finance for
rationalization of the system of Foreign Allowance both
for those who are posted in missions abroad as also those
deputed on projects and other assignments. Joint Ministry
of External Affairs-Ministry of Finance teams also paid
visits to Ramallah, Tripoli and Kabul to decide on the
admissible level of allowances in these countries since their
price indices were not available.
A comprehensive project for renovation of External

Affairs hostels at Kasturba Gandhi Marg and Gole Market
was initiated which is presently under implementation.
Similarly, several measures were taken to improve the
facilities at Dwarka Housing Complex of the Ministry. As
a result of these measures the occupancy rate in the
housing complex increased to over 80% A comprehensive
exercise was also undertaken to dispose off perishable
items lying in Toshakhana for over two decades. It has
also been decided that some of the valuable items lying in
Toshakhana could be made available to the National
Museum for display.
Several steps were initiated to give a facelift to South Block
and Akbar Bhawan. A state-of-the-art Situation Room
was also created in the South Block to facilitate use of
modern technology for better discharge of foreign policy
objectives.
The project for renovation of Jinnah House, Mumbai was
finalized and necessary approvals obtained from the
Mumbai Muncipal Coporation.

Projects
Projects Division is responsible for construction of
properties and purchase of built-up properties in India
and abroad for the use of Ministry of External Affairs.
Proposals relating to repairs/renovation of Government
owned properties in stations abroad are also handled by
the Projects Division. As of now, Government owns
Chancery Buildings in 79 stations abroad, residences for
Heads of Missions/Posts in 87 stations abroad and 624
residences for officers/staff in 46 stations abroad. In
addition, Government also owns property for Cultural
Centres in 2 stations and a Liaison Office in one station.
Currently 53 construction projects including major
renovation/re-development projects are at different stages
of implementation.
Amongst projects abroad, construction work for the
Indian Embassy Complex in Muscat has been completed.
Construction work has started in November 2007 for
Embassy Complex in Kathmandu and Chancery and
residences in Beijing. Renovation work at the residence
of the Permanent Representative of India in Geneva has
been completed and work is in progress at three
Government-owned properties in Karachi.
Construction projects in Brasilia, Islamabad, Kabul,
Tashkent and Warsaw are at tendering stage. The re-

125

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

development projects in Singapore, Tokyo and Prague are
in progress and in London, the work is at tendering stage.
Built-up properties have been purchased for Embassy
Residence in Bogota in the current financial year. The
Ministry is making vigorous efforts to acquire built-up
properties in high-rental stations. Major proposals under
process for purchase of built-up properties include
Chanceries in Bogota, Milan and Nairobi and Embassy
Residences in Hamburg, Milan, Sofia and Tripoli and a
Cultural Centre in Sao Paulo . In addition, a number of
purchase proposals from different Indian Missions/Posts
are also under consideration. An MoU has been signed
for exchange of properties between Vietnam and India.
Amongst projects in India, construction work for
Jawaharlal Nehru Bhavan, the future Headquarters of the
Ministry of External Affairs, Chanakyapuri Residential
Complex for officers of the Ministry of External Affairs is
in full swing. and Transit Accommodation project at
Canning Lane are also in progress.
Construction work has been completed for the Foreign
Service Institute Complex in New Delhi. The work in
AALCO Complex being built in New Delhi for the Asian
African Legal Consultative Organization and ICCR
Cultural Centre, Kolkata is nearing completion. Other
projects at various stages of implementation include Africa
House project for Indian Council of Cultural Relations in
New Delhi and Videsh Bhawan, Kolkata.
An allocation of Rs 250 crores has been made under

Capital Outlay during 2007-08. Budget estimates for 200809 have been kept at Rs 582 crores, to provide for a
number of projects expected to go into construction phase
in the next financial year

e-Governance and IT
Computerization of Passport and Visa issuance system was
completed in Missions at Bahrain, Toronto, Kuala Lumpur,
Birmingham, Jeddah, Colombo, Kandy and Vancouver.
Computerization of Passport and Visa issuance system at
Houston, Chicago, San Francisco, Washington, Moscow
and Doha is underway.
Outsourcing of visa application process at Kuala Lumpur,
Bangkok, Singapore, Frankfurt and Milan was completed.
Facilities for issuing machine-readable passports have been
extended to all Missions and Posts.

Archives and Record Management
(A&RM)
The A&RM Division of the Ministry has embarked upon
the project of digitization of its records to prepare a
database and for preservation, maintenance and easy
retrieval of records. Phase-II of the digitization programme
concluded by the end of 2007. Reviewing and weeding
out work is ongoing. Action is being taken for transfer of
records to the National Archives of India. Separate
browsing facilities are available in the A&RM Division
for serving as well as non-serving officers of the Ministry
in order to facilitate access to the records.

126

Coordination

C

oordination Division consists of three wings, the
Parliament Section, the Coordination Section and
the Education Section.

Parliament Section
Coordination Division functions as the nodal point of the
Ministry of External Affairs for all work relating to
Parliament including questions-answers, assurances,
debates on foreign relations and laying of reports on the
Table of both Houses of Parliament. The Division also
has the responsibility to organize the meetings of the
Consultative Committee on External Affairs, and
coordinates the work relating to the Parliamentary
Standing Committee on External Affairs and other
Parliamentary Committees.

Coordination Section
Coordination Division assisted the Inter-State Council
Secretariat (ISCS) to organize the 4 th International
Conference on Federalism at New Delhi from 5-7
November 2007. The conference was attended by
President of Comoros, President of Switzerland, VicePresident of Nigeria, Prime Minister of Ethiopia, Cabinetlevel Ministers from Austria, Canada, Ethiopia, Nigeria,
Philippines and Switzerland, about 400 foreign delegates,
large number of high dignitaries and practitioners of
Federalism from India. It was inaugurated by the Prime
Minister and the valedictory address was delivered by the
President of India.
Large number of papers were presented on the experience
of various countries in evolution of Federalism, including
Building and Accomodating Diversity, Fiscal Federalism,
Interaction in a Federal System and Local Government
in Federal Systems which are being published by the InterState Council Secretariat.
Coordination Section also assisted the Lok Sabha
Secretariat in the organization of the 53rd Commonwealth
Parliamentary Conference held at New Delhi from 21-30
September 2007 and 2nd Asian Ministerial Level Disaster

17

Reduction Conference organized by the Ministry of Home
Affairs at New Delhi on 7-8 November 2007.
Coordination Section processes all proposals for grant of
no objection from the political angle for the foreign visits
of Governors, Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Deputy
Chairman of Rajya Sabha, Union Ministers, Ministers in
the State Governments, Members of Parliament, Members
of State Legislative Assemblies, members of the judiciary,
government officials etc. During April-November 2007,
Coordination Division issued 2106 clearances for such
visits against 1592 in the same period during 2006, thus
registering an increase of 32%. The Section also handled
the work relating to grant of diplomatic clearances for
foreign non-scheduled flights and visits by naval ships.
During April-November 2007, Coordination Division
issued 859 clearances for foreign non-scheduled flights as
against 675 during the same period in 2006, thus
registering an increase of 27%.
During the year Coordination Section issued new
guidelines on expeditious processing of political clearance
for the visit of high dignitaries, ministers and officials of
Central/State Governments and Union Territories and
expeditious grant of visas to foreign research scholars,
visiting faculty, teachers and foreign participants coming
to India to attend international conferences, seminars and
workshops.
Coordination Section processed a large number of
approvals for participation of Indian sports teams and
sportsmen in the international events abroad and visits
of foreign sports persons to India. Coordination Division
issued clearances for 345 sports events from AprilNovember 2007 as against 319 during the same period in
2006 thus registering an increase of 8% in the number of
such clearances. The Division coordinated with the Indian
Missions/Posts abroad and provided essential inputs and
assistance to the Army Headquarters/Ministry of Defence
during the 2nd World Military Games held in Hyderabad
and Mumbai from 14-21 October 2007.

127

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

Coordination Section coordinates the work relating to
grant of Padma Awards to foreign nationals. The
nominations are obtained by the Coordination Division
from Indian Missions abroad and the recommendations
of the Ministry conveyed to the Ministry of Home Affairs.
Observance of the Anti-Terrorism Day ( 21 May ),
Sadbhavana Diwas (20 August ) and Quami Ekta Week/
Diwas (19-25 November) in the Ministry and Missions/
Posts abroad was also undertaken by the Coordination
Division; pledges were administered to the officials, both
at Headquarters and in Missions/Posts abroad.
The Section also examines the requests for grant of no
objection for holding international conferences, seminars,
workshop, grant of Amateur W/T Licence under the
Indian Telegraph Act 1885, grant in aid to Indo-foreign
cultural friendship and cultural societies located in foreign
countries. During April-November 2007, Coordination
Division issued clearances for 1189 conferences/seminars
and other similar events organized in India as against 950
during 2006 registering an increase of 25%. As Ex-officio
Director, Additional Secretary (Coord) attended the
Board Meetings of the Educational Consultants India

(Ltd.), a public sector organization and advised on its
current activities and growth in newer areas abroad.

Education Section
Education Section deals with the nomination and
admission of foreign self-financing students from 63
friendly neighbouring, developing countries against
reserved seats in the MBBS/BDS//BE/B.Pharmacy and
diploma courses in various institutions in India. It also
processes the political clearance of foreign students
seeking admission to the Graduate and Post-Graduate
courses in Engineering, Medicine, Management, other
technical and professional courses including elective
training/internship in various medical institutions and
research courses.
For the academic year 2007-08, Education Section
received and processed 100 and 83 applications for
admission to the MBBS/BDS and B.E/B.Pharmacy courses
respectively. In addition, during the period from JanuaryNovember 2007, 1200 applicants were granted no
objection from the political angle to pursue various courses
in India.

128

External Publicity

External Publicity

T

he External Publicity Division, the division of
Ministry of External Affairs designated to engage
with the media, continued to articulate the position of
the Government of India on various foreign policy issues
and to publicize achievements and successes in meeting
our foreign policy objectives.

There were important occasions during the course of the
year when Indian foreign policy parameters were
articulated by our leaders. Thus, Prime Minister Dr.
Manmohan Singh’s statement at the 14th SAARC Summit
held in New Delhi in April 2007, his statements at the
2nd IBSA Summit held in South Africa in October 2007,
at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meet in
Uganda in November 2007 as also his speech at the IndiaASEAN Summit in November 2007 all served to showcase
diverse aspects of our foreign policy and were widely
disseminated by the Division. The Division disseminated
also the thrust areas of our foreign policy as articulated
by the Prime Minister during his visits abroad to Germany,
Nigeria, South Africa, Uganda and Singapore.
Important areas of endeavour in the foreign policy arena
were also highlighted through publicizing the speeches
and statements of the External Affairs Minister, Pranab
Mukherjee, delivered on various occasions during the year,
notably at the 62nd UN General Assembly in New York in
September 2007, during his official visits to several
countries, i.e. Germany, Korea, Ethiopia, Philippines,
Thailand, Singapore, Russia, Libya, Cyprus, Bangladesh,
China, Bhutan, Belgium and the US and at the 29th
Meeting of the SAARC Council of Ministers in December
2007.
The Division gave enhanced publicity to the declaration
by the United Nations of 2007 as the International Year
of Non-Violence. The ceremonies held in New York,
including the well-attended address by the Chairperson
of the UPA at an informal plenary session of the UN and
the remarks by the UN Secretary-General, Ban Ki-Moon

18

on the occasion were highlighted and were well-reported
in Indian and international media. Similarly, the holding
of the World Hindi Conference in New York in July 2007
and the international participation in it was also wellpublicized.
The External Publicity Division facilitated wide publicity,
through background briefings and official statements, to
all issues which are foreign policy priorities for the country.
Particular focus during the latter part of the year was on
climate change issues leading upto the United Nations
Conference on Climate Change at Bali held in December
2007. India’s views on climate change and greenhouse
gas emissions which were articulated during the Bali
Conference were well publicized in Indian and
international media. India’s views on security and
disarmament and international civil nuclear cooperation
were also highlighted. The continuing achievements of
the Indian economy, including the worldwide success of
private Indian companies in acquisitions of global
companies, were also publicized on the Ministry Of
External Affairs website and on the Ministry Of External
Affairs Notice Board.
Another important activity for the Division was in
facilitating media coverage of incoming visits by Heads of
State and Government and by Foreign Ministers into
India. The Division arranged joint press conferences with
the visiting dignitaries and assisted visiting media and
foreign media represented in India in coverage of these
visits.
Media Facilitation
The press facilitation work in terms of extending logistical
and liaison support to foreign media delegations
accompanying Heads of State/ Government (HOS/G)
visiting India and Indian media delegations accompanying
President, Vice-President, Prime Minister and External
Affairs Minister on their visits abroad forms an important
part of the work of the Division. During the year,
accompanying media delegation for President’s visit to

129

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

France and Greece, Prime Minister’s visits to Germany,
Nigeria, South Africa, Uganda, and Singapore, and that
of External Affairs Minister to Germany, Korea, Ethiopia,
Philippines, Thailand, Singapore, Russia, Libya, Cyprus,
Bangladesh, China, Bhutan, Belgium and US were
facilitated.
In addition, a considerable amount of work of the Division
was devoted to assisting foreign media delegations and
Indian media in connection with the Head of State/
Government and Vice President visits from Portugal,
Russia, Finland, Bhutan, Italy, Maldives, Thailand, United
Arab Emirates, Brazil, Thailand, Vietnam and Cambodia
through issue of media advisories, press conferences,
facilitation access to ceremonial areas, meetings and
providing assistance for transport and accommodation.
Similar support was also extended for 26 Foreign Minister
level visits apart from other high dignitaries.
All logistical arrangements, including setting up and
operation of media centres fully equipped with facilities
for filing of stories by journalists, media briefings and other
arrangements, were made by the Division enabling Indian
media delegations accompanying the President, VicePresident and the Prime Minister during their visits
abroad, to provide timely coverage.
The Division also handled media participation in the
World Hindi Conference held in New York in September
2007 and to celebration of the first International Day of
Non violence at the UNGA in New York.
A Media Centre was set up at Vigyan Bhawan during the
SAARC Summit in April 2007. Over 500 media persons
from India and abroad registered on-line to cover the
Summit. Work stations with computers with internet
facilities, was made available, so also visual coverage was
made available through Doordarshan to rest of Indian and
Foreign Channels, at the Media Center. A Media Centre
was established for the SAARC Councils of Ministers
Conference in December 2007.
Over 300 strong foreign media representatives based in
India were provided necessary facilitation to enable them
to function smoothly through provision of relevant
information on various issues of interest as well as
assistance in matters of credential documents, visas, and
residence permits.
Due to the increasing global character of the Indian media,

a new phenomenon of foreigners working for Indian media
organizations has emerged. This raised questions about
the grant of appropriate visas to such persons. Through a
process of inter ministerial consultation, the Division has
resolved the issue and come out with a uniform policy of
grant of employment visas to such individuals. The policy
has been conveyed to all visa issuing authorities and is
now being uniformly applied.
Familiarization Visits
Familiarization visits by foreign journalists to India are a
key element of the Division’s efforts to bring about a more
accurate and contemporary depiction of India in the
foreign media as the journalists obtain a unique, first-hand
impression of developments in India’s politics, foreign
policy, economy, culture and science and Technology. The
Division, based on recommendations of Indian Missions
abroad, continued to organize several such visits to
important institutions and centers of excellence in India.
During the year, the Division was able to systematize the
familiarization visits by advance planning and organizing
them on the basis of regional groups. Meetings for visiting
journalists were also organized with ministers, senior
officials, intellectuals, academicians, and business
representatives. One hundred and sixty three journalists
were hosted on such visits during 2007 with a special focus
on India’s neighbours, francophone Africa, ASEAN and
new EU countries. These included senior journalists and
editors from East & South Africa, SAARC, LAC, Serbia,
Indonesia, Africa, West Asia, Czech Republic, Lao PDR,
Netherlands, Korea and Hungary.
Training, Workshops & Conferences
In collaboration with Research and Information System
for Developing Countries (RIS), XP Division organized a
two-day conference of editors from India, Brazil & South
Africa (IBSA) on “Globalization, Emerging Powers and
the Media” was organized in New Delhi on 3-4 September
2007. In addition to 30 Indian media participants there
were 11 participants from Brazil and South Africa. A
report of the Conference was published and disseminated
including at the IBSA Summit organized in South Africa
in October 2007.
In collaboration with Foreign Service Institute, the
Division organized a “Special Course for Diplomatic
Correspondents from SAARC Countries” from 16-20 July
2007. There were two participants each from Pakistan,

130

External Publicity

Bangladesh, Nepal, Bhutan, Sri Lanka and Maldives
besides several from India.
The division undertook activities aimed at capacity
building within the Bhutan Broadcasting Service
Corporation. To this effect two groups of 10 each from
Radio and TV departments of BBSC have undergone two
weeks training each organized by the Division at Indian
Institute of Mass Communication.
Documentaries by Foreign Audio-Visual Agencies
A major area of work of the Division is clearance of
documentaries by foreign audio-visual agencies. An
exercise to streamline the process of approval of
documentaries in India by foreign producers was
undertaken by the Division through a process of interministerial consultations. As a result, the procedures have
been greatly streamlined.
During the year 430 documentaries were produced in
India by foreign producers, major producers being BBC,
National Geographic, Discovery Channel, NHK, RAI of
Italy etc. Interestingly, as India is becoming a preferred
world destination for tourism and trade and investment,
the numbers of documentary requests are growing.
Though the majority of requests came from Japan, France,
UK, Germany, Korea and USA, we have had requests from
China, Afghanistan, and Reunion Islands etc as well.
Official Spokesperson’s Office
The Official Spokesperson’s office actively functioned as
the hub for information dissemination on day to day
developments related to the conduct of India’s foreign
policies. The office conducted regular media briefings by
the Spokesperson which were duly supplemented by press
releases, briefing points and statements. During AprilNovember 2007, about 80 press briefings were held or
briefing points released by the Official Spokesperson. In
addition, more than 200 press releases and statements
were issued during this period. These were circulated to
the media through emails and simultaneously placed on
the Ministry’s website. The Division continued to make
use of SMS alerts for informing the media about briefings
and updates to the website.
During the year, External Affairs Minister, Foreign
Secretary and other senior officials of the Ministry
addressed special media briefings on important issues of
concern. The Division arranged for regular briefings by

Foreign Secretary at Vigyan Bhawan during the duration
of the 14 th SAARC Summit. An end of the Summit
briefing by External Affairs Minister was arranged which
was attended by over 150 media persons in the Vigyan
Bhawan plenary hall.
Additionally, constant efforts were made to communicate
the position and perspective of the Government on various
significant issues by providing background briefings to
media persons. Interviews with the Prime Minister,
External Affairs Minister, Ministers of State for External
Affairs and other dignitaries were arranged with Indian
and international newspapers and TV organizations.
The Division ensured that the media received regular
updates on a 24x7 basis during various humanitarian crises
like the Kenyan Airways plane crash and the cyclone in
Oman.
Website
Ministry Of External Affairs’ website continued to play a
very useful role in the dissemination efforts of the Division.
The press section of the website http://meaindia.nic.in
was updated on a real-time basis with the speeches/
interviews/statements on foreign policy by the Prime
Minister, Minister(s), press releases, briefings by the
Official Spokesperson and other senior officials. With
more than 100 documents uploaded every month, this
website is one of the most accessed and frequently updated
websites of the Government. A separate section was
created on the website for news and information about
the Fourteenth SAARC Summit. Separate sub-sections
were created for visits of Prime Minister and External
Affairs Minister and other important developments.
The Division continued to use the Ministry Of External
Affairs’ Notice Board to provide our Missions/Post across
the world with professionally written features on various
aspects of India. From this year onwards, op/ed clippings
of interest from national newspapers were also uploaded
on a daily basis on the Board for use by our Missions.
The Hindi version of the website launched last year was
also constantly updated by the Division. The website
continued to be widely accessed both inside and outside
India.
As a part of a new initiative, the Division is now working
towards web-casting press briefings on a real time basis as
also uploading them in audio-visual format on the website.

131

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

Public Diplomacy
The mandate of the Public Diplomacy Division includes,
inter-alia, outreach activities in India and abroad, and
audio-visual and print publicity. Increased involvement
of India in international affairs and the expansion of the
Indian economy have necessitated that the Ministry
engages audiences, both within and outside India, to
effectively project India’s foreign policy priorities and
domestic realities so that a national and consensual
approach could evolve within India and a more informed
understanding abroad.
To help achieve these objectives the Division organizes
seminars, conferences and briefings for and in association
with civil societies, NGOs, think tanks, research and
academic institutions and business and industry on
strategic and foreign policy issues. Contacts have been
established with various national and international
institutions to organize these events on a regular basis.
Furthermore, within India, the Division has consciously
made efforts to move away from Delhi-centric approach
in organizing these interactive and brainstorming sessions.
Outreach Activities
The Division organized a number of outreach activities
to highlight the various contours of India’s foreign policy
with a view to encourage discussion and debate and to
benefit from the view of outside and independent experts.
These included:
An intensive briefing programme on key domestic and
foreign policy issues was organized from 24-29 October
2007 in New Delhi and Mumbai for 14 Indian Origin
Parliamentarians from Europe and USA. The inaugural
address was delivered by Vice President of India and the
Parliamentarians also called on the Prime Minister and
the External Affairs Minister. This was the first in the
series of programmes that the Division proposes to
organise for Indian Origin and other Parliamentarians so
that they may be thoroughly briefed on issues of interest
and concern to India.
A briefing programme for delegation of six senior
Mongolian academicians was organized from 25-18
November 2007 on India’s security perceptions, SinoRussian-Indian trilateral relations, Indo-Mongolian
Cooperation and Indian Peacekeeping operations.
With a view of informing civil society, academia and policy

makers in the northeast of the Government’s Look East
Policy, key officials of the Division participated in the
interactive sessions in different northeastern cities such
as Guwahati, Imphal, Shillong and Aizwal. This was
followed by a programme in Shillong on 16 June 2007 in
which the Minister of External Affairs delivered a keynote
address on the theme “Geography as an Opportunity”.
A Conference on “India’s Look East Policy: Challenges
for Sub-Regional Cooperation” was organized from 7-9
October 2007 in Guwahati in association with ICRIER
and the Omeo Kumar Das Institute of Social Change and
Development. The Minister of External Affairs delivered
the keynote address.
As a follow-up of the SAARC Summit earlier in the year,
the Division organized a national Seminar on “SAARC:
Accelerating Cooperation through Connectivity” on 1-2
September 2007 in Kolkata. The Minister of External
Affairs delivered the inaugural address.
To commemorate the first International Day of Non
Violence, the Division organized a Round Table
Discussion at UN Headquarters in New York on 2 October
2007, which was attended by the Minister of External
Affairs Pranab Mukherjee, Minister of State for External
Affairs Anand Sharma, Deputy Secretary General of UN
Dr. Asha Rose Migiro, a number of Foreign Ministers and
eminent thinkers including two Nobel Laureates, on the
contemporary challenges confronting the global
community such as increasing religious and cultural
intolerance, issues relating to hunger and poverty. In the
evening, a documentary film “Mahatma – The Great Soul”
was screened at the UN headquarters to a large audience.
A brainstorming session, chaired by the Minister of State
for External Affairs, Anand Sharma and attended by
academicians, diplomats, think tanks and senior
journalists was organized on 29 May 2007 in New Delhi,
on the ‘Future Direction for India’s Public Diplomacy’.
On 16 August 2007 a panel discussion on educational,
business and investment opportunities in India and Japan,
as a curtain raiser to the visit of Japanese Prime Minister
to India was organised. A bilingual document “Japan India
Relations at a Glance” was also released.
The Division’s officials participated in the following
seminars/conferences to reach out to people and agencies
within India: Seminar on “J&K and the Regional Strategic

132

External Publicity

Opportunities and Challenges” held at University of
Jammu on 4-5 April 2007; Seminar on “Intangible
Heritage: Protecting the Living Heritage of the North
East” in Aizwal from 17-19 May 2007; Conference on
“Development of Eastern India – Strategic issues in a
National Perspective” in August 2007; Seminar on “Land,
Identity and Development : Manipur Experience” in
Imphal in November 2007.
The Division organized annual ‘Foreign Policy Dialogue’
with International Institute of Strategic Studies (IISS),
London in New Delhi on 12 December 2007. The
Dialogue was inaugurated by Foreign Secretary and was
held over three sessions - The Strategic Shape of the
World, International Terrorism and Energy Security. The
Division in association with Utkal University,
Bhubaneswar organized a seminar on ‘Aspects of Indian
Foreign Policy and Strategic Issues’ on 5-6 January 2008
in Bhubaneswar. The Division organized the visit of Prof.
Paul Webley, Director, School of Oriental and African
Studies (SOAS), London to India (New Delhi, Hyderabad
and Mumbai) from 13-20 January 2008. Prof. Webley
delivered talks at Zakir Hussain Centre for Educational
Studies, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, Jamia
Milia Islamia, New Delhi, Indian School of Business,
Hyderabad and Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Contemporary
Studies, University of Mumbai. The Division in
association with Northern Division supported the visit of
high level Business Delegation from Bhutan to India from
13-23 January 2008. The delegation attended a Seminar
cum Round Table on ‘Investment and Trade Opportunities
in Bhutan’ organized by the Ministry in partnership with
CII in New Delhi on 15 January 2008. The Division
supported the visit of Reverend Jesse Jackson to India
from 27-31 January 2008.
The Division participated and supported the conference
on climate change being organized by Asian Education
Society in Chandigarh on 8-9 February 2008. The Division
is also organizing an intensive briefing programme in
Chennai, Hyderabad and New Delhi for a seven member
delegation Parliamentariansrepresenting the Labour
Friends of India from UK from 11-17 February 2008.
Audio-Visual Publicity
As in the past, the Division continued to commission
documentaries and acquire feature films to promote and
project India’s image abroad. Participation in film festivals

and Indian film weeks abroad, organizing cultural and
photo exhibitions were the other audio-visual publicity
activities undertaken by the Division.
Several documentaries were completed during the year:
‘Bismillah & Banaras’; ‘India-Myanmar – An Enduring
Bond’; ‘Battle of Plassey’; ‘NRIs in the Gulf – some success
stories’; ‘Footsteps of Nikitin’; ‘India Infrastructure – an
opportunity’; ‘Song of the Sanctuary’, ‘Cosmopolitan Culture
of India’, ‘Musical Bands of India’, ‘Manufacturing SunshineRenewing India’, ‘Mumbai’ and ‘Mahatma – A Great Soul
of 20th Century’.
The Division had specially commissioned two
documentary films in Hindi, ‘Bollywood Mein Hindi’ and a
multimedia CD ‘Hindi Ke Swar Computer Par’ for the 8th
World Hindi Conference held in New York from 13-15
July 2007. In addition the Division acquired a DVD
containing interesting clippings of films and
documentaries on Hindi prepared by Films Division and
one DVD containing Munshi Prem Chand’s stories by
Doordarshan. These were distributed among the
Conference delegates. A collector’s pack has been
produced of the three CDs, viz. ‘Bollywood Mein Hindi’,
‘Sanyukt Rashtra Mein Hindi’ and ‘Hindi Ke Swar Computer
Par’ and has been distributed to all Indian Parliamentarians
for their information and through our Missions and Posts
abroad for viewing by the Indian diaspora and distribution
among Hindi scholars and Centres of Indology.
Following discussions with the History Channel, the
channel launched a weekly programme ‘Mera India’ in
April 2007 showcasing India through the documentary
films produced by the Ministry of External Affairs. Eight
of the Ministry’s documentary films were telecast by the
Channel in the period of April-May 2007. The Ministry’s
documentary films ‘Bismillah and Banaras’ and ‘Urdu Hai
Jiska Naam’ were screened by the Division to highlight
the composite Indian culture. On 2 October 2007, the
History Channel screened the film ‘Mahatma – A Great
Soul of 20th Century’. Discussions are underway to enter
into an arrangement with Lok Sabha TV for the telecast
of documentary films brought out by the Division. The
Division supported the 9th Osian’s Cinefan Film Festival
of Arab and Asian Cinema in New Delhi from 20-29 July
2007. Many of the documentaries acquired or
commissioned by the Ministry were telecast on various
foreign TV channels. The Division has taken a conscious

133

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

decision to showcase Award winning regional cinema and
has processed the acquisition of three award winning
regional films with subtitles in five languages.
A photo exhibition titled ‘Path of Compassion’ was sent to
our Missions in Colombo, India-Taipei Association and
Yangon. A fifty photograph exhibition on Mahatma
Gandhi specially put together by the Gandhi Museum has
been sent to sixteen Indian Missions. An exhibition on
‘Churches of Goa’ was sent to our Missions in Dhaka,
Washington, Milan and Yangon. A photo exhibition ‘A
Paradise on Earth’ on Jammu & Kashmir was sent to our
Missions in Washington, Milan and Yerevan. The Division
sent feature films and extended support to twenty-two of
the Indian Missions for organizing Indian Film Festivals/
Weeks abroad.
Print Publicity
The monthly journal, India Perspectives has been the
flagship magazine of the Ministry and over the years, it
has grown in popularity. The journal focuses on a wide
range of subjects varying from India’s emergence as a fast
growing economy, to its rich cultural heritage, its
literature, diverse wildlife and its vibrant film industry –
as also the country’s prowess in the fields of information
technology, healthcare and other related fields of human
endeavour. The journal, published in fifteen languages, is
distributed to readers in all corners of the globe through
the Indian Missions abroad. All issues of India Perspectives
are also available in the electronic format in both English
and Hindi for its readers on the Ministry’s website. The
India Perspectives has resumed publication with a Special
Issue on Mahatma Gandhi.
Projecting India’s image through books and publications
is an integral part of the Division’s publicity strategy
abroad. Books on Indian economy, foreign policy, art and

culture, history and science and technology, etc. were
supplied to the Missions abroad for presentation and use
in their libraries. Books on Mahatma Gandhi were also
supplied to all the Indian Missions, including Permanent
Missions of India in New York for use during the
celebrations of the first International Day of Non-Violence
on 2 October 2007.
A large number of technical books were sent to High
Commission of India, Georgetown for gifting to the
Rabindranath Tagore Centre, Faculty of Natural Sciences,
University of Guyana, Georgetown. Books published by
the Sahitya Academi in Tamil language were sent to Indian
Missions in Colombo, Kandy, Yangon, Mandalay and
Kuala Lumpur. Books published by the Sahitya Akademi
in Maithili language were sent to the Consulate General
of India in Birgunj. Books published by the Sahitya Akademi
in Nepali language were sent to the Indian Embassy in
Kathmandu. Books published on Marathi language were
sent to our Mission in Tel Aviv.
The Division brought out booklets on Kailash Mansarovar
Yatra 2007, speeches of the Minister of External Affairs,
and brochures on official visits of the President and the
Prime Minister.
The Division extended financial support to the High
Commission of India in Pretoria for publishing ‘India Digest’
to aid their own publicity efforts. Financial support for
bringing out translated versions of renowned Indian
literary works was extended to the Indian Missions in
Poland, Tajikistan, Hungary and Germany. The Division
coordinated with prestigious Indian journals such as
‘Dialogue’, ‘Biblio’ and ‘Book Review’ to bring out special
issues on India’s Look East Policy, on sixty years of
Independence and on the contemporary relevance of
Gandhian Values.

134

Foreign Service Institute

T

he new building of the Foreign Service Institute (FSI)
was formally inaugurated on 14 November 2007 by
the Minister of External Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee. On
the occasion, the Minister also unveiled a bust of
Jawaharlal Nehru at the Foreign Service Institute.

Training for Indian Foreign Service (IFS)
Probationers
One of the primary activities of the Institute is the training
of IFS Probationers. The objective of the training
programme for IFS Probationers is to prepare the
Probationers to handle the wide range of tasks that they
would be required to perform during their professional
careers, both in Missions and Posts abroad as well as in
India. The IFS Probationers of the 2006 Batch were
accordingly put through a comprehensive one-year
training programme which included modules on
International Relations and Foreign Policy, Defence and
Security, Economic Diplomacy, International Law,
Parliamentary Affairs, Cultural Diplomacy, Protocol and
Consular matters. The programme also included modules
on practical skills such as administration and accounts,
communication skills, representational skills and relations
with the media. The training modules were implemented
through lectures, interactive sessions, seminars as well as
attachments to various leading institutions. In order to
enable the participants to enhance their knowledge of
India’s immediate neighbourhood and to familiarize them
with the work of the Indian Missions abroad, the training
programmes included a Mission Orientation Visit to
Myanmar in May 2007. The IFS Probationers of the 2006
Batch were also attached with our Missions in the
neighbourhood and extended neighbourhood on a 4-week
Mission Attachment Programme from 30 October-23
November 2007. The objective of this Programme was to
provide the IFS Probationers with a first hand experience
and understanding of the structure and functioning of
our Missions abroad.

19

Promotion of links with other training
institutes
The Institute maintains regular contacts with other
training institutions such as the Lal Bahadur Shastri
National Academy of Administration, the National
Academy of Direct Taxes, the National Academy of
Customs, Excise and Narcotics, the Institute of Secretarial
Training and Management and the Bureau of Police
Training and Research. The FSI is making efforts to
develop ties with other training institutes with a view to
further develop the relationship between the Indian
Foreign Service and other Services, an area which has
been assigned high priority by the Ministry of External
Affairs. With this objective in mind, the FSI organized
special training programmes for the officers of the Cabinet
Secretariat in April, May and October 2007.

Special Programmes for Diplomatic
Correspondents
The Fourth Programme for Diplomatic Correspondents
was organized in April 2007, in association with the
External Publicity Division of the Ministry. The FSI also
conducted a Special Course for Diplomatic
Correspondents from SAARC Countries from 16-20 July
2007 in association with the External Publicity Division.
Twenty five diplomatic correspondents, including 10
correspondents from India and 14 correspondents from
seven SAARC countries participated in the Special
Course.

Training of Officials of the Ministry
The FSI regularly conducted the “Basic Professional
Course” for the officials of the Ministry of External Affairs.
The training was aimed at enhancing the skills of officials
in computers and to update them on various aspects of
administration, accounts, consular related work, drafting,
office procedure and forms of communication. The FSI,
with the assistance of E-Governance & IT Division of

135

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

the Ministry, commenced training of officials of the
Ministry on specially designed software packages, which
are to be used in accounts work and in consular work.
This training has now become an integral part of the Basic
Professional Course. Since April 2007, two Basic
Professional Courses have been organized by the FSI.
A training programme in Basic Spoken English was also
organized by the FSI, in association with Central Institute
of English & Foreign Languages (CIEFL), Hyderabad,
from 30 April-11 May 2007 for the Security Guards of
the Ministry who were scheduled to proceed on postings
abroad. They also participated in a training module on
“Handling of Telephones and Visitors”, which was
organized by the FSI in association with Institute of
Secretariat Training and Management (ISTM), on 24 May
2007.

Programmes for Foreign Diplomats
The FSI has been regularly organizing courses for foreign
diplomats in its efforts at building bridges of friendship
and cooperation with countries around the world. The
courses for foreign diplomats have been received extremely
well and greatly appreciated. The 43rd and 44th Professional
Courses for Foreign Diplomats (PCFD) were organized
from 11 July–17 August 2007 and 24 October-30
November 2007 respectively. Twenty four diplomats from
23 countries attended the 43rd PCFD and twenty two
diplomats from 22 countries participated in the 44th PCFD.
A special course for ASEAN Diplomats was also organized
from 14 August–14 September 2007 in which 24 diplomats
from 10 ASEAN countries participated.

Linkages with Counterpart Institutes
Abroad
Agreements/MoUs providing an institutional framework
of cooperation between the FSI and counterpart institutes
in Kyrgyzstan, Serbia, the Philippines, Brazil, Nigeria and
the Czech Republic were signed during the year. Heads of
counterpart Institutes in Kyrgyzstan, South Africa,
Maldives, Czech Republic and Saudi Arabia visited the
FSI during April–November 2007. During these visits,
various avenues of cooperation between the FSI and the
counterpart Institutes were discussed. Pursuant to
invitations extended by the counterpart institutes of the
FSI, Dean (FSI) visited Mexico, Saudi Arabia and

Morocco in April 2007, June 2007 and November 2007
respectively to discuss possible cooperation in the areas
of training of diplomats and exchange of experience and
partnership in organizing seminars and lectures. The Dean
(FSI) also visited Brazil to participate in the meeting of
the Heads of India, Brazil and South Africa (IBSA)
Diplomatic Institutes held at the Instituto Rio Branco,
Brasilia from 10-12 September 2007.

Lectures by Eminent Persons
The FSI regularly organized lectures by eminent and
distinguished personalities. The series of lectures organized
by the FSI on the topic “India of My Dreams” included
lectures by several eminent personalities such as Sunil
Bharti Mittal, Chairman & Group Managing Director,
Bharti Enterprises on 10 April 2007; Shivraj Patil, Minister
of Home Affairs on 14 July 2007; Dr. Montek Singh
Ahluwalia, Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission on
6 August 2007; Mani Shankar Aiyar, Minister of
Panchayati Raj, Youth Affairs and Sports and
Development of the North East Region on 28 August
2007; Dr. Shashi Tharoor, former Under Secretary
General, United Nations on 27 October 2007 and Dr.
Ramachandra Guha, the renowned historian on 2
November 2007.
During the period of report, the FSI also organized lectures
by Lalu Prasad, Minister of Railways on the topic “Historic
Turnaround of the Indian Railways” on 28 June 2007; M.J.
Akbar, Editor-in-Chief of the Asian Age on the topic
“Islam, Jehad and Global War on Terrorism” on 27 July
2007; Meghnad Desai, Professor Emeritus, London School
of Economics on the topic “Emergence of India and China
as Major Economic Powers” on 30 July 2007; Dr. Sam
Pitroda Chairman, National Knowledge Commission on
the topic “Knowledge for a More Just, Equitable and
Inclusive Society” on 12 October 2007; Prof. Dipak C.
Jain, Dean, Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern
University, USA on the topic “Branding India in a Global
Context” on 19 October 2007 and Meira Kumar, Minister
of Social Justice and Empowerment on the topic “Need
of a Just, Equitable and Inclusive Society in the 21st
Century” on 26 October 2007. The FSI also organized a
Brainstorming Session on “India at Sixty” on 29 September
2007. The Session was chaired by Justice J.S. Verma,
Former Chief Justice of India and Former Chairman,

136

Foreign Service Institute

National Human Rights Commission. The distinguished
participants in the Brainstorming Session included Dr.
Sonal Mansingh, Lt. Gen. Satish Nambiar, Saeed Naqvi,
Prof. Varun Sahni, Mythili Bhusnurmath, Sadia Dehlvi
and Ambassador Surendra Kumar. The lectures were

attended by representatives of the diplomatic community,
serving and retired Foreign Service Officers, academicians,
IFS Probationers, diplomats attending the various courses
and media persons.

137

20

Implementation of Official Language
Policy and Propagation of Hindi Abroad

I

mplementation of Official Language Policy of the
Government of India is accorded a very high priority
by the Ministry of External Affairs. Documents like
Bilateral Treaties, Agreements, Memorandum of
Understanding, Annual Report of the Ministry, Parliament
Questions and other documents meant to be placed before
the Parliament are prepared bilingually.
Training in Hindi forms an integral part of the training
programmes of Foreign Service Institute (FSI) in the
Ministry. Two such programmes were held on 15 May 2007
and 9 August 2007. A total of 51 officials attended the
training programmes. Hindi training programmes are also
conducted by Hindi Section of the Ministry.
The Ministry has a well-formulated scheme for
propagation of Hindi abroad. Under this scheme Hindi
teaching material is supplied to educational institutions
through Indian Missions abroad. These include Hindi
textbooks, literary and children’s books, Hindi learning
CD’s, software to work in Hindi on computers,
dictionaries, and so on. The Ministry also extends support
to various foreign universities and other educational
institutions through Indian Missions abroad for Hindi
related activities. During the year 2007-08 the Ministry
extended financial support for publication of Hindi text
books in Suriname and publication of Korean-Hindi
Dictionary in South Korea. The Ministry also helped in
setting up of a Centre for Hindi Language and Indian
Literature in association with Kyiv National Taras
Shevchenko University, Kyiv and donated computers,
printers, and dish antenna to this Centre and three other
universities in Ukraine to facilitate teaching of Hindi.
The Eighth World Hindi Conference was organized by
the Ministry from 13-15 July 2007 in New York (USA) in
association with Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, New York. Over
850 delegates from different countries attended the
Conference. A 95-member official delegation led by the
Minister of State for External Affairs, Anand Sharma
participated in the Conference. The inauguration of the

Conference was held at the United Nations Headquarters.
The Secretary General of the United Nations, Ban KiMoon was the honoured guest at the Inauguration Session.
The first academic session on ‘Hindi in the United
Nations’ was also held at the United Nations. 40 scholars,
20 each from India and other countries were honoured at
the Conference in recognition of their distinguished
service to the cause of Hindi language and literature.
Organization of Regional Hindi Conferences in different
countries by the Ministry is an important step towards
promotion of Hindi abroad. During 2007-08 Regional
Hindi Conferences were organized in Budapest, Hungary
from 24-26 October 2007 and Seoul, South Korea from
9-11 November 2007. This initiative of the Ministry has
been greatly welcomed by Hindi scholars abroad. There
is a demand for organizing such conferences on regular
basis in different countries where Hindi is taught in local
universities.
The Ministry coordinates work relating to grant of
scholarship to foreign students to study Hindi at Kendriya
Hindi Sansthan, Agra. 100 scholarships are on offer
annually. In 2007-08, 75 students from 32 countries
availed of the scholarship.
The Ministry is also actively coordinating work relating
to the establishment of the World Hindi Secretariat in
Mauritius. The first meeting of the Executive Board of
the Secretariat was held on 24-25 May 2007 in Mauritius
and the first meeting of its Governing Council was held
on 28 January 2008 in New Delhi. Minister of External
Affairs, Pranab Mukherjee chaired the meeting. Minister
of Human Resource Development, Arjun Singh and
Minister of Tourism and Culture, Ambika Soni from India
and Minister of Education and Human Resource, D.
Gokhool and Minister of Foreign Affairs, International
Trade and Cooperation, M.M. Dulloo from Mauritius were
the other member-Ministers who attended the meeting.
The Council decided that the Secretariat will start
functioning from 11 February 2008.

138

Implementation of Official Language Policy and Propagation of Hindi Abroad

Many Missions organized Kavi Sammelans, essay
competitions and cultural activities on the occasion of
Hindi Diwas on 14 September 2007.
Hindi Salahakar Samiti of the Ministry was reconstituted
under the chairmanship of the then External Affairs
Minister on 8 February 2005. The Samiti is currently being
headed by Minister of State for External Affairs, Anand
Sharma. A meeting of the Committee was held on 17
January 2008 under the chairmanship of Minister of State
for External Affairs, Anand Sharma. The Committee

reviewed the position of Hindi in the official work of the
Ministry and Missions abroad.
World Hindi Day was celebrated on 10 January 2008. A
Hindi essay competition was organised for foreign students
studying Hindi at Kendriya Hindi Sansthan (Agra and
Delhi centres), Delhi University and Jawaharlal Nehru
University. Cash prizes, Hindi books and dictionaries were
presented to the winners by Chief Guest, Minister of State
for External Affairs, Anand Sharma at a function
organised on that day.

139

21

Indian Council for Cultural Relations

T

he Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) was
formally set up in 1950, with the primary objective
of establishing, reviving and strengthening cultural
relations and mutual understanding between India and
other countries. Its aims, as enunciated in the
Memorandum of Association, are:

publication of books and journals for distribution in India
and abroad; maintaining Indian Cultural Centers abroad;
maintaining a well stocked library and the manuscripts of
Maulana Abul Kalam Azad; digitization of rare
manuscripts.

Regional Offices, Centres/Chairs Abroad
To participate in the formulation and
implementation of policies and programmes relating
to India’s external cultural relations;
To promote cultural exchanges with other countries
and peoples;
To promote and strengthen cultural relations and
mutual understanding between India and other
countries;
To establish and develop relations with national and
international organizations in the field of culture.
The Council has worked steadily to attain these objectives.
The major activities of the Council are:
Administration of scholarship schemes for overseas
students on behalf of the Government of India and other
agencies, welfare of international students; grant of
scholarships to foreign students to learn Indian dance and
music; exchange of exhibitions; organization of and
participation in international seminars and symposia;
participation in major cultural festival abroad;
organization of “Festival of India” in countries abroad;
exchange of groups of performing artistes; organization of
lecture-demonstration by performing artistes abroad;
distinguished visitors programme under which eminent
personalities from abroad are invited to visit India and
the outgoing visitor’s programme in which experts are sent
abroad for delivering lectures, presentation of books,
audio-visual material, art objects and musical instruments
to institutions abroad; providing the secretariat for the
Jawaharlal Nehru award for international understanding;
organization of the annual Maulana Azad memorial
lecture, conducting Maulana Azad essay competition;

The Council has 11 Regional Offices functioning at
Bangalore, Chandigarh, Chennai, Hyderabad, Jaipur,
Kolkata, Lucknow, Mumbai, Thiruvananthapuram, Pune
and Varanasi.
In order to promote awareness and appreciation of India’s
composite cultural heritage abroad, the Council is
maintaining 20 Cultural Centres in Cairo (Egypt), Berlin
(Germany), Port Louis (Mauritius), Paramaribo
(Suriname), Georgetown (Guyana), Jakarta (Indonesia),
Moscow (Russian
Federation), London (U.K.), Almaty, (Kazakhstan),
Tashkent, (Uzbekistan), Durban and Johannesburg (South
Africa), Port of Spain (Trinidad & Tobago), Colombo (Sri
Lanka), Dushanbe (Tajikistan), Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia),
Suva (Fiji), Tokyo (Japan), Kathmandu (Nepal) and Kabul
(Afghanistan) and 2 sub-Centres at Bali (Indonesia) and
Lautoka (Fiji). The Council is also funding Music & Dance
Academy at Dhaka (Bangladesh) and a proposal to open
a new Centre is being pursued. Two new Centres at
Kathmandu and Kabul were inaugurated on 16 August
2007 and 14 September 2007 respectively.
The Council is maintaining Chairs of Indian Studies
abroad to teach Indian languages and other related
subjects under the bilateral Cultural Exchange
Programme, Scheme of Propagation of Hindi abroad and
Council’s own programmes. Presently 22 Chairs are
maintained for teaching Hindi, Sanskrit, Tamil, Modern
Indian History, Indian Civilization in Paramaribo
(Suriname), Budapest (Hungary), Moscow (Russia), Seoul
(South Korea), Warsaw (Poland – 2 posts, Hindi and
Tamil), Port of Spain (Trinidad & Tobago), Sofia

140

Indian Council for Cultural Relations

(Bulgaria), Bucharest (Romania), Beijing (China), Madrid
(Spain), Bangkok (Thailand), Paris (France), Osh
(Kyrgyzstan), Tashkent (Uzbekistan), Brussels (Belgium)
and Jalalabad (Afghanistan). Besides these the Council
is maintaining short term, Rotating Chairs which include
Chair for Sanskrit & Buddhist studies in Ulaanbaatar
(Mongolia), Chair for Indian studies in Pennsylvania, five
Chairs of Indian Studies in Germany and one Chair of
Economics at Sciences Po, Paris. There are proposals to
start short-term Chairs in other countries as well.

Outgoing Visitors Programme
As part of its effort to foster and strengthen cultural
relations and mutual understanding between India and
other countries, the Council facilitates exchange of
scholars, intellectuals, academicians and artistes under
the Outgoing Visitors Programme During the period from
April-November 2007, the Council sponsored the visits
of 56 eminent scholars to various parts of the world.

Festivals
In pursuant to the Joint Statement signed between India
and Japan, reciprocal festivals were organized in 2007.
The Festival of India, which was jointly inaugurated by
the Prime Ministers of India and Japan on 14 December
2006 concluded on 10 December 2007. The Council
sponsored 24 performing groups to participate in the year
long Festival of India in Japan.

Festival of India in Israel
To mark the 15th Anniversary of the establishment of
diplomatic relations between India and Israel as well as
to celebrate the 60th anniversary of India’s Independence,
the Festival 'Incredible India' was celebrated in Israel from
15–23 August 2007. A 9-member composite group was
sent by the Council for participation in the above festival.

First India, Brazil & South Africa Dance
and Music (IBSA) Festival
The first IBSA Dance and Music Festival was organised
in Brazil from 26-29 October 2007 where performing art
groups from all the three countries participated. The
Council sponsored a 14-member Contemporary Dance
group for the event.

Scholarships and Welfare of International
Students
One of the important activities of the Council is the
implementation of scholarship schemes for overseas

students for doctoral, post-graduate, under-graduate
courses as well as professional courses such as engineering,
pharmacy, business administration and accountancy.
Around 2200 foreign students are currently studying in
India under the various scholarship schemes administered
by the council. During April–November 2007, the Council
offered 1153 new scholarships including 500 scholarships
for Afghan students.
The Council regularly organises camps and study tours
for the international students.

Incoming Cultural Delegations
The Council organises the visits of foreign performing
artistes to India for performances in various cities of India.
These groups are hosted under the ambit of bilateral
Cultural Exchange Programmes as well as in response to
recommendations of Indian Missions abroad and requests
received from foreign diplomatic missions and Cultural
Centres in India. During the period April-November 2007,
the Council hosted the visits of twenty foreign cultural
groups from Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Nepal,
Afghanistan, Bhutan, Maldives, Israel, Azerbaijan,
Mexico, Egypt, Mauritius, Poland, Vietnam, Iran, Turkey,
Kazakhstan, Spain and South Korea. The Council also
organized a series of cultural events involving artists from
all SAARC member countries to mark the hosting of the
SAARC Summit in April 2007 at New Delhi.
Other major cultural events organized in India included
the Sufi Festival in Srinagar from 27 June–7 July 2007,
Malhar Festial from 6-8 August 2007 in New Delhi, a
performance by noted Pakistani artist Tahira Syed and
the famous Bangladeshi singer Runa Laila on 20 October
2007 at New Delhi and by another Pakistani artist Abida
Parveen on 27 October 2007 at New Delhi. The Council
also arranged cultural events during the 8th World Hindi
Conference held in New York in July 2007. The Council
organized a series of events including a Fusion Music
Festival, Food Festival, Fashion Show, Students Exchange
Programme, Handicraft Exhibition and a Seminar on Folk
Arts to mark the First SAARC Cultural Festival held at
New Delhi from 30 Nomeber-9 December 2007.

Publication
On the occasion of the '8th World Hindi Conference
2007', the Council brought out several publications
including a special publication called 'Chetna ka

141

Annual Report 2007-2008

Aatmsangharsh', the 'World Hindi Directory' and a special
edition of its own quarterly 'Gagananchal'. These
publications were released by the Minister of State for
External Affairs, Anand Sharma on 13 July 2007 at the
UN Headquarters in New York. The Council also
participated in the 13th Delhi Book Fair from 1-9
September 2007.

Conferences and Seminars
During the period, under review the Council collaborated
in holding of various Conferences and Seminars with a
view to facilitating interactions between intellectuals,
opinion makers and academicians representing various
countries. These included the 'South Asia Interfaith
harmony Conclave' on 21-22 April 2007, International
Poetry Festival from 20-23 July, Millinery of Maulana
Jallaluddin Rumi from 25-27 August 2007, and the
International Seminar on Storytelling from 17–19
September 2007, the International Conference on
'Economics of Non-violence ' from 1-3 November 2007.
The collaboration offered by ICCR was in tune with its
policy to support important conferences and seminars that
involve a significant foreign participation.

Busts and Exhibitions
The Council sent two busts of Mahatma Gandhi for
installation at Hamburg, (Germany) and at Addis Ababa
(Ethiopia) as well as two statues of Mahatma Gandhi for
installation at Willington (New Zealand) and Berne,
(Switzerland). Four major exhibitions were sent out. These
included the exhibition called 'Celebrating WomenAmrita Shergil Revisited' to Prague and Denmark,
Exhibition of 'Women by Women' to Poland, 'SAARC
Paintings Exhibition' produced by leading SAARC artists
at a special camp organised by the Council to Afghanistan
and Photo Exhibition on 'Religions of India' to London.
The SAARC Paintings Exhibition was inaugurated for
viewing by the public by the Minister of External Affair,
Pranab Mukherjee at a special function on 2 June 2007
at New Delhi. The Council also organized the Photo
Exhibition on Traditional Costumes and Jewellery of
Vietnam called 'Vietnam Today', Exhibition of
Contemporary Croatian Modern Arts by Croatian artists,

an Exhibition by Ranjit Das, a well-known Bangladeshi
painter and an exhibition of paintings by Sharifah Hind
Nasser from Jordan at New Delhi.
The Council coordinated holding of a special Exhibition
on advancement of Hindi language and its use in
Information Technology during the 8th World Hindi
Conference in New York in July. On the occasion of the
observance of the first International Day of Non-Violence
at the United Nations on 2 October 2007, the council
put up a photographic exhibition titled 'Gandhi and Global
Non-Violent Awakening' from 2-12 October 2007 at the
United Nations Headquarters. Sonia Gandhi, Chairperson
of UPA inaugurated the exhibition on 2 October 2007.

Outgoing Cultural Delegations
During the period, the Council sponsored 48 cultural
delegations to 54 countries. Special emphasis was given
to holding of workshops cum- lecture demonstrations with
local artistes. Several of these cultural groups participated
in over 20 international events /festival such as the Spring
Friendship Arts Festival in DPR Korea, Thyagaraja Festival
in Cleveland, Harare International Festival, Zanzibar
International Film Festival and the Bangkok International
Festival of Dance & Music. The Council also sponsored
cultural groups to perform at Independence Day
celebrations hosted by various Indian Missions abroad.

Distinguished Visitors Programme
As part of its effort to foster and strengthen cultural
relations and mutual understanding between India and
other countries, the Council facilitates visits of eminent
figures in public life as well as those of scholars,
intellectuals, academicians and artistes under its
Distinguished Visitors Programme. During the period, the
Council hosted 8 distinguished visitors from different
countries.

Awards
The Jawaharlal Nehru Award for international
understanding for the year 2006 was presented to
President of the Federative Republic of Brazil, Luiz Inacio
Lula da Silva by the President of India at a special function
on 4 June 2007.

142

22

Indian Council of World Affairs

D

uring the period April-November 2007, the Indian
Council of World Affairs (ICWA) organized the
following events:
i

Lectures

06

ii

Bilateral strategic dialogues

08

iii

Seminars

04

iv

Background briefings

02

v

Other events (CSCAP, etc.)

07

In addition, ICWA organized the following book
Launches/Discussion:
1

Contemporary Saudi Arabia & the Emerging IndoSaudi Relations by Prof. Gulshan Dietl, Prof. Girijesh
Pant, Prof. A.K. Pasha and Dr. P.C. Jain;

2

Asian Diplomacy: The Foreign Ministries of China,
India, Japan, Singapore & Thailand by Kishan S.
Rana;

3

Foreign Ministries: Managing Diplomatic Networks
and Optimizing Value by Kishan S. Rana and Jovan
Kurbalija;

4

Ghulam Rasul – Another Migration by Muniza
Agha-Fawad;

5

Rising India: Friends and Foes: Essays in Honour of
Professor ML Sondhi by Prakash Nanda

6

Group Discussion on the book: India and the United
States, Politics of the sixties by Kalyani Shankar

Lectures/Events attracted about 100 persons while for
Book Launches/Seminars the audience was approximately
50. A complete list of seminars, conferences, lectures and
meetings organized by ICWA during the year are given in
Appendix XVI.
The ICWA’s master list of invitees has grown from 1000
to over 1100 during the year 2007 and includes 254

academicians, 230 intellectuals and members of thinktanks and research organizations, 135 diplomatic corps,
108 officials, 112 former diplomats and 125 senior
journalists and media persons. This list is being revised
regularly.
ICWA organized two conferences i.e. International
Conference on “India-Nepal Relations: Looking at the
Future” on 20-21 April 2007 in association with the Antar
Rashtriya Sahayog Parishad and Regional Conference on
“SAARC: Fourteenth Summit & Beyond” in association
with Konrad Adenauer Foundation (KAF).
ICWA has started research work. ICWA officials regularly
participated in seminars and contributed papers/lectures
in various reputed national and international journals.
ICWA’s magazine ‘India Quarterly’ was on track during
2007. Three issues of ‘India Quarterly’ namely: OctoberDecember 2006; January-March 2007 and April-June
2007 were brought out during the period. Besides, the
ICWA signed MoUs with counterpart organizations in
China and Nigeria.
ICWA arranged a visit of 20-member delegation for 3rd
India-Spain Dialogue Forum Meeting on 16-17 October
2007 which included Vice-Chancellors, Professors,
intellectuals, high ranking officials and dignitaries headed
by S.J.S. Chhatwal, Chairman, Programmes Committee,
ICWA to Valladolid, Spain
ICWA organized a meeting of Council for Security
Cooperation in the Asia Pacific (CSCAP) Study Group
on Energy Security, from 13-15 September 2007, in Goa.
CSCAP-India Committee activities are included in the
list at Appendix XVI.
ICWA continued to be an important platform for foreign
affairs discussions in India in the year 2007.

143

Research and Information System for
Developing Countries

R

esearch and Information System for Developing
Countries (RIS) is a New Delhi based think-tank
specialized in international economic relations and
development cooperation. It is an autonomous body of
the Ministry of External Affairs. Its mandate is to function
as an advisory body to the Government of India on matters
pertaining to multilateral economic and social issues,
including regional and sub-regional cooperation
arrangements, as may be referred to it from time to time.
The RIS is envisioned as a forum for fostering effective
policy dialogue among developing country think-tanks on
international economic issues.
Highlights of the RIS’ work during the year 2007-08 are
given below.
Research and Policy Inputs Provided to the
Government
RIS conducted research studies to assist the policy
formulation and preparation for major Summit Meetings
and other negotiations held during the year. Some of these
inputs include the following:
India- ASEAN and East Asia Summit: RIS assisted
the Government with inputs for the 11th IndiaASEAN Working Group held in April 2007; IndiaEast Asia Summit Countries Trade; 12 th IndiaASEAN Working Group held in October 2007; on
India’s Look East Policy – Challenges for SubRegional Cooperation; and on the India-East Asia
Economic Cooperation and the 3rd East Asia Summit
held on 21 November 2007.
SAARC and BIMSTEC: RIS provided the
Government with policy inputs on ‘Towards a
Prosper-thy-Neighbour Policy for Southern Asia: Some
Inputs’, in the context of India’s Chairing of the
SAARC and BIMSTEC; ‘Sub-regional Economic
Cooperation under SAARC – Focusing on Energy, Food,
Environment and Water’; and inputs for the
Thirteenth Meeting of the SAARC Committee on
144

23

Economic Cooperation (CEC) held in November
2007.
Second IBSA Summit: RIS participated in the
IBSA summit in Johannesburg from 15-17 October
2007 and also participated in the IBSA Academic
Forum and made three lead presentations.
WTO: RIS submitted two reports on WTO for the
Government on the topics, ‘Trade Impact on India’s
Exports to USA with Possible Withdrawal of US-GSP
Benefit’ and WTO Proposals and Indian Paper and
Newsprint Industry’.
India-Korea Negotiations: RIS provided the
Government with inputs on sensitive products for
the negotiations on India-Korea Comprehensive
Economic Partnership Agreement.
CEPEA: Director General, RIS was nominated on
the Track II Study Group on Comprehensive
Economic Partnership of East Asia by the
Government of India. RIS has been contributing to
the work of the Study Group in the form of policy
papers and will be hosting the fourth meeting of the
Study Group in New Delhi on 1-2 February 2008.
Mekong-Ganga Cooperation: A note on ‘Towards
Deepening Mekong-Ganga Cooperation: Some
Proposals’ was made available to the Ministry of
External Affairs on 26 July 2007.
Other Policy Papers and Inputs: RIS provided the
Government of India, with inputs on various other
policy matters which included: inputs on ‘India and
China in the 21st Century’, on ‘Relevance of APEC
for India, Work of APEC, and APEC membership and
obligations’; note on ‘Asia Pacific Bank for
Infrastructure Investment’; Inputs for the G-8
Summit a note on ‘India’s Key Challenges to Sustaining
Growth’; a report on ‘Prospects of Making India’s
Manufacturing Sector Export-Oriented’; a report on
‘Feasibility Study of Investment Cooperation between
India and the GCC’; a report on the ‘Resurgent China:

Research and Information System for Developing Countries

Imperitives on India’; and a report of the study on
‘Deepening Financial Cooperation in Asia: An Indian
Perspective’.

Policy Dialogues, Conferences and
Symposia
During 2007-08 RIS organized a number of policy
dialogues, conferences and symposia to fulfill its mandate
of fostering intellectual dialogue among developing
countries. The select major events organized in the period
include the following:
Sixth High-level Conference on Asia Economic
Integration: Agenda for East Asia Summit: RIS
organized a High-Level Conference on ‘Asian Economic
Integration: Agenda for the East Asia Summit’ in
collaboration with the Institute of South East Asian
Studies (ISEAS), Singapore and the Institute of
Developing Economies (IDE), Tokyo; Japan External
Trade Organistion (JETRO), Tokyo; and supported by
Sasakawa Peace Foundation (SPF), Tokyo on 12-13
November 2007 in New Delhi. Around hundred
delegates, comprising head of policy think-tanks in EAS
countries, policy makers, media and members of the civil
society participated in the conference.
Panel Discussion on Global Trade governance and the
Role of the South: Enhancing the DevelopmentFriendliness of the Doha Round: RIS jointly with the
South Centre organised a two part Panel Discussion at
the WTO Public Forum 2007 held in Geneva on 5
October 2007.
Seminar on RIS’ World Trade and Development Report
2007: Commonwealth Secretariat, London and RIS
jointly organised a discussion meeting on the ‘World Trade
and Development Report 2007: Building a DevelopmentFriendly World Trading System’ in London on 31 May 2007.
Discussion Meeting on World Trade Development
Report 2007: RIS and the International Centre for Trade
and Sustainable Development (ICTSD), Geneva,
organised a Discussion Meeting on the ‘World Trade and
Development Report 2007: Building a Development-Friendly
World Trading System’, in Geneva on 5 June 2007.
Conference of Editors from India, Brazil and South
Africa (IBSA): The Ministry of External Affairs in
collaboration with the RIS organised a two day conference
of editors from India, Brazil and South Africa in New Delhi

on 3-4 September 2007 on the theme of ‘Globalisation,
Emerging Powers and Media’.
National Seminar on SAARC: The RIS, jointly with the
Ministry of External Affairs; Federation of Indian
Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) and Global
India Foundation (GIF) organised the National Seminar
on ‘SAARC: Accelerating Cooperation through
Connectivity’ on 1-2 September 2007 in Kolkata.
International Workshop on Emergence of Large
Developing Countries and Implications for
International Development: RIS, with the support of the
Commonwealth Secretariat, London, has undertaken a
study on the subject. As a part of the study, RIS and the
Commonwealth Secretariat, London, jointly organised an
International Workshop on Emergence of Large
Developing Countries (BICS) and Implications for
International Development in New Delhi on 28-29 June
2007.
Inception Workshop for the Study on Potentials for
Trade in Services under SAFTA Agreement: The RIS,
jointly with SAARC Secretariat, Kathmandu, Nepal,
organised the Inception Workshop for the Study on
‘Potentials for Trade in Services under SAFTA Agreement’ in
New Delhi on 10-11 May 2007. The SAARC Secretariat
has assigned RIS to conduct this study in consultation
with the researchers from the other SAARC countries
with the framework of SAARC Network of Researchers
on Global Financial and Economic Issues.
RIS’ Special Session on International Trading System
and Development: The World Trade and Development
Report, 2007, prepared by the RIS, has summarized an
agenda for reforming of the multilateral trading system to
make it more development friendly and thus giving the
developing countries more say in the negotiations. This
provided the basis for the panel discussions in a special
session on International Trading System and Development
organised by the RIS at the ‘International Conference on
Emerging Powers in Global Governance – New Challenges
and Policy Options’, held in Paris on 6-7 July 2007.
Seminar on Implications of the WTO Proposals on
Indian Paper and Newsprint Industry: RIS and Central
Pulp and Paper Research Institute (CPPRI) organised a
Seminar on ‘Implications of the WTO Proposals on Indian
Paper and Newsprint Industry’ on 13 September 2007 in

145

Annual Report 2007 - 2008

New Delhi. Prof. Anwarul Hoda, Member Planning
Commission Chaired the Seminar and Dr. Rajesh Mehta,
Senior Fellow, RIS made a presentation of the study on
‘WTO Proposals and Indian Paper Newsprint Industy’. Bipin
Menon, Department of Commerce made the presentation
on ‘NAMA negotiations in Doha Round: State of Play’.

Outreach, Global
Networking

Presence

and

RIS has taken steps to strengthen the institutional
networking and international visibility of its work by
organising seminars at the global events. In the past year
a number of policy dialogues were organised jointly with
partner institutions in different parts of the world. These
included seminars organised in London, Paris and Geneva
as a part of important global events to enhance RIS’
international visibility and effectiveness in association
with collaborating institutions such as the South Centre,
International Centre for Trade and Sustainable
Development (ICTSD), the Commonwealth Secretariat.
The RIS delegation also participated and made key
presentations in the IBSA Academic Forum organised in
Johannesburg as part of the Second IBSA Summit in
October 2007. In addition, the RIS has also organised a
number of policy dialogues with international institutions
and other collaborative institutions in India including UNESCAP, South Asia Centre for Policy Studies (SACEPS),
SAARC Secretariat, Commonwealth Secretariat, Institute
of Southeast Asian Studies-Singapore, Institute of
Developing Economies (IDE) of Japan, among others.
RIS has entered into MoUs providing a framework for
joint activities with a number of similar institutions in
different countries such as with Development Research
Centre (DRC) of the State Council of China, Korea
Institute for International Economic Policy (KIEP),
Institute of Policy Studies of Sri Lanka, Institute of
Southeast Asian Studies in Singapore, Institute of
Developing Economies (IDE/JETRO) in Tokyo,
International Institute of Trade and Development in

Bangkok, and NAM Centre for South-South Technical
Cooperation in Jakarta, among others.

Capacity Building
Programmes

and

Training

A Programme on ‘International Economic Issues and
Development Policy (IEIDP)’ sponsored by the Ministy of
External Affairs, under ITEC/SCAAP Programme was
organised in RIS from 19 February-16 March 2007.
Fourteen participants, which included Farida Mahomed,
Member of Parliament, South Africa, took part in this
programme.
Training Programme on Global Economic Regime and
India’s Regional Economic Engagements
RIS, on behalf of the Ministry of External Affairs,
organised a training programme for the Indian Foreign
Service (IFS) probationers (2006 batch) on the theme of
Global Economic Regime and India’s Regional Economic
Engagements from 27-31 August 2007. The IFS
probationers also made presentations on different themes
during the workshops that were held during the course of
the training programme.

RIS Publications
During 2007-08, RIS published six books and reports,
issued four policy briefs and thirteen discussion papers.
Two issues of the south Asia Economic Journal, three
issues of the Biotechnology and Development Review and
four issues of New Asia Monitor were brought out. A new
publication RIS Mekong-Ganga Policy Brief was also
launched. In addition four issues of RIS Diary were also
published as listed at Appendix XVII. RIS publications
can be downloaded from its website http://www.ris.org.in

Budget
The RIS received a budgetary support of Rs. 175 lakhs
during the year 2007-08 from the Ministry of External
Affairs.

146

24

Library

T

he Ministry’s Library has over one hundred thousand
books, rich resource material and a large collection
of maps, microfilms and official documents. It is also
equipped with modern facilities to support policy planning
and research. The Library subscribes / receives and
maintains about 350 periodicals, journals and newspaper
titles, out of which 80 are also available on-line. The
Library also subscribed to the database “J-GATE: Social
Science and Management Sciences: a full text multi-user
database” for the use in Headquarters and Missions
abroad.
The Library has an in-house computer system consisting
of a Server and 12 PC terminals. The system supports
data entry and retrieval in Hindi as well. The library has
CD-ROM databases on foreign affairs and current affairs.
The Library PCs are also equipped with CD-writers and
laser printers. It also has a colour scanner (with OCR
capability as well as facility for storage and retrieval of
Images), a microfilm / fiche reader printer, plain paper
photocopiers and a HP Office-jet pro laser printer with
Desk Top Publishing (DTP) software.
A Library Committee manages library activities including
purchase of books and subscription of journals /
periodicals. In August 2007, Foreign Secretary
reconstituted the Library Committee.
All documentation and bibliographic services, as well as
other library operations and services have been
computerized, using an integrated library software package
LIBSYS covering all the features of the Library. LIBSYS
follows MARC as well as non-MARC format and supports

word-based free text searching using Boolean operators.
It also provides online validation of input data prior to
updating the database. Information on all books, maps,
documents and selected articles from periodicals received
in the Library since 1986, publications received in the
Library since 1986 (and also pre-1986 publications in
active use) are available on-line through intranet in all
PCs of Ministry of External Affairs Library. Library’s
information can also be accessed through Internet on
MEA Library’s website: www.mealib.nic.in.
All new documents received in the Library such as books,
maps, microfilms, and selected articles from periodicals
are fed on a regular basis in the database on foreign affairs.
Using this database and CD-ROM Databases, the Library
provides Current Awareness Service and Bibliographical
and Reference Services. In addition, the Library regularly
issues a Foreign Affairs Documentation Bulletin (FADB)
which lists selected articles on International Relations and
related subjects and an update on recent additions which
consist of an annotated list of books and publications
added to the Library.
The library regularly provides Article Alert Service, which
consists of abstracts of important articles from journals /
periodicals subscribed by MEA library and is available on
Internet through group e-Mails IDs to all Foreign Service
officers in the Ministry and Missions abroad
Weeding out of old and obsolete books and journals which
commenced few years back is still continuing and
substantial progress has been made in this regard.

147

Appendices

Appendix I
Cadre strength at Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad during 2007-08 (including posts
budgeted by Ministry of Commerce and those ex-cadred etc.)
S. No

Cadre/Post

Posts at
Headquaters

Posts at
Mission

Total

1

Grade I

5

21

26

2

Grade II

3

31

34

3

Grade III

38

140

178

4

Grade IV

35

110

145

5

Junior Admn. Grade/Senior scale

44

143

187

6

(i) Junior Scale

5

30

35

(ii) Probationers Reserve

62

-

62

(iii) Leave Reserve

15

-

15

(iv) Deputation Reserve

19

-

19

(V) Training Reserve

7

-

7

233

475

708

(i) Grade I

65

141

206

(ii) Deputation Reserve

6

-

6

(i) Integrated Grades II&III

147

234

381

(ii) Leave Reserve

30

-

30

(iii) Deputation Reserve

16

-

16

(iv) Training Reserve

25

-

25

(i) Grade IV

197

412

609

(ii) Leave Reserve

60

-

60

(iii) Deputation Reserve

55

-

55

(i) Grade V/VI

217

99

316

(ii) Leave Reserve

60

-

60

(iii) Deputation Reserve

14

-

14

(i) Grade II of Cypher Cadre

37

151

188

(ii) Leave Reserve

24

-

24

(i) Stenographer’s cadre

184

476

660

(ii) Leave Reserve

47

-

47

(iii) Training Reserve(Hindi)

10

-

10

(iv) Deputation Reserve

12

-

12

13

Interpreter’s Cadre

7

-

33

14

L&T cadre

14

1

15

Sub Total

1246

1521

2767

Grand Total

1479

1996

3475

Sub Total
IFS(B)
7

8

9

10

11

12

151

Appendix II
Recruitment made in various groups in the Ministry of External Affairs and reserved vacancies
filled by Scheduled Caste/Schedule Tribe/Other Backward Classes (OBC) categories from
April to November 2007.
Groups

Total No. of Vacancies

Number of Vacancies
Reserved
SC

ST

OBC

Unreserved

Group A

17

5

-

3

10

Group B

36

3

1

1

31

Group C

19

6

-

3

10

Total

72

14

1

7

51

152

Appendix III
Language-wise Statement of Officers (Grade I to Junior Scale of IFS)
Language

Number of Officers

Language

Number of Officers

Arabic

96

Nepali

3

Bahasa Indonesia

12

Persian

20

Bahasa Malay

2

Portuguese

21

Burmese

2

Russian

82

Chinese

61

Serbo-Croatian

3

Sinhalese

1

Dutch

1

French

74

Spanish

63

German

33

Swedish

1

Hebrew

4

Thai

2

Italian

4

Tibetan

1

Japanese

24

Turkish

7

Kazakh

1

Ukrainian

1

Kiswahili

6

Vietnamese

2

Korean

3

Total (27 Languages)

153

531

Appendix IV
Gender-Related Statistics
Cadre

Total No. of Officers
in position

No. of Lady
officers

Lady Officers as a
% of total strength

IFS

626

89

14.2%

IFS-B

2394

327

13.6%

L&T

11

3

27.2%

Interpreters

18

5

27.7%

Library

11

2

18.1%

154

Appendix V
Statement showing the number of applications received and passports issued including
under Tatkaal Scheme, miscellaneous applications received and services rendered as well
as Revenue (including revenue under Tatkaal Scheme) and Expenditure figures of the
Passport Offices from 1 January - 31 December 2007.
Name of
RPO/PO

No. of
Applications
received

Ahmedabad
271278
Bangalore
270124
Bareilly
67906
Bhopal
81127
Bhubaneswar
39642
Chandigarh
283233
Chennai
299488
Cochin
215411
Delhi
247712
Ghaziabad
79784
Guwahati
29870
Hyderabad
392869
Jaipur
159989
Jalandar
223463
Jammu
17872
Kolkata
182224
Kozhikode
169180
Lucknow
268647
Madurai
2965
Malappuram
138731
Mumbai
299028
Nagpur
50174
Panaji
28825
Patna
147395
Pune
109971
Raipur
412
Ranchi
31757
Shimla
17022
Srinagar
15616
Surat
90773
Thane
142229
Trichy
287862
Trivandrum
151104
Vishakapatnam 82172
TOTAL
4895855
*
**
***
****

No. of
No. of
Passports miscellanissued
eous
applications
received
276396
279812
64280
83826
44542
278411
305238
241205
227330
83250
27254
400266
188573
215750
17113
170306
170070
303118
346
153689
294019
46701
28421
119206
107955
46
33409
11947
13897
96980
139669
285627
149135
83773
4941560

22156
46996
5194
6455
3394
45125
40725
70551
35707
9075
5688
47654
19302
43436
1161
19890
45129
20574
288
28860
33277
3041
6413
7039
13460
26
3629
1386
1729
11544
9737
28819
47888
14761
700109

Miscellaneous
services
rendered
21715
46299
5164
6405
3020
43389
40191
70002
34337
8007
1088
47239
15027
42490
806
19509
44664
19265
280
29183
33196
2998
6684
6998
12888
24
3261
1321
1508
11181
9475
27379
46359
14167
675519

Passports
issued
under
Tatkaal

Revenue
under
Tatkaal
Scheme

Total
Revenue

11645 17265449 290340100 34819227
33754 59468800 331586905 29427552
4314
6885500
77602275 10422984
9580 14434900
96271655
8493251
8416 12864000
57529440
3771026
12866 27334300 334079988 25917353
67261 105384000 434038293 34636678
38681 58957500 313620333 29031737
35016 88557400 334040230 39901383
5801 22372100
80189460
7821721
1768
2629400
43273800
3746951
28865 68098800 454552107 44749429
18801 44660200 170548125 22985316
1480
2414000
26714807 29219587
136
19400
19609620
2225925
9919 21373800 199716510 22492144
30157 47220500 238071856 25814647
7900 12241500 293201953 28970532
326
0
4440000
*
23366 35782000 201082495 11803994
18744 28460600 310103001 63106916
5048
6484700
57043737
3631253
1577
2440000
34989982
4101949
1446
2113500 151200110 11153772
12569 16719000 129721092
9018828
46
265500
541700
**
3366
4791150
29556980
3802899
863
2074300
16434713
2486749
188
304500
17111427 16017477
3047
4835700
95793700
***
10080 15370600 160222160
****
30948 48652500 361763900 29800288
19058 29263000 208576847 15635761
7165 11124500 105026938
7760797
464157 820963099 5678596239 582768126

Expenditure is incurred by PO Trichy.
Expenditure is incurred by PO Bhopal.
Since Letter of Credit has been combined with RPO Mumbai, all expenditure has been made by them.
Expenditure is combined and is being sent every week by RPO Ahmedabad.

155

Total
expenditure

Appendix VI
Finances of the Ministry of
External Affairs in 2007-2008
The Budget Allocation of the Ministry of
External Affairs in the Budget Estimates
(BE) 2007-2008 is Rs. 4433.60 crores,
which is Rs. 738.55 crores i.e. 19.99 %
more than the BE 2006-07 of Rs. 3695.05
crores. There is an increase in the Revised
Estimates for 2007-08 by Rs. 549.40 crores
i.e. by 12.39 % over BE 2007-08
allocation.

MEA Expenditure and Budget (2002-2003 to 2007-2008)
Years

Actuals (in Rs. Crores)

Percentage
variation from
previous year

2002-2003

3253.79

23.98

2003-2004

3344.53

2.79

2004-2005

3756.15

12.31

2005-2006

4089.67

8.88

2006-2007

3695.05

-9.65

2007-2008 (BE)

4433.60

19.99

2007-2008(RE)

4783.00

29.44

156

Appendix VII
The Major Sectoral Allocations in the 2007-2008 Budget (RE)
Sectors

Allocation (in Rs. Crores)

MEA Secretariat

158.84

Embassies & Missions

1044.01

Passport & Emigration

267.35

Special Diplomatic Expenditure

655.67

Technical & Economic Cooperation

1656.11

Contributions to International Organizations

123.96

Grant to Indian Council for Cultural Relations

77.00

Loans and Advances to Foreign Governments

48.00

Others

752.06

157

Appendix VIII
Principal Destinations of India’s Aid
Programmes

1.

Aid to Bhutan accounts for 42.90 % of India’s total
aid and loan budget. Other destinations for Indian
aid programs include Afghanistan – 25.47 %, Nepal
– 5.87 %, Bangladesh – 3.52 %, African countries –
2.93 %, Sri Lanka- 1.64 %, Myanmar – 1.17 %,
Maldives 1.14 %, and Others –14.09 %.

2.

The Government of India has extended loans to the
Government of Bhutan to assist in the
implementation of developmental projects. During
2007-2008, the loan extended to the Government
of Bhutan amounts to Rs. 48.00 crores.

3.

The Budget of the Ministry of External Affairs is
essentially a Non-Plan Budget. However, from 199697, a Plan head has been established with the
approval of the Cabinet. This primarily caters to
certain large developmental projects undertaken in
Bhutan, as part of project assistance requested by
the Government of Bhutan in the Government of
India’s “Aid to Bhutan” Programme. The TalaHydroelectric Project implemented under this
Programme in Bhutan has been commissioned. The
other projects in Bhutan being funded from the Plan
head are the Punatsangchu Hydroelectric Project
and the Dungsum Cement Plant Project. The KabulPul-e-Khumri double circuit transmission line in
Afghanistan is also being funded from Plan
allocations. The Plan segment also caters to the loans
extended to the Government of Bhutan, which is
Rs. 48 Crores for the current financial year.

4.

The estimated expenditure on the Headquarters of
the Ministry of External Affairs during the current
financial year is Rs. 158.84 crores, which forms about
3.88 % of the total estimated revenue budget of the
Ministry. Estimated expenditure on Indian Missions
and Posts abroad is expected to be of the order of
Rs. 1044.01 crores which is about 25.52 % of the
total revenue expenditure of the Ministry.

5.

The Ministry of External Affairs’ revenue from
Passport and Visa fees and other receipts are likely
to be of the order of Rs. 1780 crores. It is estimated
that Passport fees would account for Rs. 790 crores,
Visa fees for Rs. 950 crores and other receipts for
Rs. 40 crores.

The principal beneficiaries of our Aid and Loan
Programmes in the Current Financial Years are as under:
(RE)
Aid & Loan to Countries
Bhutan
Bangladesh
Nepal

(In Rupees Crores)
731.00
60.00
100.00

Sri Lanka

28.00

Maldives

19.50

Myanmar

20.00

Afghanistan

434.00

African Countries

50.00

Central Asia

20.00

Latin American Countries
Others

1.53
240.08

158

Appendix IX
Outcome Budget in Respect of Major Heads of Expenditure (2007-08)
S.No. Name of Scheme/
Programme

Objective

Projected Outcomes

1

2

3

4

1.

Advertising &
Publicity

Commissioning and purchase of
feature films, dubbing/ screening of
documentaries, photographs/
exhibitions, ANI episodes/
subscriptions, etc.

Effective and correct projection
of India’s image abroad, particularly,
our recent developments and
foreign policy initiatives.

Printing of various publications,
purchase of books for libraries of
Missions/Posts abroad and for
presentation to foreign dignitaries,
magazines and periodicals for
Missions/Posts abroad.
Publication of ‘India Perspective’
magazine.
Projection of Indian foreign policy
through interaction with Press Clubs,
think-tank institutions and universities
in India and abroad.
Advertisement in prominent
international newspapers, handling
visits of foreign journalists and VVIP
visits abroad.
2.

Passport & Emigration

Networking of Passport Offices.

Enhanced connectivity between
CPO, Passport Offices and
Missions.

Up-gradation of hardware.

Quicker disposal of applications for
Passport and Visa.

Scanning of passport files.

Efficient maintenance of records
and retrieval of consular records.

Printing of travel documents.

Improved efficiency of
service to applicant.

Provision of machine readable printers.
Computerization of Passport, Visa and
Consular services in select Missions
abroad. Work Study of Passport Offices
by National Institute for Smart
Government (NISG).
3.

Training

Conducting 7 programmes for
participants from 97 countries and the
League of Arab States.

159

Exposure of foreign/Indian
participants to the various facets of
international diplomacy and also
exposure to the Indian polity,
India’s foreign and security policies,
economy etc.

Appendix IX

S.No. Name of Scheme/
Programme

Objective

Projected Outcomes

1

3

4

2

Conducting training programmes and
refresher courses for officials of
Ministry of External Affairs and also
other Government offices and media.
Participation in various International
bodies including the United Nations.

Advancing of India’s cause and
profile, in line with the trend of
India’s role as an emerging global
power.

(i) Grant in Aid to
Indian Council for
Cultural Relations

Cultural Diplomacy (“soft power”)
through exchange of cultural
delegations, participation in
international exhibitions, conferences
& seminars, publications, offering
scholarships, organization of Festivals
of India abroad, etc.

Promotion of Indian culture
abroad and also to provide a
platform to other countries for
showcasing their culture.

(ii) Other
Miscellaneous
items

Provide grants-in-aid to various
institutions, fund various bilateral
dialogues, holding of seminars and
studies, propagation of Hindi etc.

Obtain inputs from bilateral
dialogues for shaping policy through
seminars involving prominent
personalities.

(i) Bangladesh

Providing of flood relief assistance,
training of teachers in IT courses,
welfare activities, repairs/renovation
of institutions/historical buildings
etc.

Creation of goodwill amongst the
people of Bangladesh towards
India.

(ii) Bhutan

Construct mega hydro-electric projects
– Tala & Punatsangchu I, assistance
for other developmental and social
projects, power purchase from Bhutan.

Improved relations with Bhutan,
socio-economic development of
Bhutan, availability of power,
promotion of trade.

(iii) Nepal

Health projects, construction of
hospitals, establishment of educational
institutions and other development
projects.

Socio-economic development,
human resource development,
infrastructure development in
Nepal and creation of goodwill
amongst people of Nepal towards
India.

(iv) Sri Lanka

Small development projects

Goodwill for India.

4.

International
Cooperation

5.

Other Expenditure

6.

Technical & Economic
Cooperation with
Other Countries

Execution of small community
oriented development projects
Tsunami relief projects-reconstruction
of KKS harbour

160

Appendix IX

S.No. Name of Scheme/
Programme

Objective

Projected Outcomes

1

3

4

2

Defence cooperation.
(v) Maldives

Defence cooperation and training of
civil officials.

General goodwill for India and to
develop long term interests of India.

Deputation of Indian medical and
para-medical experts.
Establishment of a Hydrographic
Survey Unit.
Establishment of a Faculty of
Hospitality and Tourism Studies.
Up-gradation of INSAT
Meteorological Data Reception.
(vi) Myanmar

Reconstruction/maintenance of
infrastructure projects.

Infrastructure development in
Myanmar, improved road
connectivity, promotion of crossborder trade and tourism tourism as
well as to facilitate control of
insurgency, arms smuggling, drugs
trafficking and other allied
problems. Strengthening of
cooperation with Myanmar and
creation of goodwill and influence
for India.

Cooperation in remote sensing

Enhancement of cross-border
connectivity and trade.

Tamanthi hydroelectric project

Energy supply to India.

Information and Communication
Technology projects
Educational, cultural and
other cooperation
(vii) Other
Developing
Countries

Reconstruction of dams,
infrastructure development projects,
power transmission project,
reconstruction of health facilities in
Afghanistan

Development of infrastructure,
improved health facilities and
generation of goodwill in
Afghanistan

Bilateral assistance to countries in
West Asia and North Africa

Development of infrastructure in
Palestine, development in Sudan
and other countries in the West
Asia/North Africa region

Rehabilitation and relief assistance
to Iraq

Enhancement and improvement of
bilateral relations with 156 ITEC
partner countries.

161

Appendix IX

S.No. Name of Scheme/
Programme

Objective

Projected Outcomes

1

3

4

2

Establishment of Information
technology centers in select countries
in South East Asia
Training of candidates from other
countries in various civilian and
military training programmes and
SAARC Programmes.
(viii) Aid to African
Countries

Setting up of projects in the
agricultural processing sector,
Information Technology centers,
Development projects in countries
in West Africa and East &
Southern Africa.

Generate goodwill towards India
amongst the people of the countries
in West Africa and East &
Southern Africa
Enhance connectivity through IT

(ix) Aid to Central Asia

Setting up of IT Centers

Development of skills in the
Information Technology sector
General development of the region
and generation of goodwill towards
India amongst the people in the
countries in Central Asia

Defence cooperation
Providing agricultural implements
to countries in Central Asia
7.

Public Works

Construction of chanceries and
residential buildings in 20 countries
abroad.

Creation of assets and consequential
reduction in the rental liabilities of
Government of India over a period
of time.

Acquisition of land and built-up
properties in 4 countries abroad
and in India.
Construction of 4 projects of
construction of office and institutional
buildings in India including
Videsh Bhavan.
8.

Housing

Construction of residences in 9
countries abroad and residential
quarters/hostel suites in India
Acquisition of properties for
residential purposes in 1 country
abroad.
Repairs and renovation works of
properties abroad.

162

Creation of assets and consequential
reduction in the rental liabilities of
Government of India over a period
of time

Appendix X
Extracts from C&AG's Report on Ministry of External Affairs
Deficient Internal control mechanism

Non-institution of effective internal control mechanism in the Ministry/
Mission of Thimpu resulted in excess release of Rs.6.57 crore to the Royal
Government of Bhutan for a power project. The Ministry also made double
remittance of Rs. 67.99 crore to the Mission for the same purpose and
excess release of Rs. 22.99 crore for another purpose. These instances
resulted in loss of interest of Rs. 58.00 lakh computed at the borrowing
rate of the Union government.
(Report No.2 of 2007)

Irregular payment of Composite
Transfer Grant

In contravention of Government of India orders and its own rules, the
Ministry paid composite Transfer Grant equivalent to one month’s
basic pay to the officials selected on temporary deputation of 2 to 3 months
during the annual Haj pilgrimage resulting in irregular payment of Rs.
93.61 lakh during 2003-05. Further, the Ministry instead of recovering
the overpaid amount accorded ex-post-facto sanction to incurring of
expenditure which was also highly irregular.
(Report No.2 of 2007)

Non-adherence to norms for
purchase, hiring, repair and
maintenance of buildings and
residential accommodation

Slackness of the Ministry/Mission at Chicago in acquiring property for
residential purpose led to an avoidable expenditure of Rs. 2.48 crore
during October 1999 to February 2004. In disregard of the rules,
Missions at Bangkok, Beijing, Ho-Chi-Minh City, Kathmandu and Mahe
hired residential accommodation for their officers/staff far in excess of
the prescribed plinth area norms resulting in irregular expenditure of Rs.
2.67 crore during 2001-05. Indian Missions at Johannesburg and Pretoria
in disregard of Ministry’s rule and delegated powers paid rent of residential
accommodation in excess of the prescribed ceiling without the approval
of the Ministry resulting in unauthorized expenditure of Rs. 31.12 lakh
during September 2002 to March 2006. Indian Mission at Mahe, Riyadh
and Colombo incurred expenditure on repairs/renovation and
maintenance of Government owned buildings/residences of staff in
violation of the delegation of financial powers resulting in unauthorized
expenditure of Rs. 1.39 crore during 2002-06.
(Report No. 2 of 2007)

Performance audit of functioning
of Commercial Wings in the
Indian Missions/Posts abroad

Commercial wings in the Indian Missions/Posts abroad were not
restructured keeping in view the changing international trade scenario.
Several proposals to restructure and streamline these wings to enable
them to discharge their functions efficiently and effectively remained
unimplemented. The recommendations of the Expenditure Reforms
Commission on downsizing were also not implemented by the
DOC.
(Paragraphs 8.1.1 and 8.1.2)
The Commercial representation was not commensurate with the trade
potential. Posts in many countries identified as “focus markets” were
functioning without adequate commercial presence, whereas, a large
number of India based and local staff were provided in other countries
that were not regarded as top export destinations.
(Paragraph 8.3.1)

163

Appendix X
Only 2 per cent of the total expenditure of Rs. 337 crore was incurred on
‘Trade Promotion’ by the commercial wings during 2001-02 and 2005-06
while the major part of the allocation (75 per cent) was utilized to meet
establishment costs. The decision of the commerce Secretary (May 2000)
to reduce establishment costs and increase trade promotional activities
was not implemented.
(Paragraphs 8.2.1. and 8.2.2.)
Commercial wings in the Indian Missions/Posts abroad did not discharge
their mandated responsibilities efficiently and effectively so far as they
related to preparation of annual action plan, conducting market research
surveys, development of business strategy elements, settlement of trade
disputes, follow up on trade and investment delegations to post countries,
and furnishing of reports pertaining to the trade fairs and exhibitions in
the countries where they were located.
(Paragraphs 8.4.1, 8.4.3, 8.4.4, 8.4.5, 8.4.6 and 8.4.7)
Monitoring of the performance of commercial wings by the DOC and
the MEA was lax. The commercial wings did not submit the monthly
annual commercial reports regularly to the DOC and the MEA. The
reports received in the DOC and the MEA were seldom analyzed or
reviewed to measure the performance of the wings.
(Paragraph 8.5.2){Report No. 21 of 2007 (Performance Audit)}
Performance audit of Passport, Visa
and Consular Services

There were significant delays in the issue of Passports. In the 12
selected RPOs/POs, only 19 per cent of the passports were issued within
the prescribed time. In nine of the selected RPOs/POs only 12 per cent
passports were issued on time after receipt of police verification reports
(PVRs). In 10 of these RPOs/POs even where police verification was
waived, 38 per cent of the passports were issued after the prescribed time.
The Director General of Police, Uttar Pradesh stated that submission of
PVRs in 21 days is not possible unless a separate cell is created and police
verification for passport applications was not a priority item for the State
Police. Under the Tatkal Scheme, in 80,725 cases passports were not issued
within the specified time though in these cases additional fees of Rs. 872.49
lakh had been charged by RPOs/POs Kozhikode, Bhopal, Ahmedabad,
Pune, Lucknow, Kolkata, Bareilly and Chandigarh.
(Paragraph 7.1.2.)
Large number of passports that were returned undelivered were not
destroyed by RPOs/POs Lucknow, Chandigarh, Kolkata, Kozhikode, Pune,
Bareilly, Delhi, Bhopal, Nagpur, Jammu and Ahmedabad although this
was required. RPOs Delhi and Jammu did not maintain proper records for
this category of passports. The absence of proper accounting and timely
destruction of these passports could have serious implications including
possible misuse.
(Paragraph 7.1.3.)
In RPOs/POs at Bhopal, Delhi, Pune, Kolkata and Lucknow, 244 passports
were revoked/impounded after delays ranging from six months to more
than eight years from the date of receipt of adverse PVRs. Twenty eight
persons had traveled abroad after the receipt of adverse PVRs./issue of
impounding/revoking circulars by the RPO/PO. Delay in revocation
impounding of passports provides an opportunity to the concerned persons
to continue to misuse their passports, which is against the security interest
of the nation.
(Paragraph 7.1.4.)

164

Appendix X
Lack of adequate control in checking the issue of passports resulted in
fake passports being issued by RPO, Delhi to difference individuals who
impersonated others. This is a matter of serious concern because of its
likely impact on the national security.
(Paragraph 7.1.5.1.)
In RPO, Delhi, the software system did not accurately reflect the status of
inter-related revoked/impounded passports thereby leaving scope for
manipulation and misuse of the passports not shown as revoked/
impounded. The cancelled passports were also not accounted for properly
leading to the possibility of their misuse.
(Paragraph 7.1.5.2)
RPO, Delhi issued 5553 loss circulars against 6683 cases of lost passports
during 2001-02 to 2004-05. The non-issue/delay in issue of loss circulars
can result in misuse of lost passports with adverse implications.
(Paragraph 7.1.6.1)
Sufficient care was not taken in verification of the antecedents and other
particulars of the applicants before issue of clear PVRs.
(Paragraph 7.1.8.1.)
During 2000-01 to 2004-05, delay in receiving PVRs occurred in 70 to 82
per cent of the cases, resulting in the issue of passports on ‘PVR overdue’
basis. Such delay while adversely affecting the genuine applicants, are
fraught with risk of passports being issued to ineligible
applicants.
(Paragraph 7.1.8.2.)
Passports under the Tatkal Scheme were issued on the basis of verification
certificates (VCs) given by the officers mostly to unknown persons on the
basis of references made by their friends/relatives etc. In RPOs/POs Delhi,
Bareilly, Bhopal, Lucknow, Ahmedabad, Nagpur, Pune, Chandigarh and
Kolkata, out of 1,74,177 cases sent for post police verification during 2000
01 to 2004-05, adverse PVRs were received in 1,930 cases, incomplete
PVRs in 19,672 and PVRs were not received at all in 44,191 cases. There
was no practice of initiating action against the VC issuing authorities where
adverse PVRs were received. Not holding the VC issuing authorities
accountable has left the entire system vulnerable to malpractices.
(Paragraph 7.1.8.3.)
In RPO Delhi, in 114 cases of revoked/impounded passports, entries
regarding their revocation/impounding were not made in the system. These
passports could go unnoticed by the PIAs, immigration officers and other
security agencies.
(Paragraph 7.1.9.1)
Blank travel documents (passport booklets, visa stickers etc.) went missing
in transit while being supplied to 16 Missions/Posts from the India Security
Press, Nasik. The blank travel documents received by 10 Missions/Posts/
RPO were found damaged. There was absence of proper accounting of
blank travel documents. In 13 Missions/Posts, discrepancies in demand,
supply and receipt of the blank travel documents were also noticed. The
stock registers maintained by the Mission/Posts were deficient on many
counts. Poor maintenance of proper records as well as accounting of blank
travel documents is a matter of serious security concern.
(Paragraph 7.3.1 and 7.3.2)

165

Appendix X
Effective supervision, monitoring and internal controls were lacking in
passport matters. This resulted in issue of Indian passports to foreign
nationals, issue of 275 fake passports and issue of passports to criminals
and terrorists. The MEA did not initiate corrective measures to
strengthen its internal controls even after the deficiencies and
malpractices were brought to its notice.
(Paragraph 7.6){Report No.12 of 2007 (Performance Audit)}

166

Appendix XI
Treaties/Conventions/Agreements Concluded or Renewed by India with other countries in
the year 2007
S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement

Date of
Signature

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

A. MULTILATERAL
1
2
3

The International Convention for the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance.

6.2.07

The Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities.

30.3.07

24.9.07 /1.10.07

The Intergovernmental Agreement on the
Trans-Asian Railway Network.

29.6.07

7.8.07

4

Protocol amending the TRIPS Agreement adopted
by the General Council of World Trade Organization
at Geneva on 6 December 2005.

5

Memorandum of Understanding on Trilateral
Cooperation in Agriculture and Allied Fields between
the Governments of the Republic of India, The
Federative Republic of Brazil and the Republic of
South Africa under the India-Brazil-South
Africa (IBSA) Dialogue Forum Initiative.

13.09.06

10.5.07

6

The amendments to the International Institute for
Democracy and Electoral Assistance Statutes were
adopted by the Extraordinary Council meeting of
International IDEA on the twenty fourth day of
January in the year two thousand and six.

24.1.06

14.5.07

7

Amendment to the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material adopted by the IAEA
Diplomatic Conference on 8 July 2005.

8.7.05

19.9.07

The International Convention against Doping in Sport
was adopted by the General Conference of UNESCO
at its thirty third session on the nineteenth day of
October, two thousand and five in Paris.

19.10.05

10.9.07

9

India-Bhutan Friendship Treaty.

8.2.07

2.3.07

10

SAARC
Agreement on Establishing the
SAARC Food Bank.

4.4.07

17.4.07

Agreement for Establishment of South
Asian University.

4.4.07

17.4.07

8

11

B. TRILATERAL
IBSA
1
Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation
in the Field of Health and Medicine between the
Government of the Republic of India, the Government
of the Federative Republic of Brazil and the Government
of the Republic of South Africa.

167

9.3.07

17.10.07

14.5.07

2.3.07

17.10.07

Appendix XI

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

2

Date of
Signature

Agreement on Customs and Tax Administration
Co-operation between the Government of the Republic
of India, the Government of the Federative Republic of
Brazil and the Government of the Republic of
South Africa.

17.10.07

Agreement on Cultural Cooperation between the
Government of the Republic of India, the Government
of the Federative Republic of Brazil and the Government
of the Republic of South Africa.

17.10.07

Agreement on Higher Education between the
Government of the Republic of India, the Government
of the Federative Republic of Brazil and the Government
of the Republic of South Africa.

17.10.07

Agreement on Social Agreement between the
Government of the Republic of India, the Government
of the Federative Republic of Brazil and the Government
of the Republic of South Africa.

17.10.07

6

Agreement on Wind Resources between the
Government of the Republic of India, the Government
of the Federative Republic of Brazil and the
Government of the Republic of South Africa.

17.10.07

7

Agreement on Public Administration & Governance
between the Government of the Republic of India, the
Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil and the
Government of the Republic of South Africa.

17.10.07

3

4

5

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

C. BILATERAL
1

2

3
4

Austria
The Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of the Republic
of Austria on Scientific and Technological Co-operation

30.11.07

Azerbaijan
Agreement between the Government of India and the
Government of Republic of Azerbaijan on the
Inter-governmental Commission on Trade, Economic,
Scientific and Technological Cooperation

11.4.07

16.8.07

Belarus
Treaty on Extradition between the Republic of India
and The Republic of Belarus

16.4.07

2.8.07

Agreement between the Ministry of Agriculture of the
Republic of India and the Ministry of Agriculture and
Food of the Republic of Belarus on Cooperation in the
Field of Agriculture

16.4.07

168

16.4.07

Appendix XI

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

5

6

7

8
9

10

11

12

13

14

Date of
Signature

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

Programme of Cooperation between the Government of
the Republic of India and the Government of the
Republic of Belarus in the Field of Culture, Arts,
Education, Mass Media and Press for 2007-2009

16.4.07

Executive Programme of Indo-Belarusian Cooperation
in the Field of Science and Technology for the
Period 2007-2010

16.4.07

Protocol on the Accession of the Republic of Belarus
to the World Trade Organization between the Republic
of India and the Republic of Belarus

16.4.07

Bahrain
Agreement for cooperation between Prasar Bharti
Radio and Bahrain Radio and Television Corporation.

20.3.07

20.3.07

Executive Programme for Cultural Co-operation
between the Government of the Republic of India and
the Government of the Kingdom of Bahrain
for the Years 2007-2010.

20.3.07

20.3.07

Bhutan
Memorandum of Understanding between national
Informatics Centre Services Incorporated (NICSI),
Government of Indian and the Department of
Information Technology, Ministry of Information and
Communications, Royal Government of Bhutan on
‘Collaboration in the area of Customization/
Development and Implementation of e-Governance
Applications’.

28.6.07

28.6.07

Agreement between the Government of India and the
Royal Government of Bhutan regarding the
Punatsangchhu-I Hydroelectric Project.

28.7.07

28.7.07

Memorandum of Understanding for Cooperation
between Comptroller and Auditor General, India
(C&AG) and the Royal Audit Authority of the
Kingdom of Bhutan.

15.10.07

15.10.07

Brazil
Agreement between the Republic of India and the
Federative Republic of Brazil on Scientific and
Technological Co-operation

12.9.06

Memorandum of Understanding between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Federative Republic of Brazil on
Mutual Cooperation between the Diplomatic Academies.

12.9.07

169

16.4.07

7.8.07

Appendix XI

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

15

Date of
Signature

Agreement between the Government of The Republic
of India and the Government of the Federative Republic
of Brazil on Mutual Assistance in Customs Matters.

4.6.07

Bulgaria
Agreement on Economic Cooperation between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Republic of Bulgaria

12.9.07

Protocol of intent on Promoting Cooperation in the
Areas of Labour Relations, Employment and Social
Security between the Ministry of Labour and
Employment of the Republic of India and the Ministry
of Labour and Social Policy of the Republic of Bulgaria.

12.9.07

Treaty on Mutual Legal Assistance in Civil and
Commercial Matters between the Republic of India
and the Republic of Bulgaria.

12.9.07

19

Protocol between the Government of India and the
Government of the Republic of Bulgaria amending the
Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and The Government of the Republic of
Bulgaria for the Promotion and Protection of Investment
signed in new Delhi, on 26 October 1998.

12.9.07

20

Treaty on Mutual Legal Assistance in
Criminal matters between the Republic of India
and the Republic of Bulgaria.

12.9.07

Memorandum of Understanding between the National
Small Industries Corporation Ltd., Republic of India,
and the Bulgarian Small and Medium Enterprises
Promotion Agency.

12.9.07

Treaty on the Transfer of Sentenced Persons between
the Republic of India and the Republic of Bulgaria.

12.9.07

Cambodia
Memorandum of Understanding between the
Government of the Republic of India and The Royal
Government of Cambodia for Setting up a Centre
for English language training in Phnom Penh,
Cambodia.

18.5.07

Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation
and Technical Assistance between ONGC Videsh Ltd.
of India and the Cambodia National Petroleum
Authority of the Kingdom of Cambodia.

8.12.07

Credit Line Agreement dated 8 December 2007
between the Government of the Kingdom of
Cambodia and Export-Import Bank of India.

8.12.07

16

17

18

21

22

23

24

25

170

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

24.9.07

24.9.07

12.9.07

Appendix XI

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

Date of
Signature

Work plan under Memorandum of Understanding
between the Government of the Republic of India
and The Royal Government of Cambodia on
Agriculture Cooperation for 2007 and 2008.

8.12.07

Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and Government of Kingdom of
Cambodia on Defence Cooperation.

8.12.07

Memorandum of Understanding between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Royal Government of Cambodia on Cooperation in
the Field of Water Resources Management.

8.12.07

Memorandum of Understanding on Foreign Office
Consultations between the Ministry of External
Affairs of India and The Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of the
Kingdom of Cambodia.

8.12.07

Agreement between the Government of Republic
of India and the Royal Government of Cambodia on
the Transfer of Sentenced Persons.

8.12.07

China
Cultural Exchange Programme between India and
China for the years 2007-09.

20.6.07

Union Postal Union Constitution (China)
Sixth Additional Protocol to the Constitution of the
Universal Postal Union was adopted at Beijing
(People’s Republic of China) on the Fifteenth day of
September in the year one thousand nine hundred
and ninety nine.

12.12.06

Cyprus
Agreement between the Government of India and
The Government of the Republic of Cyprus on
Combating International Terrorism, Organized
Crime and Illicit Drug Trafficking.

25.5.07

Agreement Between the Government of The
Republic of India and the Government of the
Republic of Cyprus on Abolition of Visa
Requirement for Holders of Diplomatic and
Official/Service Passports.

25.5.07

Executive Programme on Cultural, Educational and
Scientific Cooperation between the Government of
The Republic of India and the Government of the
Republic of Cyprus for the year 2007-2010.

25.5.07

171

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

1.3.07

25.5.07

Appendix XI

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

Date of
Signature

Colombia
Memorandum of Understanding between the
Government of India and the Government of Colombia
on CO-operation in the Field of Urban Public Transport
Systems and Urban Transport Planning.

31.5.07

Croatia
Agreement on Visas Exemption for Diplomatic and
Official Passport Holders between India and Croatia.

19.9.07

Czech Republic
Memorandum on Cooperation between the Foreign
Service Institute of the Ministry of External Affairs of
the Republic of India and the Diplomatic Academy
of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Czech Republic.

19.11.07

Ethiopia
Protocol for Consultations between the Ministry of
External Affairs of the Republic of India and The
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia.

5.7.07

Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia on the Establishment of
Joint Ministerial Commission.

5.7.07

Agreement between the Republic of India and the
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia for the
Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments.

5.7.07

Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia on Cooperation in the Fields of
Science and Technology.

5.7.07

Exchange Programme between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia in the Field of
Education.

5.7.07

European Community
The Agreement for Scientific and Technological
Cooperation between the Government of the Republic
of India and the European Community.

30.11.07

Germany
Memorandum of Understanding between Ministry of
Communications and IT, Government of Republic of
India and Deutsche Post AG, Germany.

30.10.07

172

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

31.5.07

5.7.07

3.9.07

5.7.07

Appendix XI

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

53

54

55

Date of
Signature

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Hellenic Republic
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the Hellenic Republic on
Scientific and Technological Cooperation.

26.4.07

18.7.07

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the Hellenic Republic on
the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments.

26.4.07

26.4.07

Iceland
Memorandum of Understanding Sustainable Fisheries
Development between the Ministry of Agriculture
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and
Fisheries Government of India and The Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of Iceland.

30.7.07

30.7.07

Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in
the Field of Earthquake Prediction Research between
India and Iceland.

5.4.07

Memorandum of Understanding on Indo-Iceland
Renewable Energy Cooperation between the Ministry of
New and Renewable Energy, Government of the
Republic of India and Ministry of Industry of the
Republic of Iceland.

9.10.07

The Agreement and the Protocol between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of Iceland for the Avoidance of Double
Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with
respect to Taxes on Income.

23.11.07

Iraq
Agreed Minutes of the Sixteenth session of the
India-Iraq Joint Commission for Economic and Technical
Co-operation held in New Delhi from 22-25 May 2007.

25.5.07

Japan
Memorandum of Understanding between Ministry of
Urban Development Government of India and Ministry
of Land, Infrastructure and Transport Government of
Japan on Co-operation in the Field of Urban
Development.

1.5.07

Joint Statement by the Republic of India and Japan on
the Enhancement of Cooperation on Environmental
Protection and Energy Security.

22.8.07

Joint Statement on the Roadmap for New Dimensions
to the Strategic and Global Partnership
between India and Japan.

22.8.07

173

Date of Entry
into force

9.10.07

Appendix XI

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

Date of
Signature

Korea
Fifth session of India-Republic of Korea Joint
Commission in Seoul signed on 17 September 2007

17.9.07

Kuwait
Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the State of Kuwait for
the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention
of Fiscal Evasion with Respect of Taxes on Income.

15.6.07

Kyrgyzstan
Memorandum of Understanding on Mutual
Cooperation between the Foreign Service Institute,
Ministry of External Affairs, the Republic of India and
the Diplomatic Academy of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of the Kyrgyz Republic.

24.4.07

Lao PDR
Memorandum of Understanding between the
Government of the Republic of India and Government
of Lao People’s Democratic Republic for Setting up
Centre for English Language Training at Vientiane,
Lao PDR.

12.6.07

Memorandum of Understanding between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of Lao People’s Democratic Republic for
the Conservation and Restoration of the
UNESCO World Heritage Site at Wat Phou.

30.5.07

Libya
Cultural & Information Agreement between the Great
Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and the
Government of the Republic of India.

26.5.07

Agreement between the Republic of India and the
Great Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya for
the Promotion and Protection of Investments.

26.5.07

Malaysia
Agreed Minutes of the 4th India-Malaysia Joint
Commission Meeting held in New Delhi on
16 February 2007.

16.2.07

Mauritius
The Memorandum of Understanding in
the Field of Social Defence Including Welfare of the
Elderly, Programme of Drug Demand Reduction,
Disability, and Other Areas in the General Field of
Social Defence between Ministry of Social Justice
and Empowerment of the Republic of India and

174

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

26.5.07

Appendix XI

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

Date of
Signature

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

Ministry of Social Security, National Solidarity and
Senior Citizen Welfare and Reform Institution
of the Republic of Mauritius.

3.11.07

Mexico
Treaty between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of United Mexican States
on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters.

10.9.07

28.9.07

Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the United Mexican
States on the Promotion and Protection of Investments.

21.5.07

2.7.07

Treaty on Extradition between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of the United
Mexican States.

10.9.07

Myanmar
Memorandum of Understanding between the
Government of the Republic of India and the Union of
Myanmar for Establishing Indian Myanmar Centre for
enhancement of IT skills at Yangon.

12.12.07

Nigeria
Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation
between the Indian Council of World Affairs,
Republic of India and Nigerian Institute of
International Affairs, Federal Republic of Nigeria.

15.10.07

15.10.07

Memorandum of Understanding on Mutual
Cooperation between the Foreign Service Institute,
Ministry of External Affairs of the Republic of India
and the Foreign Service Academy, Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.

15.10.07

15.10.07

Protocol for Consultations between Ministry of
External Affairs of the Republic of India and the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of
Nigeria.

15.10.07

15.10.07

Memorandum of Understanding(MoU) between
the Ministry of Defence of the Government of the
Republic of India and the Ministry of Defence of the
Government of the Federal Republic of Nigeria
Concerning Defence Cooperation.

15.10.07

St. Christopher and Nevis
Memorandum of Understanding on Consultations
between the Ministry of External Affairs of the Republic
of India and The Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
International Trade, Industry and Commerce of the
Government of St. Christopher and Nevis.

23.7.07

175

23.7.07

Appendix XI

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

74

Date of
Signature

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

Pakistan
Agreement between the Republic of India and the Islamic
Republic of Pakistan on Reducing the Risk from
Accidents Relating to Nuclear Weapons.
21.2.07
Philippines
Memorandum of Agreement between the Department
of Energy Republic of the Philippines and the Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy Republic of Indian on
Enhanced Cooperation in the Field of Renewable Energy.

5.10.07

76

Declaration on a Framework of Bilateral Cooperation.

5.10.07

77

Joint Declaration to combat International Terrorism.

5.10.07

78

Agreement on Establishment of a Joint Commission.

5.10.07

79

MoU on Cooperation between Foreign Service Institutes.

5.10.07

80

Agreement on exemption visas for diplomatic
and official passports.

5.10.07

MoU in the Field of Health and Medicine.

5.10.07

5.10.07

Rwanda
Memorandum of Understanding between the
Government of the Republic of India and the Republic
of Rwanda on Cooperation in the Fields of Agriculture
and Animal Resources.

31.05.07

31.5.07

Agreement between Ministry of External Affairs
Government of India and Hole-In-the Wall Education
Ltd. (HIWEL) for setting up of a Hole-In-The-Wall
Pilot Project in Rwanda 9 April 2007

9.4.07

Russian Federation
Programme of Cultural Exchanges between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Russian Federation for
the years 2007-2009.

25.1.07

25.1.07

Protocol between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the Russian Federation on
Holding “Year of Russia in India” in the Year 2008 and
“Year of India in Russia” in the Year 2009

25.1.07

25.1.07

Minutes of the Thirteenth Meeting of the
Russian-Indian Working Group on Energy.

11.10.07

Protocol of the 3rd Meeting of the Russian-Indian
Working Group on Metallurgy and Mines of the
Russian-Indian Intergovernmental Commission for
Trade, Economic, Scientific, Technical and
Cultural Cooperation

12.9.07

75

81
82

83

84

85

86
87

176

5.10.07

5.10.07

Appendix XI

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

88
89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

Date of
Signature

Russian-Indian Working Group for technologies
Minutes of the Third Meeting

8.10.07

Protocol of the Thirteenth Session of the Indo-Russian
Inter-Governmental Commission on Trade , Economic,
Scientific, Technical and Cultural Cooperation

12.10.07

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

th

Protocol of the 13 Meeting of the Indian-Russian
Working Group on Tourism & Culture of the
Indian-Russian Intergovernmental Commission on
Trade-Economic, Scientific-Technical and
Cultural Cooperation.

13.9.07

Protocol of the 13th Session of the Russian-Indian
Working Group on Trade, Economic Cooperation of
the Indo-Russian Inter-Governmental Commission on
Trade, Economic, Scientific-Technological and Cultural
Cooperation.

31.8.07

Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the Russian Federation
on Cooperation in Development and Production of
Prospective Multi-Role Fighter.

18.10.07

Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the Russian Federation
on access of the Indian Party to a part of the Russian
Global Navigation Satellite System GLONASS
Radio Frequency Spectrum.

25.1.07

Agreement between the Indian Space Research
Organization and the Federal Space Agency on
Cooperation in the Joint Satellite Project
“YOUTHSAT”.

25.1.07

Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the Russian Federation
on the access of the Indian Party to navigation signals
of the Russian Global Navigation Satellite System
GLONASS for peaceful purposes.

25.1.07

Protocol between the Central Board of Excise and
Customs, Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance
(Republic of India) and the Federal Customs Service
(Russian Federation) on exchange of information on
the movement of goods and conveyances between the
Republic of India and the Russian Federation.

25.1.07

25.1.07

Joint Statement on the Outcome of the Official Visit
of H.E. Mr. Vladimir V. Putin, President of the Russian
Federation to the Republic of India.

25.1.07

25.1.07

177

25.1.07

Appendix XI

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

98

99

Date of
Signature

Memorandum of Intent between the Department of
Atomic Energy, the Government of the Republic of
India and Federal Atomic Energy Agency, the Russian
Federation on Development of Cooperation in the
Construction of Additional Nuclear Power Plant Units
at Kudankulam Site as well as in the construction of
Russian Design Nuclear Power Plants at New Sites
in the Republic of India.

25.1.07

The Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of the
Russian Federation on Cooperation in Development
and Production of Prospective Multi-Role Fighter.

18.10.07

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

25.1.07

100 Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the Russian Federation
onCooperation to combat illicit trafficking in Narcotics,
Psychotropic substances and their precursors.

12.11.07

12.11.07

101 Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the Russian Federation
on Cooperation in Development and Production of
Multi-Role Transport Aircraft.

12.11.07

12.11.07

102 Letters of Exchange (on utilization of rupee debt funds
for Russian investments in India).

12.11.07

12.11.07

103 Agreement between the Indian Space Research
Organization and the Federal Space Agency on
Cooperation in the Field of Joint Moon Exploration.

12.11.07

12.11.07

Singapore
104 Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the Republic of
Singapore on the Establishment of the Joint Ministerial
Committee for Bilateral Cooperation.

19.6.07

19.6.07

Spain
105 Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry
of Science and Technology of the Republic of India and
the Ministry of Education and Science and the Ministry
of Industry, Tourism and Trade of Spain For Cooperation
in the Field of Science and Technology.

12.6.07

12.6.07

Serbia
106 Agreement on Visas Exemption for Diplomatic and
Official Passport Holders between India and Serbia.

17.9.07

107 Memorandum of Understanding for cooperation
between the Foreign Service Institute of India and
Diplomatic Academy of Serbia.

17.9.07

178

17.9.07

Appendix XI

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

Date of
Signature

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

108 Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the Republic of Serbia for
the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investment.

31.1.03

18.12.07

109 Agreement on Trade and Economic Cooperation
between the Government of the Republic of India and
the Government of the Republic of Serbia.

7.2.06

18.12.07

110 Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the Republic of Serbia
on Cooperation in the Fields of Culture, Education and
Sports.

20.9.02

18.12.07

Slovenia
111 Memorandum of Understanding by and
between the CSIR of the Republic of India and the
ICPE of Slovenia.

19.11.07

Tunisia
112 Cultural Exchange Programme between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of Republic of Tunisia (2007-2009).

8.2.07

113 Cooperation Agreement in the field of small and
medium sized enterprises between The Government of
the Republic of India and The Government of the
Republic of Tunisia.

8.2.07

114 Air Service Agreement between the Government of
India and the Government of the Republic of Tunisia.

8.2.07

Thailand
115 Executive Programme of Cultural Exchange between
the Government of The Republic of India and
The Government of the Kingdom of Thailand
for the years 2007-2009.

26.6.07

26.6.07

116 Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy, Government of India
and The Ministry of Energy Government of the
Kingdom of Thailand on Enhanced Cooperation in the
Filed of Renewable Energy Preamble.

26.6.07

26.6.07

Trinidad and Tobago
117 Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
Indian and the Government of the Republic of Trinidad
and Tobago for the Promotion and Protection of
Investment.

12.3.07

UAE
118 Agreed Minutes of the Ninth Session of the India-UAE
Joint Commission for Economic and Technical
Co-operation.

6.6.07

179

20.4.07

Date of Entry
into force

Appendix XI

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

Date of
Signature

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

119 Memorandum of Understanding for Technical
Cooperation between the Bureau of Indian Standards
and Emirates Authority for Standardization and
Metrology.

26.3.07

120 Framework Agreement between the Government of
the Republic of India and the Government of the
United Arab Emirates for Developing
Industrial Relations.

26.3.07

121 Protocol Amending the Agreement between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the United Arab Emirates for the
Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of
Fiscal Evasion with Respect to Taxes on Income signed
in India on 29 April 1992.

26.3.07

122 Memorandum of Understanding between Securities
and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) and Emirates
Securities and Commodities Authority (ESCA) in
relation to Assistance and Mutual Cooperation on the
Exchange of Information.

26.3.07

26.3.07

123 Memorandum of Understanding for Technical
Cooperation in Accreditation Activities between
National Accreditation Board for Testing and
Calibration Laboratories (NABL) and The Emirates
Authority for Standardization & Metrology (ESMA).

26.3.07

26.3.07

Uganda
124 Memorandum of Understanding between the
Government of the Republic of India and the Republic
of Uganda on Cooperation in the Fields of
Agriculture and Allied Sectors.

30.5.07

30.5.07

125 Agreement between Ministry of External Affairs
Government of India and Hole-In-the Wall Education
Ltd (HIWEL) for setting up of a Hole-In-The-Wall
Pilot Project in Uganda.

21.5.07

United State of America
126 Memorandum of Cooperation between the Ministry of
Urban Development Government of the Republic of
India and the Department of Transportation of the
United states of America on Cooperation in Public
Transportation Science and Technology.

19.9.07

Vietnam
127 Joint Declaration on the Strategic Partnership
between India and Vietnam.

6.7.07

180

26.3.07

6.7.07

Appendix XI

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

Date of
Signature

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

128 Exchange Programme between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of the
Socialist Republic of Vietnam on Cooperation in
the Field of Education.

6.7.07

129 Memorandum of Understanding between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam on
the exchange of properties and land for their
respective Diplomatic Missions.

6.7.07

130 Memorandum of Understanding on Bilateral
Cooperation in the field of Fisheries and Aquaculture
between the Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic
of India and the Ministry of Fisheries of the
Socialist Republic of Vietnam.

6.7.07

131 Memorandum of Understanding between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam for
Establishing the Centre for English Language Training
in Danang City – Vietnam.

6.7.07

132 Cultural Exchange Programme between the Government
of the Republic of India and the Government of the
Socialist Republic of Vietnam for the Years 2007-2010.

6.7.07

6.7.07

133 Memorandum of Understanding between the Department
of Atomic Energy (DAE) of the Government of the
Republic of India and Ministry of Science and
Technology (MOST) of Government of
Socialist Republic of Vietnam.
6.7.07

6.7.07

134 Agreed Minutes of the Thirteenth Meeting of
India-Vietnam Joint Commission on Trade, Economic,
Scientific and Technological Cooperation Held at
New Delhi on 27 February 2007.

27.2.07

135 Work Plan for the years 2007-2009 under the
Indo-Vietnam MoU for Agricultural Research
and Education.

6.7.07

136 Treaty between the Republic of India and the Socialist
Republic of Vietnam on Mutual Legal Assistance in
Criminal Matters.

8.10.07

Yemen
137 Agreed Minutes of the Sixth Session of the
Indo-Yemen Joint Committee for Economic Scientific
and Technical Co-operation held in New Delhi,
Republic of India 10-11 April 2007.

11.4.07

181

6.7.07

6.7.07

6.7.07

19.10.07

Appendix XI

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement etc.

Date of
Signature

138 Protocol of Bilateral Cooperation in the Field of Oil
and Gas Industry between the Ministry of Oil
and Minerals of the Republic of Yemen and the
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas of
the Republic of India.

182

3.2.07

Date of
Deposit
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

Date of Entry
into force

Appendix XII
Instruments of Full Powers Issued during the period 1 January 2007 to December 2007
Sl. No. Convention/Treaty

Date of
Full Powers

1.

In favour of Shri Nirupam Sen, Permanent Representative of India to the United
Nations for signing the Convention on Jurisdictional Immunities of States and
their Property.

2.

In favour of Shri K.P. Singh, Secretary (Defence Production) for signing the
Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the
Government of the Republic of India on the Transfer to the Republic of India of
Licenses and Technical Documents for the Production of RD-33 Engine ser. 3, its
Aggregates, KSA-2 Aircraft Gear Box and GTDE-117 Gas Turbine Engine-Power
Unit (Turbine Starter) and on Technical Assistance in Organization of their Production.

23.1.07

In favour of Shri K.V. Bhagirath, Charge d’ Affaires, ad interim of the Republic of
India in France, London for signing the International Convention for the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance

5.02.07

3.

8.1.07

4

Protocol Amending the TRIPS Agreement

5

In favour of Shri Nirupam Sen, Permanent Representative of India to the United Nations
of the Government of the Republic of India for signing the Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities

29.3.07

In favour of Shri Kanti Lal Bhuria, Minister of State for Agriculture for signing the
Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the Republic of India and
the Republic of Rwanda on Cooperation in the Fields of Agriculture and
Animal Resources.

16.4.07

In favour of Shri Kanti Lal Bhuria, Minister of State for Agriculture for signing the
Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the Republic of India and
the Republic of Uganda on Cooperation in the Fields of Agriculture and Allied Sectors

16.4.07

In favour of Shri Kanti Lal Bhuria, Minister of State for Agriculture for signing the
Agreement between the Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of India and the
Ministry of Agriculture and Food of the Republic of Belarus on Cooperation in the
Field of Agriculture.

16.4.07

In favour of Shri P. Chidambaram, Minister of Finance for signing the Agreement
between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government of the United
Mexican States on the Promotion and Protection of Investments.

19.5.07

6

7

8

9

10.

09.03.07

In favour of Shri P. R. Dasmunsi, Minister of Information & Broadcasting for signing the
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government of
the Federative Republic of Brazil on Audio Visual Co-Productions

4.6.07

11.

In favour of Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister for Science and Technology for signing the
Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Science and Technology of the
Republic of India and the Ministry of Education and Science and the Ministry of Industry,
Tourism and Trade of Spain For Cooperation in the Field of Science and Technology.

7.6.07

12.

In favour of Shri J. P. Batra, Chairman, Railway Board for signing the Intergovernmental
Agreement on the Trans-Asian Railway Network.

18.6.07

In favour of Ms. Charusheela Sohoni, Secretary, Department of Animal Husbandry
Dairying and Fisheries for signing the Memorandum of Understanding on Sustainable
Fisheries Development between the Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries, Government of India and the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs of Iceland.

18.6.07

13.

183

Appendix XII

Sl. No. Convention/Treaty

14.

15.

16.

17.

Date of
Full Powers

In favour of Shri P. Chidambaram, Minister of Finance for signing the Agreement
between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government of the Republic
of Iceland for the Promotion and Protection of Investments.

25.6.07

In favour of Shri Priyaranjan Dasmunshi, Minister for Information and Broadcasting
and Parliamentary Affairs for signing the Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany on
Audio Visual Co-Production.

19.7.07

In favour of Shri Balakrishna Shetty, then Ambassador of India to Senegal for signing
the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government
of the Republic of Senegal for the Promotion and Protection of Investments.

2.8.07

In favour of Shri Vayalar Ravi, Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs for signing the
Additional Protocol to the Agreement between the State of Qatar and the Republic of
India on the Regulation of the Employment of Indian Manpower signed on eleventh
day of April in the year nineteen hundred and eighty five.

24.8.07

18.

In favour of Shri V. Subramanian, Secretary, Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
for signing the Memorandum of Understanding on Indo-Iceland Renewable Energy
Cooperation between the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, Government of the
Republic of India and the Ministry of Industry and Commerce of the Republic of Iceland.

19.

In favour of Shri K.P. Singh, Secretary (Defence Production), for the signing the
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government of
the Russian Federation on Cooperation in Development and Production of Prospective
Multi-Role Fighter.

25.10.07

In favour of Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Science and Technology and Earth Sciences
for signing the Agreement between the Government of Republic of India and the
Government of Republic of Maldives on Cooperation in the Fields of
Science and Technology

25.10.07

21

In favour of Smt. Meira Kumar, Hon’ble Minister of Social Justice & Empowerment
for signing the Memorandum of Understanding in the Field of Social Defence Including
Welfare of the Elderly, Programme of Drug Demand Reduction, Disability, and Other
Areas in the General Field of Social Defence between Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment of the Republic of India and Ministry of Social Security, National
Solidarity and Senior Citizen Welfare and Reform Institution of the Republic of Mauritius.

30.10.07

22

In favour of Shri Nalin Surie, Secretary (West), Ministry of External Affairs for signing
the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government
of the Republic of Turkey concerning the Mutual Abolition of Visas for Holders
of Diplomatic Passports.

15.11.07

In favour of Shri P. Chidambaram, Minister of Finance for signing the Agreement and
the Protocol between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government of
Iceland for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion
with respect to Taxes on Income

21.11.07

In favour of Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Science and Technology and Earth Sciences for
signing the Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Republic of Austria on Scientific and Technological Co-operation

23.11.07

In favour of Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Science and Technology and Earth Sciences for
signing the Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Science and
Technology of the Republic of India and the Ministry of Economic Affairs of the
Netherlands on Co-operation in the Fields of Science, Technology and Innovation

23.11.07

20

23

24

25

184

3.9.07

Appendix XII

Sl. No. Convention/Treaty

26

27

28

29

Date of
Full Powers

In favour of Shri P. P. Shukla, Ambassador of India to the Russian Federation for signing
the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government
of the Republic of India on Russian-Indian Cooperation in Production of Empennage
Aggregates for Su-30 MK Airframe and their Installation On Su-30-MK-Type
Aircraft Produced in Russia

29.11.07

In favour of Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Science and Technology and Earth Sciences
for signing the Agreement for Scientific and Technological Cooperation between the
Government of the Republic of India and the European Community.

29.11.07

In favour of Shri Shivshankar Menon, Foreign Secretary for signing the Memorandum
of Understanding between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government
of the Union of Myanmar for Establishing India-Myanmar Centre for Enhancement
of Information Technology Skills (IMCEITS) at Yangon.

10.12.07

In favour of Shri Nirupam Sen, Permanent Representative of India to the United
Nations, for signing the International Tropical Timber Agreement, 2006

20.12.07

185

Appendix XIII
Instruments of Ratification/Accession issued during the period 1 January 2007 to December
2007
Sl. No. Instruments of Ratification/Accession
1.

2.

3.

Date of Issue of Ratification

Convention on the Taking of Evidence Abroad in Civil or
Commercial Matters.
Agreement on cooperation in the Hydrocarbon sector between the
Republic of India and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

10.1.2007

9.2.07

Agreement on the Establishment of the ITER International Fusion
Energy Organization for the Joint Implementation of the ITER Project.

19.2.07

Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the ITER International
Fusion Energy Organization for the Joint Implementation of the ITER Project

19.2.07

5.

India-Bhutan Friendship Treaty

19.2.07

6

Agreement on cooperation in the Field of Tourism between the
Government of the Republic of India and the Government of the
Republic of the Philippines

21.3.07

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and The
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for the Promotion and Protection of Investments.

26.3.07

8

Agreement on Establishing the SAARC Food Bank.

17.4.07

9

Agreement for Establishment of South Asian University.

17.4.07

10

International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance Statutes.

19.4.07

11

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the People’s Republic of China for the Promotion and
Protection of Investments.

20.04.07

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago for the Promotion
and Protection of Investments.

20.4.07

Memorandum of Understanding on Trilateral Cooperation in Agriculture
and Allied Fields between the Governments of the Republic of India,
The Federative Republic of Brazil and the Republic of South Africa
under the India-Brazil-South Africa (IBSA) Dialogue Forum Initiative

10.5.07

4.

7

12

13

14.

15.

The Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and
the Government of the United Mexican States on the Promotion and
Protection of Investments
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Hellenic Republic on Scientific and Technological Cooperation

2.7.07

18.7.07

16

Treaty on Extradition between the Republic of India and the Republic of Belarus

2.8.07

17

Agreement between the Republic of India and the Federative Republic of
Brazil on Scientific and Technological Co-operation

7.8.07

186

Appendix XIII

Sl. No. Instruments of Ratification/Accession

Date of Issue of Ratification

18

Intergovernmental Agreement on the Trans-Asian Railway Network

7.8.07

19

Amendment to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material

9.8.07

20

Agreement between the Government of India and the Government of Republic
of Azerbaijan on the Inter-governmental Commission on Trade, Economic,
Scientific and Technological Cooperation

16.8.07

Treaty on Extradition between the Republic of India and the Republic
of Mauritius

21.8.07

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Hellenic Republic on the Promotion and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments

21.8.07

21

22

23

Agreement between the Republic of India and the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia for the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments

3.9.07

24

The International Convention against Doping in Sport

10.9.07

25

The Treaty on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters between the
Republic of India and the Republic of Bulgaria

24.9.07

26

The Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities

24.9.07

27

Treaty between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government
of United Mexican States on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters

28.9.07

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

The Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Republic of Iceland for the Promotion
and Protection of Investments

19.10.07

Treaty between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government
of Vietnam on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters.

19.10.07

The Agreement on Extradition between the Republic of India
and the Portuguese Republic.

25.10.07

The Agreement between the Republic of India and the Great Socialist
People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya for the Promotion and Protection of Investments.

8.11.07

The Protocol between the Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Republic of Bulgaria amending the Agreement between
the Government of the Republic of India and the Government of the Republic
of Bulgaria for the Promotion and Protection of Investment signed in New Delhi
on the twenty sixth day of October in the year nineteen thousand and ninety eight.

8.11.07

The Audio Visual Co-Production Agreement between the Republic of India and
the Government of the Italian Republic

20.11.07

The Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia concerning the Encouragement
and Reciprocal Protection of Investments.

21.11.07

The Treaty on Extradition between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the United Mexican States.

21.11.07

187

Appendix XIII

Sl. No. Instruments of Ratification/Accession
36

37

38

Date of Issue of Ratification

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Republic of Serbia for the Reciprocal Promotion
and Protection of Investments.

18.12.07

Agreement on Trade and Economic Cooperation between the Government of
the Republic of India and the Government of the Republic of Serbia.

18.12.07

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Republic of Serbia on Cooperation in the Fields of
Culture, Education and Sports.

18.12.07

188

Appendix XIV
Conference/ Seminars/ Study projects organized/ undertaken by Institutions/ NGOs, which
were funded, partially or wholly, by Policy Planning & Research Division till January 2008
Sl. No.

Event

Institution / Beneficiary

1.

Seminar on “India-China Border Trade-a Strategy for
Frontier Development” on 5-6 March 2007 at Gangtok.

Indian Council of Social Science
Research (ICSSR) North Eastern
Regional Centre, Shillong (Meghalaya)

2.

International Seminar on “Envisioning A New South Asia”
from 29-31 March 20007 at Visakhapatnam.

Centre for SAARC Studies, Andhra
University, Visakhapatnam (A.P.)

3.

Study on “Newer Dynamics of India’s Nepal Policy:
Challenges, Options and Way Forward” by Prof.
Mahendra P. Lama.

Centre for Public Affairs (CPA),
Noida (UP)

4.

Research Projects on
i. Indo-Myanmar Geo-political and security relations:
Measures for improving trade & economic tie-ups.
ii. Impediments in India’s “Look East” policy: suggested
remedies.
iii. Indo-Russian strategic relations in the new world order:
Opportunities/Challenges.
iv. New realities in the Indian Ocean Region: How can
India benefit from them?

Asia Centre, Bangalore

5.

Study on “The National Interest Project”.

Indian Council for Research on
International Economic Relations
(ICRIER), New Delhi.

6.

Study by the Task Force on Disarmament and Non-Proliferation
set up by Ministry of External Affairs consisting of Dr. K.
Subrahmanyan, Arundhati Ghose, Shyam Saran and others.

Ministry of External Affairs

7.

Financial assistance to the Centre for the Advanced Study
of India (CASI).

University of Pennsylvania (USA)

8.

7th India-Korea Dialogue in October 2007 at Seoul (Korea).

Indian Council for Research on
International Economic Relations
(ICRIER), New Delhi.

9.

3rd International Congress of the Asian Political and
International Studies Association (APISA)” at New Delhi
from 23-25 November 2007.

Developing Countries Research
Centre(DCRC), University of Delhi.

10.

Seminar on “India and the Gulf”

Association of Indian Diplomats
(AID), New Delhi

11.

Publication of “Foreign Affairs Journal”

Association of Indian Diplomats
(AID), New Delhi

12.

Research Project on “Contemporary Myanmar: From Isolation
to Active Engagement - By Dr. K. Yhome

Observer Research Foundation (ORF),
New Delhi

13.

7th International Conference on Regional Economic
Cooperation - Bangladesh, China, India and Myanmar
(BCIM) at Dhaka

Institute of Chinese Studies (ICS),
New Delhi

14.

5th Conference on “International Dimension of Environmental
Law” on 8-9 December 2007

Indian Society of International Law
(ISIL)

189

Appendix XIV

Sl. No.

Event

Institution / Beneficiary

15.

International Seminar on “Democracy, Nation Building and
Peace in South Asia: Challenges and Prospects” from
10-12 December 2007

Rajiv Gandhi Chair in Contemporary
Studies, Allahabad University
Universitya of Allahabad.

16.

2nd Sustainability Summit: Asia 2007 held on
11-12 December 2007

Confederation of Indian Industry
(CII), New Delhi

17.

Research Study on “Foundational Crisis in South and South
East Asia - A study of Bangladesh, Indonesia & Malaysia” - By
Dr. Abu Nasar Saied Ahmed

Omeo Kumar Das Institute of Social
Change and Development
(OKDISCD), Guwahati

18.

Research Project on “Central Asia-China Relations, 1991-2006”
by Prof. K. Warikoo, JNU, New Delhi

The Centre for South, Central &
South East Asian Studies (CSCSEAS),
JNU, New Delhi

19.

International Seminar on “India and South-Asia : Strategic
Convergence in the 21st Century” from 3-5 January 2008

Centre for SAARC Studies (CSS)
Andhra University, Vishakapatnam
(AP)

20.

Conference on “The Landscape of Regional Integration”
on 11-12 January 2008

Association of Asia Scholars (AAS),
New Delhi.

21.

International Conference on “Afghanistan” February 2008.

Centre for South, Central Southeast
Asia and Southwest Pacific Studies,
School of International Studies, JNU,
New Delhi.

22.

Seminar on “State and Society in Pakistan” and “India-Pakistan
Relations”

23.

28th Round Talks of Track-II Dialogue with Pakistan at Islamabad. India-Pakistan Neemrana Initiative
(IPNI), New Delhi

24.

Seminar on “Cooperation Development and Peace in Central
Asia: An Indian Perspective”

The Centre for Research in Rural and
Industrial Development (CRRID),
Chandigarh

25.

Study Project on “Analysis of Alternative Course for India:
Post Kyoto Negotiations”

Integrated Research and Action for
Development (IRADe), New Delhi

190

India-Pakistan Friendship Society
(IPFS), New Delhi

Appendix XV
List of ITEC/SCAAP partner countries
S. No

Countries

S. No

1

Afghanistan

41

Democratic Republic of Congo

2

Albania

42

Djibouti

3

Algeria

43

Dominican Republic

4

Angola

44

East Timor

5

Anguilla

45

Ecuador

6

Antigua and Barbuda

46

Egypt

7

Argentina

47

El-Salvador

8

Armenia

48

Equatorial Guinea

9

Azerbaijan

49

Eritrea

10

Bahamas

50

Estonia

11

Bahrain

51

Ethiopia

12

Bangladesh

52

Fiji

13

Barbados

53

Gabon

14

Belarus

54

Gambia

15

Belize

55

Georgia

16

Benin

56

Ghana

17

Bhutan

57

Grenada

18

Bolivia

58

Guatemala

19

Bosnia - Herzegovina

59

Guinea

20

Botswana

60

Guinea Bissau

21

Brazil

61

Guyana

22

Brunei Darussalam

62

Haiti

23

Bulgaria

63

Honduras

24

Burkina Faso

64

Hungary

25

Burundi

65

Indonesia

26

Cambodia

66

Iran

27

Cameroon

67

Iraq

28

Cape Verde Island

68

Ivory Coast

29

Cayman Island

69

Jamaica

30

Central African Republic

70

Jordan

31

Chad

71

Kazakhstan

32

Chile

72

Kenya

33

Colombia

73

Kiribati

34

Commonwealth of Dominica

74

Korea (DPRK)

35

Comoros

75

Kyrgyzstan

36

Congo

76

Laos

37

Costa Rica

77

Latvia

38

Croatia

78

Lebanon

39

Cuba

79

Lesotho

40

Czech Republic

80

Liberia

191

Countries

Appendix XV

S. No

Countries

S. No

Countries

81

Libya

119

Rwanda

82

Lithuania

120

Samoa

83

Macedonia

121

Senegal

84

Madagascar

122

Seychelles

85

Malaysia

123

Singapore

86

Malawi

124

Sierra Leone

87

Maldives

125

Slovak Republic

88

Mali

126

Solomon Island

89

Marshall Islands

127

South Africa

90

Mauritius

128

Sri Lanka

91

Mauritania

129

St. Kitts & Nevis

92

Mexico

130

St. Lucia

93

Micronesia

131

St. Vincent & Grenadines

94

Moldova

132

Sudan

95

Mongolia

133

Suriname

96

Montserrat

134

Syria

97

Morocco

135

Swaziland

98

Mozambique

136

Tanzania

99

Myanmar

137

Tajikistan

100

Namibia

138

Thailand

101

Nauru

139

Togo

102

Nepal

140

Tonga

103

Nicaragua

141

Trinidad & Tobago

104

Niger

142

Tunisia

105

Nigeria

143

Turkey

106

Oman

144

Turkmenistan

107

Palau

145

Turks & Caicos Island

108

Palestine

146

Tuvalu

109

Panama

147

Uganda

110

Papua New Guinea

148

Ukraine

111

Paraguay

149

Uruguay

112

Peru

150

Uzbekistan

113

Philippines

151

Vanuatu

114

Poland

152

Venezuela

115

Qatar

153

Vietnam

116

Republic Of Sao Tome

154

Yemen

117

Romania

155

Zambia

118

Russia

156

Zimbabwe

192

Appendix XVI
Seminars/Conferences/Lectures/Meetings organized by ICWA
S. No.

Date

Event

1.

2 April 2007

Lecture on Russia’s Strategic Partnerships in Asia by Mikhail
Titarenko, Director, Institute of Far Eastern Studies, Russian Academy
of Sciences, Moscow (in association with the Institute of Chinese
Studies (ICS))

2.

9-10 April 2007

India-Malaysia Strategic Dialogue including Luncheon Keynote
Address on 10 April 2007 by Syed Hamid Albar, Foreign Minister of
Malaysia. Chaired by the Minister of State for External Affairs, Anand
Sharma

3.

15-17 April 2007

1st Meeting of CSCAP Study Group on Oceania held in Wellington
New Zealand, attended by Dr. Sanjay Chaturvedi.

4..

19 April 2007

Talk on Recent Developments in Afghanistan and Afghanistan
Pakistan Relations: Implications for the Region by Dr. Frederic
Grare, Director, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace,
Washington DC.

5.

20-21 April 2007

International Conference on India-Nepal Relations: Looking at the
Future - Visit of Nepal Delegation. Inaugural Address by M.K.
Rasgotra (in collaboration with the Antar Rashtriya Sahyog Parishad)

6.

23-24 April 2007

1st Study Group Meeting of CSCAP on Asia Pacific Cooperation for
Energy Security held in Singapore, attended by Talmiz Ahmad and Dr.
B. Mohanty.

7.

1 May 2007

Release of the book: Contemporary Saudi Arabia & the Emerging
Indo-Saudi Relations by Ishrat Aziz (in association with the Gulf
Studies Programme, Jawaharlal Nehru University).

8.

1-2 June 2007

Regional Conference on SAARC: Fourteenth Summit & Beyond (in
association with Konrad Adenauer Foundation (KAF)).

9.

03 June 2007

27th Steering Committee Meeting held in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia,
attended by K.K.S. Rana and Prof. Radha Kumar.

10.

4-8 June 2007

21st Asia Pacific Round Table meeting held in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia,
attended by Prof. Radha Kumar.

11.

12 June 2007

Foreign Affairs Discussion on The Role of Taiwan’s Economy in the
Regional and International Environment Lead Speaker: Ma Ying-Jeou
from Taiwan.

12.

18-20 June 2007

Visit of ICWA delegation led by P.K. Kapur, DDG, ICWA to Hanoi in
the Commemorative Seminar to mark the 35th Anniversary of the
Establishment of full Diplomatic Relations between India and Vietnam.

13.

22 June 2007

Seminar on Palestine: 1967 and After (in association with the League
of Arab States Mission)

14.

7 July 2007

Release of two books: Asian Diplomacy: The Foreign Ministries of
China, India, Japan, Singapore & Thailand [Written by Kishan S.
Rana] and Foreign Ministries: Managing Diplomatic Networks and
Optimizing Value (Edited by Kishan S. Rana and Jovan Kurbalija,

193

Appendix XVI

S. No.

Date

Event
Director, DiploFoundation) by Shivshankar Menon, Secretary, Ministry
of External Affairs.

15.

20 July 2007

Discussion on Politics in 21st Century India led by Mahesh
Rangarajan Visiting Professor, Department of History, Jadavpur
University, Kolkata and Yogendra Yadav, Co-Director of Lokniti and
Senior Fellow, Centre for the Study of Developing Societies.

16..

23 July 2007

Lecture on India and Germany – Partners of Choice in a Globalising
World by Bernd Muetzelburg, Ambassador of the Federal Republic of
Germany to India (in association with the Federation of Indo-German
Societies in India)

17.

26 July 2007

Release of Muniza Agha-Fawad’s book: Ghulam Rasul – Another
Migration by Satish Gujral and an Exhibition of Paintings by Ghulam
Rasul.

18.

31 July 2007

Meeting with the Delegation of the Standing Committee on Foreign
Affairs of the Federal Parliament of Germany on Foreign and Security
Policy Issues.

19.

6-9 September 2007

2nd Meeting of CSCAP Study Group on Malacca and Singapore Straits
held in Jakarta, Indonesia, attended by Commodore Uday C. Bhaskar
(Retd.).

20.

11 September 2007

Lecture by Sergei Stanishev, Prime Minister of the Republic of Bulgaria
on Bulgaria in the European Union: Strengthening the Bulgaria –
India Partnership.

21.

13-15 September 2007

2nd Meeting of Study Group on Energy Security held in Goa, hosted by
CSCAP India.

22.

24 September 2007

Launch of the book Rising India: Friends and Foes: Essays in
Honour of Professor ML Sondhi by Satinder K. Lambah, Special
Envoy, Prime Minister’s Office (in collaboration with The Professor ML
Sondhi Memorial Committee (auxiliary of the ML Sondhi Memorial
Trust)).

23.

9 October 2007

Group Discussion on the book: India and the United States, Politics
of the sixties.

24.

10 October 2007

Lecture by Massimo D’ Alema, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Italy on Italy, Europe and India: Making the
Multilateral System Stronger.

25.

15 October 2007

MoU between ICWA and Nigerian Institute of International Affairs.

26.

16-17 October 2007

Third India-Spain Dialogue Forum

27.

18-20 October 2007

Bilateral Dialogue with Poland

28.

24 October 2007

Lecture by Ilan Mizrahi, Head of Israel’s National Security Council on
Trends and Challenges in the Middle East and Beyond.

29.

30-31 October 2007

CSCAP Study Group Meeting on Preventive Diplomacy held in
Brunei, attended by K.K.S. Rana, Prof. Pushpesh Pant, JNU, Dr. Rajan
Kumar, JNU.

194

Appendix XVI

S. No.

Date

Event

30.

13 November 2007

Interaction with the Study Group from Australian Institute of the
International Affairs (AIIA), Canberra.

31.

14 November 2007

Seminar on Proliferation of Bio-Weapons: Challenges for Asian
countries (in collaboration with the Association of Asia Scholars
(AAS)).

32.

23 November 2007

Meeting with Egyptian Delegation

195

Appendix XVII
Seminars Organized by RIS
Seminar on Governance Matters: Examining the
Dimensions of Governance Relevant for Private
Investment, New Delhi on 27 December 2007.
Seminar on Third East Asia Summit and Future
Prospects, New Delhi on 18 December 2007.
Seminar on Regional Cooperation and Integration
Prospects in Asia, New Delhi on 5 December 2007.
Seminar on Regional Cooperation in Asia: Lessons
from the Nordic Cooperation, New Delhi on 16
November 2007.
RIS-UNESCAP High-Level Policy Dialogue on
Regional Cooperation for Infrastructure
Development and Financing, New Delhi on 2122 March 2007.
Regional Conference on Economic Cooperation
in SAARC New Delhi on 19 March 2007.
Seminar on Governance and Voice in the
International Financial Institutions, New Delhi on
10 August 2007.

Economic Considerations of Biosafety and
Biotechnology Regulations in India, RIS and
International Food Policy Research Institute and
South Asia Bio-safety Programme, 2007.
Policy Briefs
#30 Restoring
Afghanistan-Pakistan-IndiaBangladesh-Myanmar (APIBM) Corridor:
Towards a New Silk Road in Asia
#31 Towards an Asian Regional Mechanism for
Addressing Excess Foreign Exchange Reserves,
Infrastructure Deficits and Global Imbalances
#32 Strengthening International Competitiveness in
Knowledge -based Industries: A Strategic
Apporach
#33 Broader Regional Economic Integration in Asia:
An Agenda for the East Asia Summit Report of
the RIS-ISEAS -IDE Sixth High-Level
Conference on Asian Economic Integration
Discussion Papers
#118 Trade Facilitation Measures in South Asian
FTAs: An Overview of Initiatives and Policy
Approaches by Sachin Chaturvedi

RIS Publications
Books and Reports
World Trade and Development Report 2007:
Building a Development Friendly World Trading
System, Oxford Universiy Press 2007.
Trinity of the South: Potential of India-BrazilSouth Africa (IBSA) Partnership, RIS in
association with Academic Foundation, New
Delhi, 2007.
International Competitiveness and Knowledgebased Industries in India, Editors: Nagesh Kumar
and KJ Joseph, RIS and Oxford University Press,
2007.
Asia’s New Regionalism and Global Role: Agenda
for the East Asia Summit, Editors: Nagesh Kumar,
K. Kesavapany and Yao Chao Cheng, RIS and
ISEAS, Singapore in association with Bookwell,
New Delhi, 2007.
Environmental Risk Assessment, Socio-Economic
Considerations and Decision – Making Support
Support for LMOs in India, RIS, International
Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology
(ICGEB), Ministry of Environment and Forest,
GEF and World Bank.

196

#119 India-Sri Lanka Bilateral Free Trade
Agreement: Six Years Performance and
Beyond by Indra Nath Mukherji
#120 Relevance of ‘Policy Space’ for Development:
Implications for Multilateral Trade
Negotiations by Nagesh Kumar and Kevin P.
Gallagher
#121 India’s Rising Role in Asia by Mukul G. Asher
#122 Community-based Rights and IPR Regime:
Revisiting the Debate by Srividhya Raghvan
and Jamie Mayer
#123 Regional Economic Integration, Foreign
Direct Investment and Efficiency-Seeking
Industrial Restructuring in Asia: The Case of
India by Nagesh Kumar
#124 Emergence of Indian Biopharmaceutical
Sector: Issues and Prospects by Sachin
Chaturvedi
#125 Investment Provisions in Regional Trading
Arrangements in Asia: Relevance, Emerging
Trends and Policy Implications by Nagesh
Kumar

Appendix XVII

#126 Welfare Gains from Regional Economic
Integration in Asia: ASEAN+3 or EAS by SK
Mohanty and Sanjib Pohit
#127 Brazilian Economy: recent evolution and new
perspectives for South-South cooperation by
Maria Lúcia LM Pádua Lima
#128 WTO and Trade in Electronically Delivered
Software (EDS): Emerging Challenges and
Policy Options – An Indian Perspective by
Sachin Chaturvedi and SK Mohanty
#129 Intellectual Property Regime, Indigenous
Knowledge and Access and Benefit Sharing:
Drawing Lessons from Kani Case by Sachin
Chaturvedi
#130 Deepening India-Bangladesh Economic
Cooperation: Challenges and Opportunities by
Prabir De and Biswa N Bhattacharya
#131 Regional Cooperation and Integration
Prospects in Asia by Rajat Nag

3.

Asian Biotechnology and Development
Review, Vol. 9(2), March 2007.

4.

Asian Biotechnology and Development
Review, Vol. 9(3), July 2007.

5.

Asian Biotechnology and Development
Review, Vol. 10(1), November 2007.

6.

New Asia Monitor, Vol. 4 No. 2, April 2007.

7.

New Asia Monitor, Vol. 4 No. 3, July 2007.

8.

New Asia Monitor, Vol. 4 No. 4, October
2007.

9.

Mekong-Ganga Policy Brief, No. 1, March
2007.

10.

Mekong-Ganga Policy Brief, No. 2, October
2007.

Newsletter
RIS Diary, Vol. 5 No. 2, April 2007.
RIS Diary, Vol. 5 No. 3, July 2007.

Periodicals

RIS Diary, Vol. 5 No. 4, October 2007.

1.

South Asia Economic Journal (Vol. 8 No. 1)
January-June 2007.

RIS Diary, Vol. 6 No. 1, January 2008.

2.

South Asia Economic Journal (Vol. 8 No. 1)
July-December 2007.

197

Abbreviations

AALCO

Asian African Legal Consultative
Organisation

ECOWAS

Economic Community Of West African
States

AMM

ASEAN Ministerial Meeting

EIL

Engineers India Limited

ARF

ASEAN Regional Forum

EMM

East Asia Energy Ministers Meeting

ASEAN

Association of South East Asian Nations

EU

European Union

ASEM

Asia Europe Meeting

EXIM

Export Import Bank of India

ASSOCHAM

Associated Chambers of Commerce
and Industry

FICCI

Federation of Indian Chambers of
Commerce and Industry

AU

African Union

FIPB

Foreign Investment Promotion Board

AYUSH

Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani,
Siddha and Homeopathy

FOC

Foreign Office Consultations

FTA

Free Trade Agreement

BIMSTEC

Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral
Technical and Economic Cooperation

GAIL

Gas Authority of India Limited

CECA

Comprehensive Economic Cooperation
Agreement

GCC

Gulf Cooperation Council

GST

Goods and Service Tax

CEP

Cultural Exchange Programme

HAL

Hindustan Aeronautics Limited

CHOGM

Commonwealth Heads of Government
Meet

HIV/AIDS

Human Immuno Virus / Acquired
Immuno Deficiency Syndrome

CIC

Central Information Commission

IAEA

International Atomic Energy Agency

CII

Confederation of Indian Industry

IBF

India Business Forum

CIS

Commonwealth of Independent States

ICCR

Indian Council for Cultural Relations

COMESA

Common Market for Eastern and
Southern Africa

ICRIER

Indian Council for Research on
International Economic Relations

CORPAT

Coordinated Patrol

ICT

COSC

Chiefs of Staff Committee

Information and Communication
Technology

CPIO

Central Public Information Officer

ICWA

Indian Council of World Affairs

CPV

Consular Passport and Visa

IDSA

Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses

CSCAP

Council for Security Cooperation in Asia
Pacific

IFS

Indian Foreign Service

IIBF

Indian Institute of Banking and Finance

CSD

Comprehensive Security Dialogue

IIT

Indian Institute of Technology

DIPP

Department of Industrial Policy and
Promotion

ILO

International Labour Organisation

DSSC

Defence Services Staff College

INS

Indian Navy Ship

DTAC

Double Taxation Avoidance Convention

INSTC

International North-South Transport
Corridor

EAC

East African Community

IOR-ARC

EAS

East Asia Summit

Indian Ocean Rim Association for
Regional Cooperation

198

Abbreviations

ISCS

Inter-State Council Secretariat

RBI

Reserve of Bank of India

ITEC

Indian Technical and Economic
Cooperation

RITES

Rail India Technical Economic Service

RTI

Right to Information

JWG

Joint Working Group
SAARC

LNG

Liquified Natural Gas

South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation

MERCOSUR

Market of Southern Cone Countries

SADC

Southern African Development
Community

MFN

Most Favoured Nation

SAFTA

South Asia Free Trade Agreement

MoU

Memorandum of Understanding

SBI

State Bank of India

NABARD

National Bank for Agriculture and
Rural Development

SCAAP

Special Commonwealth Assistance for
Africa Programme

NAFED

National Agricultural Cooperative
Marketing Federation of India Limited

SCO

Shanghai Cooperation Organisation

NAM

Non-Aligned Movement

SEBI

Securities and Exchange Board of India

SEWA

Self Employed Women’s Association

SEZ

Special Economic Zone

NASSCOM National Association of Software and
Service Companies
NATO

North Atlantic Treaty Organisation

SME

Small and Medium Enterprises

NELP

New Exploration Licensing Policy

STPI

Software Technology Parks of India

NEPAD

New Partnership for Africa’s
Development

TEAM-9

Techno-Economic Approach for Africa
India Movement

NIC

National Information Centre

UNCTAD

NPT

Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty

United Nations Conferences on Trade
and Development

NSC

National Security Council

UNESCO

United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization

NSG

Nuclear Suppliers Group

OCI

Overseas Citizenship of India

UNGA

United Nations General Assembly

OECD

Organisation for Economic Cooperation
and Development

UNSC

United Nations Security Council

UPA

United Progressive Alliance

ONGC

Oil and Natural Gas Corporation

VSNL

Videsh Sanchar Nigam Limited

PIO

Persons of Indian Origin

WTO

World Trade Organisation

199


